### Accession
PXD020181

### Title
Metabolic shift underlies recovery in reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency

### Description
Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency (RIRCD) is a rare mitochondrial myopathy leading to severe metabolic disturbances in infants, which recover spontaneously after 6 months of age. RIRCD is associated with the homoplasmic m.14674T>C mitochondrial DNA mutation, however only ~1/100 carriers develop the disease. We studied 27 affected and 15 unaffected individuals from 19 families and found additional heterozygous mutations in nuclear genes interacting with mt-tRNAGlu including EARS2 and TRMU in the majority of affected individuals, but not in healthy carriers of m.14674T>C, supporting a digenic inheritance. The spontaneous recovery in infants with digenic mutations is modulated by changes in amino acid availability in a multi-step process. First, the integrated stress-response associated with increased FGF21 and GDF15 expression enhances catabolism via β-oxidation and the TCA cycle increasing the availability of amino acids. In the second phase mitochondrial biogenesis increases via mTOR activation, leading to improved mitochondrial translation and recovery. Similar mechanisms may explain the variable penetrance and tissue specificity of other mtDNA mutations and highlight the potential role of amino acids in improving mitochondrial disease.

### Sample Protocol
In total seven muscle samples (vastus lateralis) derived from three healthy controls and four patients were processed independently. Approximately 10 slices of 10µm of muscle were lysed in50 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (Applichem Biochemica A3452) (pH 7.8) 150 mM NaCl, 1 % SDS (Carl Roth CN30.1), and Complete Mini Roche 11873580001) using a manual glass grinder. Then samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 4°C and 5000 g. Protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by BCA assay (ThermoFisher 23225) (according to the manufacturer’s protocol) and cysteines were reduced with 10 mM of DTT (Roche 10708984001) by incubation at 56°C for 30 min. Next, the free thiol groups were alkylated with 30 mM IAA (Sigma-Aldrich I1149-25G) at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30.  Sample digestion and cleanup were performed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described previously(Roos et al, 2019) with some minor changes: 100 µg of protein lysate was diluted 10-fold with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (Applichem Biochemica A3452) (pH 8.5) buffer and placed on PALL microsep centrifugal device(Merck Z648051) (30 KDa cutoff) and centrifuged at 13,500 g at RT for 20 min (all the following centrifugation steps were performed under the same conditions). Three washing steps were carried out with 100 µL of 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich U1250)/100 mM Tris-HCl (Applichem Biochemica A3452) (pH 8.5). For buffer exchange, the device was washed thrice with 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8) (Sigma-Aldrich S2889-250G). The digestion buffer contains as follows (final volume of 100 µL): trypsin (Promega V5117) (1:25 w/w, protease to substrate), 0.2 M GuHCl (Sigma-Aldrich G3272-500G) and 2 mM CaCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich C3306) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8) (Sigma-Aldrich S2889-250G), which was added to the concentrated proteins and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 14 h. Resulting tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation with 50 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma-Aldrich S2889-250G) followed by 50 µL of ultra-pure water. Afterwards, the resulting peptides were acidified (pH<3 by addition of 10 % TFA (v/v) (Biosolve 213141). All digests were quality controlled as described previously.  Samples were measured using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were preconcentrated on a 100 µm x 2 cm C18 trapping column for 10 min using 0.1 % TFA (v/v) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. Next the separation of the peptides was performed on a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 main column (both Pepmap, Thermo Scientific 164567) with a 120 min LC gradient ranging from 3-35 % of 84 % ACN (Biosolve 12041), 0.1 % FA (v/v) (Biosolve 69141) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min. MS1 spectra was acquired in the Orbitrap from 300 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120000 using the polysiloxane ion at m/z 445.12003 as lock mass(Olsen et al, 2005),with maximum injection times of 50 ms and ACG target was set at 2.0x105 ions. Top fifteen most intense signals were selected for fragmentation by HCD with a collision energy of 30 %. MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap at a resolution of 120,000, with maximum injection times of 300 ms, a dynamic exclusion of 15 s. The ACG target was set at 2.0x103 for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the acquired label free MS data was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). Raw MS data was aligned by Progenesis which automatically selected one of the LC-MS files as reference. After automatic peak picking, only features within retention time and m/z windows from 0-120 min and 300-1500 m/z, with charge states +2, +3, and +4 were considered for peptide statistics and analysis of variance (ANOVA) and  MS/MS spectra were exported as peak lists. Peak lists were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database (downloaded on 22.07.2015 containing 20273 target sequences) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA), MS-GF+, X!Tandem and MyriMatch with the help of searchGUI 3.2.5(Vaudel et al, 2011). Trypsin was selected as enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed and oxidation of Met was selected as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 p.p.m and 0.5 Da, respectively.  To obtain peptide-spectrum match and to maximize the number of identified peptides and proteins at a given quality we used PeptideShaker software 1.4.0 (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker/). Combined search results were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % on the peptide and protein level and exported using the PeptideShaker features that allow direct re-import of the quality-controlled data into Progenesis. Peptide sequences containing oxidized Met were excluded from further analysis. Only proteins that were quantified with unique peptides were exported. For each protein, average of the normalized abundances (obtained from Progenesis) from the analyses was calculated in order to determine the ratios between the patient muscle and control.  Only proteins which were (i) commonly quantified in all the replicates with (ii) unique peptides, (iii) an ANOVA p-value of <0.05 (Progenesis) and (iv) an average ratio < log2 -2.2 or > log2 0.98 were considered as up respectively down regulated. AThe Proteomap was generated using the online available tool (https://www.proteomaps.net/). The annotation of these proteomaps is based on the KEGG database platform, each protein is shown by a polygon, and functionally relevant proteins are arranged as neighbors. Additionally, polygon areas represent protein abundances weighted by protein size.

### Publication Abstract
Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency (RIRCD) is a rare mitochondrial myopathy leading to severe metabolic disturbances in infants, which recover spontaneously after 6-months of age. RIRCD is associated with the homoplasmic m.14674T&gt;C mitochondrial DNA mutation; however, only ~&#xa0;1/100 carriers develop the disease. We studied 27 affected and 15 unaffected individuals from 19 families and found additional heterozygous mutations in nuclear genes interacting with mt-tRNAGlu including EARS2 and TRMU in the majority of affected individuals, but not in healthy carriers of m.14674T&gt;C, supporting a digenic inheritance. Our transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of patient muscle suggests a stepwise mechanism where first, the integrated stress response associated with increased FGF21 and GDF15 expression enhances the metabolism modulated by serine biosynthesis, one carbon metabolism, TCA lipid oxidation and amino acid availability, while in the second step mTOR activation leads to increased mitochondrial biogenesis. Our data suggest that the spontaneous recovery in infants with digenic mutations may be modulated by the above described changes. Similar mechanisms may explain the variable penetrance and tissue specificity of other mtDNA mutations and highlight the potential role of amino acids in improving mitochondrial disease.

### Keywords
Digenic inheritance, Homoplasmic trna mutation, Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency, Mitochondrial myopathy

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Denisa Hathazi

### Lab Head
Dr Rita Horvath
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


