### Accession
PXD028251

### Title
Plasma proteome signature to predict outcome of breast cancer patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy

### Description
The purpose of this study is to find candidate biomarkers by analyzing proteins with differential amounts in 17 breast cancer patients’ plasmas with pathological complete response and 34 breast cancer patients’ plasmas without pathological complete response.

### Sample Protocol
1. Plasma protein sample preparation and tryptic digestion Plasma samples were sequentially prepared by depletion and digestion steps. First, 40 uL of plasma was injected into the MARS14 column (100 x 4.6 mm; Agilent Technology, Palo Alto, CA, USA) on a binary HPLC system (20A Prominence, Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan). For this, the mixture was 4-fold diluted with proprietary “Buffer A” and loaded onto a MARS14 column on a Shimadzu HPLC system. The unbound fraction was lyophilized with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps, Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA). Second, protein digestion was conducted using suspension-trapping sample preparation 46. A 400 µL aliquot of 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.55) was used for resuspension, and disulfides were reduced by adding dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 20 mM for 10 min at 95 C. Alkylate cysteines were treated by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM, and samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min after cooling the protein solution to room temperature. Then, the sampled was diluted 10 times, and 12% phosphoric acid was added to the sample. The sample was put in S-Trap mini columns (ProtiFi, NY, USA, Cat. No: CO2-mini-80), which was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and the ratio of sample to Lys-C/trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA, Cat. No: V5071) was 1:20. The eluted peptide mixture was lyophilized with a cold trap and stored at −80 °C until use.  2. Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis Digested peptides were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides from the bead column were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 column (500 mm x 75 μm i.d., 3 um, 100 Å) equipped with a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm x 100 um i.d., 5 um, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, USA) over 200 min (250 nl/min) using a 0–48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 150 min at 50°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and twenty data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for the full scan MS spectra, selected from a 350 m/z to 1800 m/z, was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The selected ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the following parameters: 2 Da precursor ion isolation window and 27% normalized collision energy. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeated peptides were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using the SequestHT on Proteome discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against the SwissProt human database (May 2017). Briefly, precursor mass tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. The search parameters were set as default including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications with 2 miscleavages. False discovery rates (FDRs) were set for 1% for each analysis using “Percolator”. From the Sequest search output, peptide filters which peptide confidence, peptide rank, score versus charge state and search engine rank were default value of proteome discoverer. And label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using peak intensity for unique and razor peptide of each protein and excluded peptides including methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
The plasma proteome of 51 non-metastatic breast cancer patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NCT) was prospectively analyzed by high-resolution mass spectrometry coupled with nano-flow liquid chromatography using blood drawn at the time of diagnosis. Plasma proteins were identified as potential biomarkers, and their correlation with clinicopathological variables and survival outcomes was analyzed. Of 51 patients, 20 (39.2%) were HR+/HER2-, five (9.8%) were HR+/HER2+, five (9.8%) were HER2+, and 21 (41.2%) were triple-negative subtype. During a median follow-up of 52.0 months, there were 15 relapses (29.4%) and eight deaths (15.7%). Four potential biomarkers were identified among differentially expressed proteins: APOC3 had higher plasma concentrations in the pathological complete response (pCR) group, whereas MBL2, ENG, and P4HB were higher in the non-pCR group. Proteins statistically significantly associated with survival and capable of differentiating low- and high-risk groups were MBL2 and P4HB for disease-free survival, P4HB for overall survival, and MBL2 for distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS). In the multivariate analysis, only MBL2 was a consistent risk factor for DMFS (HR: 9.65, 95% CI 2.10-44.31). The results demonstrate that the proteomes from non-invasive sampling correlate with pCR and survival in breast cancer patients receiving NCT. Further investigation may clarify the role of these proteins in predicting prognosis and thus their therapeutic potential for the prevention of recurrence.

### Keywords
Human, Neoadjuvant chemotherapy, Plasma, Lc-msms, Pathological complete response, Proteome, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kim Kyunggon
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


