### Accession
PXD024552

### Title
The resistance of oilseed rape microspore-derived embryos to osmotic stress is associated with the accumulation of proteins in energy metabolism, redox homeostasis and up-regulation of abscisic acid and cytokinin contents

### Description
The aim of the present study was to investigate the response of rapeseed microspore-derived embryos (MDE) to osmotic stress at proteome level. The PEG-induced osmotic stress was studied in cotyledonary MDE of two genotypes: Cadeli (D), and Viking (V), which were previously reported to reveal contrasting leaf proteome responses under drought. 156 representative protein spots – obtained by 2D-DIGE – have been selected for MALDI-TOF/TOF, 63 proteins have been successfully identified and divided into 8 functional groups. Eight selected protein accumulation trends were validated by using qRT-PCR. Biomass accumulation in treated D was significantly higher (3-fold) than in V, so we can claim D as resistant to osmotic stress. Cultivar D displayed resistance strategy thanks to accumulation of proteins in energy metabolism, redox homeostasis, protein destination and signalling functional groups accompanied by high ABA and active cytokinins. In contrast, V protein profile displayed high requirements of energy (ATP) and nutrients with a significant number of stress-related proteins and cell structure changes accompanied by quick down-regulation for active CK content, SA, JA, GA20. MDE proteome profile is discussed together with leaf proteome results from our previous study (Urban et al., 2017, 30:152, J. Proteomics). We propose different mechanisms to cope with osmotic stress in the genotypes studied. This proteomic study is a first step to validate MDE as a suitable model for follow-up research on characterization of new crossings, and can be used for selection of resistant genotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble proteins were extracted from embryos as described in [37] with some modifications as described in details in [22]. Dry protein pellets were resolved in lysis buffer according to GE Healthcare manual for 2D-DIGE analysis, pH of the solution was adjusted to 8.5 by 50 mM NaOH and protein concentration was determined by 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare). The protein samples (15 µg) were labelled with CyDye® minimal dyes (GE Healthcare) according to manufacturer´s instructions. Samples were run on 11 cm IPG strips with pI range 5-8. Image capture of 1 mm thick gels was done using the PharosFX Plus (Bio-Rad) at a resolution of 600 dpi. Densitometric analysis of scanned images was carried out using PDQuest Advanced 8.0.1 (Bio-Rad). Protein spot normalization was carried out using local regression model, and spot manual editing was carried out using group consensus tool. The differentially abundant protein spots were characterized as those with at least a 2-fold change; p < 0.05 determined by Student T-test) were chosen for spot excision (ExQuest Spot Cutter; Bio-Rad) and identification from preparative gels (2-DE of 200 µg of internal standard sample) stained by Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 stain (Bio-Rad). Each of 3 biological replicate of protein samples was created as a bulk from five technical repetitions. Samples of VC and DS were dyed four times, samples DC and VS were dyed six times. Cy3- and Cy5-labelled samples were randomly combined and Cy2-labelled internal standard was added to form mixed sample for loading onto IPG strip. For protein identification, the excised proteins were processed as described in [38]. Briefly, each sample was washed initially in a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 50% (v/v) methanol and dehydrated using a 75% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) solution. Proteins were then digested in 8 μL of trypsin Gold (Promega), 5 ng/μL trypsin in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After extraction with 50% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the peptides were dried at 50°C and spotted on MALDI-TOF target plates. A volume of 0.7 mm3 of 7 mg/cm3 α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 50% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA was added. A MALDI peptide mass spectrum was acquired using the AB Sciex 5800 TOF/TOF (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA), and the 10 most abundant peaks, excluding known contaminants, were selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
The ProteinPilot™ software 4.0.8085 was used for database searches with an in-house MASCOT platform (version 2.3, Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com, London, UK). All proteins were identified by search against NCBInr database 20151110 (76068736 sequences; 27658295194 residues) with the taxonomy Viridiplantae (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) containing 3269297 sequences and downloaded on November 15, 2016. All searches (combined MS and 10 MS/MS spectra) were carried out using a mass window of 100 ppm for the precursor and 0.5 Da for the fragments. During the different searches, the following parameters were defined: maximum two missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable oxidation of methionine or tryptophan, and tryptophan to kynurenine or double oxidation to N-formylkynurenine, unrestricted protein mass, and mass value set to monoisotopic. All identifications were manually validated and extra precursors were selected for fragmentation if the obtained data were judged as insufficient. When high quality spectra were not matched to sequences, a sequence was determined manually and, in the current data set, it could be linked to the identified protein by allowing for more missed cleavages, semitryptic peptides, or specific modifications. Protein scores greater than 78 were considered as significant (p < 0.05). Individual ions scores higher than 58 indicate identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05) and considered as significant. Only the spots with a single (unique) and significant protein identification were considered for further bioinformatics analyses. The spots with multiple protein identifications were not considered in the study and all discarded (Supplementary material). The 980 spots were found on each gel on average. Out of all differentially abundant protein spots (894 normalized spots – Boolean union of all normalized spots revealing at least a 2-fold change at 0.05 level determined by Student T-test) just 212 spots were assessed by PDQuest as quantitatively changed at least ± 2-fold. From these, the present in at least 80% of gels and revealing less than 50% variability in their standard deviation (SD) density values relative to the mean sample values have been selected for protein spot excision (156 spots).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microspore, Brassica napus, Rt-qpcr, 2d-dige, Osmotic stress

### Affiliations
Crop Research Institute, Prague, Czechia
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Mgr. Pavel Vitamvas, PhD
Crop Research Institute, Prague, Czechia


