### Accession
PXD011567

### Title
Exposure to microplastics reduces attachment strength and alters the haemolymph proteome of blue mussels (Mytilus edulis)

### Description
The contamination of marine ecosystems with microplastics, such as the polymer polyethylene, a commonly used component of single-use packaging, is of global concern. Although it has been suggested that biodegradable polymers, such as polylactic acid, may be used to replace some polyethylene packaging, little is known about their effects on marine organisms. Blue mussels, Mytilus edulis, have become a “model organism” for investigating the effects of microplastics in marine ecosystems. We show here that repeated exposure, over a period of 52 days in an outdoor mesocosm setting, of M. edulis to polyethylene microplastics reduced the number of byssal threads produced and the attachment strength (tenacity) by ~50%. Exposure to either type of microplastic altered the haemolymph proteome and, although a conserved response to microplastic exposure was observed, overall polyethylene resulted in more changes to protein abundances than polylactic acid. Many of the proteins affected are involved in vital biological processes, such as immune- and stress- regulation, metabolism and cellular and structural development. Our study highlights the utility of mass spectrometry-based proteomics to assess the health of key marine organisms and identifies the potential mechanisms by which microplastics, both conventional and biodegradable, could affect their ability to form and maintain reefs.

### Sample Protocol
Mesocosms were 10 litre polypropylene buckets (height x diameter = 25 x 25 cm). The experiment had 5 replicates (n = 5, N = 15) and to simulate the habitat where the mussels were collected from, each mesocosm contained a 5 cm layer of muddy sediment. On the 26th of August 2014, after allowing 48 hours for the sediment to settle, each mesocosm received 7 individuals of M. edulis. PLA or HDPE microplastics were then added to 5 litre bottles with I. galbana and were continuously mixed with air bubblers. Fresh batches of control and microplastic-dosed I. galbana cultures were made weekly. White PLA and HDPE microplastic particles used in the experiments had a volume-weighted mean diameter of 65.6 µm (range = 0.6–363 µm) for PLA and 102.6 µm (range = 0.48–316 µm) for HDPE. Every day, each mesocosm received 250 mL of ~2 × 106 cells mL-1 of microalgae containing either 0 (control) or 800 µg L-1 of PLA or HDPE microplastics, equating to a concentration in the mesocosms of 25 µg L-1. This corresponds to approximately 1296.3 (± 182.9) and 844.9 (± 138.7) particles L-1 respectively (Green et al. 2017). Although this is high relative to current environmental concentrations, due to the range of particle sizes included, these concentrations are among the lowest used experimentally to date and, therefore, among the most environmentally realistic (Lenz et al. 2016). Mussels were exposed for two hours per day. During dosing, the flow of water was paused and air bubblers were used to keep the water moving and aerate the mesocosms. The water flow in the mesocosms was resumed after 2 hours and fresh seawater replaced the microplastic- contaminated water which was captured for safe disposal. After 50 days, haemolymph was extracted from one individual from each mesocosm. In order to minimise disturbance, exposure to the air was not longer than 3 minutes before haemolymph extraction. Prior to haemolymph extraction, the shells were temporarily opened 2-3 mm to allow for the removal of excess water from the interior. The shells were then allowed to reclose and form a tight seal. An Omnican F syringe with an integrated 30 gauge needle was inserted between the shells of the mussel into the posterior adductor muscle and haemolymph slowly collected. The syringe was then removed from the needle and the haemolymph was dispensed into a nuclease-free 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube. The haemolymph was stored temporarily at -20°C overnight before transfer to -80°C for long-term storage.  200 µl crude haemolymph was removed and centrifuged at 8,000 × g for 5 min to pellet cellular debris. The supernatant was then removed, quantified and four independent biological replicates were analysed for each treatment: control (n=4), PLA- (n=4) and HDPE-exposed. 50 µg of each sample was precipitated using the 2D Clean-Up Kit (GE HealthCare), following the manufacturer’s instructions and the resulting protein pellet was resuspended in 20 µl 6M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample and proteins were reduced with 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 20 min and alkylated with 0.55M iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 15 min, in the dark. 1 µl of a 1% w/v solution of Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) and 0.5 µg of Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) was added to give a protein:trypsin ratio of 100:1. The protein/trypsin mixture was incubated at 37°C for 18 h. Digestion was terminated by adding 1 µl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) and incubation at room temperature for 5 min. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000 × g and a volume equivalent to 40 µg of pre-digested protein was removed and purified for mass spectrometry using C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were sonicated for 5 min to aid peptide resuspension followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 13,000 × g. The supernatant was removed and used for mass spectrometry. 1 µg of each digested sample was loaded onto a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. The peptides were separated by a 4% to 35% gradient of acetonitrile on a Biobasic C18 PicofritTM column (100 mm length, 75 mm ID), using a 55 min reverse-phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer (MS) operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 140,000 resolution and a scan range of 400-2000 m/z were followed by an MS/MS scan, resolution 17,500 and a range of 200-2000 m/z, selecting the 10 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label Free Quantification (LFQ) normalisation of MS/MS data were performed using MaxQuant v1.5.6.5 (http://www.maxquant.org) following the general procedures and settings outlined in Hubner et al. (2010). The Andromeda search algorithm (Cox et al. 2011) incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data against a predicted protein set generated from available RNA sequences for Mytilus edulis (Bioproject: PRJEA75259), Mytilus gallaprovinciallis (Bioproject: PRJNA167773) and nucleotide/protein sequences available for M. edulis and M. gallaprovinciallis from the National Centre for Biotechnology and Information (NCBI) repository (8,305 entries, downloaded September 2017) including the predicted protein set derived from the M. gallaprovinciallis genome (Murgarella) et al. 2016) (Bioproject: PRJNA262617). A 6-frame translation was conducted on the RNA sequences for the transcriptome resources of Mytilus species and an open reading frame extraction was performed. CD-Hit (Huang et al. 2010) was utilized to remove redundant sequences that were similar by 98% and above. The final predicted proteome comprised 12,453 sequences and was used in mass spectrometry searches in addition to a contaminant sequence set provided by MaxQuant.  The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. LFQ intensities were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014) from razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of two peptides across samples.  Perseus v.1.5.5.3 (www.maxquant.org/) was used for data processing and visualization. The data matrix was first filtered for the removal of contaminants, decoy peptide matches and peptides identified by site. Normalised LFQ intensity values (quantitative measurement of protein abundance) were log2 transformed and each replicate was assigned to its corresponding sample (n=4). Proteins not found in all 4 replicates of at least one sample were removed from the analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace non-detected values with values that simulate signals of lowest abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 1.8 times the mean standard deviation (SD) of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this SD. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus by plotting negative log p-values against log2 fold-change values for each protein to visualize two-fold changes in protein expression of the microplastic exposed mussels relative to the control mussels and microplastic exposed mussels to each other. LFQ intensity values for proteins deemed statistically significant (by ANOVA, see Statistical data analyses) were Z-score normalized and hierarchical clustering was generated in order to summarise the overall differences among treatments.

### Publication Abstract
The contamination of marine ecosystems with microplastics, such as the polymer polyethylene, a commonly used component of single-use packaging, is of global concern. Although it has been suggested that biodegradable polymers, such as polylactic acid, may be used to replace some polyethylene packaging, little is known about their effects on marine organisms. Blue mussels, Mytilus edulis, have become a "model organism" for investigating the effects of microplastics in marine ecosystems. We show here that repeated exposure, over a period of 52 days in an outdoor mesocosm setting, of M.&#xa0;edulis to polyethylene microplastics reduced the number of byssal threads produced and the attachment strength (tenacity) by &#x223c;50%. Exposure to either type of microplastic altered the haemolymph proteome and, although a conserved response to microplastic exposure was observed, overall polyethylene resulted in more changes to protein abundances than polylactic acid. Many of the proteins affected are involved in vital biological processes, such as immune regulation, detoxification, metabolism and structural development. Our study highlights the utility of mass spectrometry-based proteomics to assess the health of key marine organisms and identifies the potential mechanisms by which microplastics, both conventional and biodegradable, could affect their ability to form and maintain reefs.

### Keywords
Proteins, Polyethylene, Polylactic acid, Biodegradable microplastics, Tenacity, Immunity

### Affiliations
Biology
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr Jim Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland


