### Accession
PXD039012

### Title
 Kinase Impaired BTK Mutations Are Susceptible to Clinical Stage BTK and IKZF1/3 Degrader NX-2127

### Description
Here we identify that drug-resistant BTK mutations occur in distinct enzymatic classes, some of which render BTK enzymatically impaired while conferring novel protein-protein interactions to sustain B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling.

### Sample Protocol
TMD8 cells expressing BTK WT, T474I, or L528W were treated with either vehicle (DMSO) or 1uM of pirtobrutinib for one hour in triplicate. Cells were then all stimulated with 10ug/ml of anti-human IgM for 15 minutes and treated with pervanadate solution (0.25uM sodium orthovanadate, 30% hydrogen peroxide, and PBS) for 10 minutes for phospho-tyrosine enrichment. Cells were collected, pelleted, and lysed in MS lysis buffer (0.5% Nonidet-40, 150 nM NaCl, 10mM KCl, 1.5MgCl2, 10mM Tris-HCl ph=8) supplemented with 10ug/ml of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 21,000 g for 30 min at 40C, and protein concentration was measured by BCA. 1 mg of nuclear extracts was denatured in 2%SDS/2%SDC/200 mM EPPS at 60oC for 15 min followed by sonication. Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), and quenched with 10 mM DTT. Protein was chloroform−methanol precipitated. Protein was reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) and digested by Lys-C overnight and trypsin for 6 h, both at a 1:50 protease-to-peptide ratio. Digested peptides were quantified using a Nanodrop at 280 nm, and 500 µg of the peptide from each sample was labeled with 500 µg TMT reagent using a 16-plex TMT kit. TMT labels were checked, 100 ng of each sample was pooled and desalted, and analyzed by short SPS-MS3 method, and using normalization factor samples were bulk mixed at 1:1 across all channels and desalted using a 500 mg Sep-Pak solid-phase extraction column and dried using vacuum centrifugation.  Desalted dried isobaric labeled peptides (4 mg) were resuspended in 1.4 ml of ice-cold HS IAP bind buffer (50 mM MOPS (pH 7.2), 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and centrifuged at maximum speed for 5 min at 4°C to remove any insoluble material. Supernatants (pH ~7.5) were incubated with the washed PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Motif (Y*) immunoaffinity magnetic beads for 2 hours at 4°C with gentle end-over-end rotation. After centrifugation at 2000 x g for 1 min, beads were washed four times with ice-cold HS IAP wash buffer and three with ice-cold HPLC water. The phospho-tyrosine peptides were eluted twice with 0.15% TFA, desalted using SDB-RPS StageTip, and dried via vacuum centrifugation.  The isobaric labeled dried phospho-tyrosine peptides were dissolved in 10 µl of (3% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 using the MSA-SPS-MS3 and NL SPS-MS3 method. Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray C18 25cm column. Peptides elution and separation were achieved at a non-linear flow rate of 250 nl/min using a gradient of 5%-30% of buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) for 120 minutes with a temperature of the column maintained at 40 °C during the entire experiment. For both methods, MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4×105). Determined charge states between 2 and 4 were required for sequencing and a 60 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Data-dependent top10 MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap with collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation (Turbo; NCE 30%; maximum injection time 54 ms; AGC 5×104). MS3 quantification scans were performed using the multi-notch MS3-based TMT method (ten SPS ions; 50,000 resolution; NCE 55% for MSA-SPS-TMT and 35% for NL-SPS-TMT maximum injection time 100 ms; AGC 1x105) using the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 to perform database search and TMT reporter ions quantification. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and the carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while the oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984) on asparagine and glutamine and phosphorylation (+79.966) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as a variable modification. Data were searched against a UniProt Human database with peptide-spectrum match (PSMs) and protein-level FDR at 1% FDR. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of each protein normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Phosphopeptides identification and quantification were imported into Perseus (Version 1.2.2) to filter and annotate data. Filtered data was then process in R studio (Version 4.1.3) using the Bioconductor software package limma to test for statistical analysis (FDR<0.05).  Adjusted p-values were negatively logarithmized (-log10) and foldchange (FC) values (mutant/WT) were logarithmized (log2) to identify proteins demonstrating statistically significant changes in abundance. Data was visualized as volcano plots using R package ggplot2 with significance cutoffs for FC and p-value of -1,1 and -1.3,1.3 respectively. Kinase substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) was performed using the R package KSEAapp to show estimated changes in kinase activity based on phosphorylation changes of identified substrates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinase dead, Phosphoproteomics, Btk

### Affiliations
University of Miami - Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center
Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of Miami

### Submitter
Skye Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Justin Taylor
Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of Miami


