### Accession
PXD028936

### Title
Proteogenomic subtyping of chronic lymphocytic leukemia identifies subgroups with contrasting clinical outcome and distinct ex-vivo drug response profile

### Description
We have performed a comprehensive proteomic analysis of clinical patient samples of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) alongside genome-, transcriptome- and ex-vivo drug response profiling. Trisomy 12 and IGHV mutation status had the strongest impact on the proteome and transcriptome; and SF3B1 mutations preferentially affected the proteome. Unsupervised clustering of the proteome data partitioned CLL patients into six protein based subgroups (PG) with contrasting clinical behavior. PG1-4 could be explained by the impact of trisomy 12 and IGHV mutation status on protein abundances and another subgroup (PG6), was enriched for TP53 mutations. In addition we uncovered a new subgroup (PG5) only detectable from the proteome, characterized by low expression of central B-cell receptor proteins, altered splicing, metabolic reprogramming and increased sensitivity to proteasomal inhibition. https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD024544 

### Sample Protocol
Patient Samples Written consent was obtained from patients according to the declaration of Helsinki. Leukemia cells were isolated from blood using Ficoll density gradient centrifugation. Cells were viably frozen and kept on liquid nitrogen until use.  Samples isolation for proteomics Cells were thawed and allowed to recover in medium for 3h. To deplete dead cells, which form clumps during the recovery process, the suspension was filtered through a 40µm cell strainer. Cell viability and counts were analysed using Trypan Blue. Cells were washed twice and tumour cells were collected by Magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) using CD19 beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Cells were filtered through a 40µM strainer. Samples were split into aliquots for proteomics analysis (1x10^7cells), RNA sequencing and panel sequencing. Pellets for proteomics analysis were washed twice with PBS and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Cell pellets from 68 CLL patients were dissolved in Lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7,6, 1 mM DTT), heated to 95°C and sonicated. The total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). Samples were then prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using  a modified version of the SP3 protein clean-up and a digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018) (Hughes et al., 2014), where proteins were digested by LysC and trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Pierce). In brief, 250 µg protein from each sample was alkylated with 4 mM Chloroacetamide. Sera-Mag SP3 bead mix (20 µl) was transferred into the protein sample together with 100% Acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70 %. The mix was incubated under rotation at room temperature for 18 min. The mix was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was discarded, followed by two washes with 70 % ethanol and one with 100 % acetonitrile. The beads-protein mixture was reconstituted in 100 µl LysC buffer (0.5 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH: 7.6 and 1:50 enzyme (LysC) to protein ratio) and incubated overnight. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in 100 µl 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and incubated overnight. The peptides were eluted from the mixture after placing the mixture on a magnetic rack, followed by peptide concentration measurement (Bio-Rad DC Assay). The samples were then pH adjusted using TEAB pH 8.5 (100 mM final conc.), 65 µg of peptides from each sample were labelled with isobaric TMT-tags (TMT10plex reagent) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific).  Of note, the labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of the samples. For the sample clean-up step, a solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex) was performed and purified samples were dried in a SpeedVac. An aliquot of approximately 10 µg was suspended in LC mobile phase A and 1 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system.  Peptide level sample fractionation through IPG-IEF  The TMT labelled peptides were pooled and 325 µg of each set were separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on pH 3-10 strips as described by Branca et al (Branca et al., 2014). Peptides were extracted from the strips by a prototype liquid handling robot, supplied by GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB. A plastic device with 72 wells was put onto each strip and 50 µl of MQ was added to each well. After 30 minutes incubation, the liquid was transferred to a 96 well plate and the extraction was repeated 2 more times with 35% acetonitrile (ACN) and 35% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in MQ, respectively. The extracted peptides were dried in Speed-Vac and dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1 % formic acid.  References Branca, R.M., Orre, L.M., Johansson, H.J., Granholm, V., Huss, M., Perez-Bercoff, A., Forshed, J., Kall, L., and Lehtio, J. (2014). HiRIEF LC-MS enables deep proteome coverage and unbiased proteogenomics. Nature methods 11, 59-62. Moggridge, S., Sorensen, P.H., Morin, G.B., and Hughes, C.S. (2018). Extending the Compatibility of the SP3 Paramagnetic Bead Processing Approach for Proteomics. Journal of proteome research 17, 1730-1740.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics Online LC-MS was performed as previously described (Branca et al 2014) using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each of the 72 plate wells was dissolved in 20ul solvent A and 10ul were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 µl min-1, the curved gradient went from 6-8% B up to 40% B in each fraction in a dynamic range of gradient length, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.  Peptide and protein identification Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v2.08) (Granholm et al., 2014), where search results from 8 subsequent fraction were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 75 in the Galaxy platform (Boekel et al., 2015). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015). For phosphorylation as a variable modification, we performed a separate search in which phosphorylation was allowed as a dynamic modification on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. PTM-localization was scored using LuciPHOr2 (Fermin et al.). References Boekel, J., Chilton, J.M., Cooke, I.R., Horvatovich, P.L., Jagtap, P.D., Kall, L., Lehtio, J., Lukasse, P., Moerland, P.D., and Griffin, T.J. (2015). Multi-omic data analysis using Galaxy. Nature biotechnology 33, 137-139. Fermin, D., Avtonomov, D., Choi, H., Nesvizhskii, A.I. (2015). LuciPHOr2: site localization of generic post-translational modifications from tandem mass spectrometry data, Bioinformatics, 31(7), 1141–1143 Granholm, V., Kim, S., Navarro, J.C., Sjolund, E., Smith, R.D., and Kall, L. (2014). Fast and accurate database searches with MS-GF+Percolator. Journal of proteome research 13, 890-897. Holman, J.D., Tabb, D.L., and Mallick, P. (2014). Employing ProteoWizard to Convert Raw Mass Spectrometry Data. Current protocols in bioinformatics 46, 13 24 11-19. Hughes, C.S., Foehr, S., Garfield, D.A., Furlong, E.E., Steinmetz, L.M., and Krijgsveld, J. (2014). Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Molecular systems biology 10, 757. Kim, S., and Pevzner, P.A. (2014). MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics. Nature communications 5, 5277. Savitski, M.M., Wilhelm, M., Hahne, H., Kuster, B., and Bantscheff, M. (2015). A Scalable Approach for Protein False Discovery Rate Estimation in Large Proteomic Data Sets. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 14, 2394-2404. Sturm, M., Bertsch, A., Gropl, C., Hildebrandt, A., Hussong, R., Lange, E., Pfeifer, N., Schulz-Trieglaff, O., Zerck, A., Reinert, K., et al. (2008). OpenMS - an open-source software framework for mass spectrometry. BMC bioinformatics 9, 163.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer heterogeneity at the proteome level may explain differences in therapy response and prognosis beyond the currently established genomic and transcriptomic-based diagnostics. The relevance of proteomics for disease classifications remains to be established in clinically heterogeneous cancer entities such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Here, we characterize the proteome and transcriptome alongside genetic and ex-vivo drug response profiling in a clinically annotated CLL discovery cohort (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;68). Unsupervised clustering of the proteome data reveals six subgroups. Five of these proteomic groups are associated with genetic features, while one group is only detectable at the proteome level. This new group is characterized by accelerated disease progression, high spliceosomal protein abundances associated with aberrant splicing, and low B cell receptor signaling protein abundances (ASB-CLL). Classifiers developed to identify ASB-CLL based on its characteristic proteome or splicing signature in two independent cohorts (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;165, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;169) confirm that ASB-CLL comprises about 20% of CLL patients. The inferior overall survival in ASB-CLL is also independent of both TP53- and IGHV mutation status. Our multi-omics analysis refines the classification of CLL and highlights the potential of proteomics to improve cancer patient stratification beyond genetic and transcriptomic profiling.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Hirief, Proteogenomics, B-cell, Leukemia, Proteomics, Lymphoblast, Clinical samples., Chronic lymphoblastic leukemia, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Science for Life Laboratory
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Mattias Vesterlund

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Science for Life Laboratory


