### Accession
PXD026629

### Title
Precision N-glycoproteomics of murine peritoneal macrophage

### Description
In this study, we profiled the precision N-glycoproteome of the murine peritoneal macrophage under different stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
The murine peritoneal macrophages were obtained according to previous study and following be cultured in DMEM medium for at least 2 hours at 37℃ to make them adhere to the substrate. Proteins were extracted from peritoneal macrophages using 4% SDS denaturing buffer (Tris-HCl, pH=7.6). Lysis was performed for 30 minutes. The protein concentration was quantified by BCA kit (Thermo). Before tryptic digestion, 5 volumes of pre-cooled acetone were added to the protein and placed at -20°C. After centrifugation at 140000 rpm for 40 minutes, the supernatant was removed. Resuspend the protein with 50 mM ABC, then added trypsin at a concentration of 1:50 (w/w) to the protein in the solution. Proteins were digested for 18 hours at 37 °C. Use C18 desalting column to desalt peptides according to the protocol.  Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted with loading buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA). Fill a 200 uL pipette tip with about 20ug ZIC-HILIC to construct ZIC-HILIC column. Pipe 100 ul washing buffer (80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA) to ZIC-HILIC column and centrifuge at 10000 rpm for 2 minutes and discard the elution. Wash the column three times. Load the peptides to the ZIC-HILIC column and centrifuge at 10000 rpm for 2 minutes and discard the elution. Elute the glycopeptide from peptide with 200 uL elution buffer 1 (0.1% TFA), 20 uL elution buffer 2 (50mM ABC) and 20 uL elution buffer 3 (50% acetonitrile). The precision N-glycoproteome was characterized by LC-MS according to pGlyco2.0 workflow.

### Data Protocol
Site-specific glycopeptides were interpreted using the software pGlyco 2.0. Raw MS/MS data were converted to “mgf” format by the revised version of pParse. Parameters for database searching of intact glycopeptide were as follows: mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions was set as ±5 ppm and ±20 ppm, respectively. The protein databases were from UNIPROT. Maximal missed cleavage was 3. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation (C). Variable modifications contained oxidation on Met (M), acetylation on protein Nterm. The N-glycosylation sequon (N-X-S/T, X ≠ P) was modified by changing “N” to “J” (the two shared the same mass). The glycan database was extracted from GlycomeDB (www.glycome-db.org), and the total entries of N-glycan were 7,884 considering NeuGc. Trypsin and protein databases with species of Mus musculus (16,711 entries) were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Inflammation, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Institutes of Biomedicine Science, Fudan University
Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University

### Submitter
Lujie Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hongxiu Yu
Institutes of Biomedicine Science, Fudan University


