### Accession
PXD028816

### Title
Fluoxetine triggers synaptic vesicle exo/endocytosis, mitochondrial energy metabolism and dynamics in hippocampus of socially isolated rats

### Description
We used comparative proteomic approach to identify proteome changes in purified synaptic terminals (synaptosomes) of rats exposed to chronic social isolation (CSIS) (6 weeks), animal model for depression, followed by chronic Fluoxetine treatment (last 3 weeks of CSIS) (therapeutic effect). Our aim was to examine a subcellular compartment enriched in proteins involved in synaptic function.

### Sample Protocol
The synaptosomal fractions of chronic social isolation (CSIS)animals and control rats withor without chronic antidepressant tianeptine (Tian) treatment were pooled so that each sample contained the same amount of total protein, which was then heated to 95°C for 5min and cooled on ice prior to loading onto NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels (life technologies). SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed according to the manufacturer's specification. Proteins were fixed within the polyacrylamide matrix by incubating the entire gel in 5% acetic acid in 1:1 (v/v) water:methanol for 30min. After Coomassie staining (60min), the gel slab was rinsed with water (60min) and each lane was excised, divided into 2 gel fragments (samples) and cut into small pieces. The proteins were then in-gel destained (100mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile 1:1 (v/v)), reduced (10mM DTT), alkylated (50mM Iodoacetamide) and finally Trypsin-digested by overnight incubation at 37°C. The generated peptides were collected from the gel pieces, which were further subjected to a peptide extraction step with an acidic (1.5% formic acid) acetonitrile (66%) solution. Both peptide containing samples were combined and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a C18 precolumn (Acclaim; Dionex) using a RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient, resolved on a C18 column (Acclaim; Dionex) with a flow rate of 300nl/min and electrosprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A Triversa Automate (Advion Biosciences) was used as an ion source. Each scan cycle consisted of one FTMS full scan and up to seven ITMS dependent MS/MS scans of the seven most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion (30s), mass width (10ppm) and monoisotopic precursor selection were enabled. All analyses were performed in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
Extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database using the Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3) search engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) accepting common variable modifications and one missed tryptic cleavage. Peptide tolerance was 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was 0.5 Da. All protein identification experiments were carried out using the corresponding decoy database and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The relative quantification of the proteins in the two subgroups was performed with the label free quantification (LFQ) tool of the Sieve 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a mass error tolerance of 10ppm und a retention time shift of 1min. Proteins identified by only one (unique) peptide match were excluded from bioinformatic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic social isolation (CSIS)-induced alternation in synaptic and mitochondrial function of specific brain regions is associated with major depressive disorder (MDD). Despite the wide number of available medications, treating MDD remains an important challenge. Although fluoxetine (Flx) is the most frequently prescribed antidepressant, its mode of action is still unknown. To delineate affected molecular pathways of depressive-like behavior and identify potential targets upon Flx treatment, we performed a comparative proteomic analysis of hippocampal purified synaptic terminals (synaptosomes) of rats exposed to six weeks of CSIS, an animal model of depression, and/or followed by Flx treatment (lasting three weeks of six-week CSIS) to explore synaptic protein profile changes. Results showed that Flx in controls mainly induced decreased expression of proteins involved in energy metabolism and the redox system. CSIS led to increased expression of proteins that mainly participate in Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (Camk2)-related neurotransmission, vesicle transport, and ubiquitination. Flx treatment of CSIS rats predominantly increased expression of proteins involved in synaptic vesicle trafficking (exocytosis and endocytosis), and energy metabolism (glycolytic and mitochondrial respiration). Overall, these Flx-regulated changes in synaptic and mitochondrial proteins of CSIS rats might be critical targets for new therapeutic development for the treatment of MDD.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Rat, Proteomics, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty Mannheim of the University of Heidelberg
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Institute for Clinical Chemistry

### Submitter
Victor Costina

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Findeisen
Medical Faculty Mannheim, Institute for Clinical Chemistry


