### Accession
PXD012353

### Title
Cysteine oxidation triggers amyloid fibril formation of the tumor suppressor p16INK4A

### Description
p16INK4A inhibits the CDK4/6 kinases and is therefore an important cell cycle regulator. Accumulation of p16INK4A in response to oncogenic transformation leads to cellular senescence and it is therefore frequently lost in cancer. p16INK4A is also known to accumulate under conditions of cellular oxidative stress and therefore could potentially be regulated by redox signaling, which is a form of signal transduction that is mediated by the reversible oxidation of cysteine-thiol side chains in proteins. We found that oxidation of the single cysteine residue in p16INK4A in human cells occurs under relatively mild oxidizing conditions and that this leads to disulfide dependent dimerization. p16INK4A is a well-characterized all alpha-helical protein, but we find that upon cysteine-dependent dimerization, p16INK4A undergoes a dramatic structural rearrangement and forms aggregates that have the typical features of amyloid fibrils, including binding of diagnostic dyes, presence of cross-β sheet structure, and typical dimensions found in electron microscopy. We find that p16INK4A amyloid formation abolishes its function as a CDK4/6 inhibitor in human cells. Taken together, these observations mechanistically link the cellular redox state to the inactivation of p16INK4A through the formation of amyloid fibrils.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with FLAG-p16INK4A or FLAG-p16INK4AC72A. After two days, half of the dishes (3 full 15cm dishes per sample) were treated for 10 minutes with diamide (250uM) (Sigma Aldrich) and DNCB (12.5uM) (Sigma Aldrich) and subsequently harvested for immunoprecipitation with FLAG beads as described before. After washing, proteins were eluted from the beads by two times 5 minutes incubation with 75ul 0.1M glycine pH 2. The protein containing supernatant was transferred to a new tube and incubated for 20 minutes with 10mM DTT and 2M Urea (dissolved in 100mM Tris pH7.5), followed by 10 minutes incubation with iodoacetamide (50mM). To digest the proteins, 0.25μg trypsin (Promega) was added per sample and samples were incubated ON at 25°C. The next day C18‐stagetips were used for filtering and loading of the protein digest.  Peptide samples were separated on a 30 cm column (75 m ID fused silica capillary with emitter tip (New Objective)) packed with 3 um aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. maisch) using a 40 minute gradient (0,5% HAc to 80% ACN 0,5% HAc), and delivered by an easy-nHPLC (Proxeon). Peptides were electro-sprayed directly into a LTQ-velos-Orbitrap (Thermo) and analyzed in data dependent mode with the resolution of the full scan set at 60000, after which the top 15 peaks were selected for CID fragmentation in the Iontrap with a target setting of 5000 ions.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis Maxquant software version 1.5.1.0 (19029910) was used. During the analysis, oxidation of methionine, alkylation of cysteines with iodoacetamide were set as variable modification. Proteins were identified by the IPI human V3.68 database. And the relative amounts of protein in the separate experiments, the Intensity Based Absolute Quantification (IBAQ) , as well as the label free quantification were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
The tumor suppressor p16<sup>INK4A</sup> induces cell cycle arrest and senescence in response to oncogenic transformation and is therefore frequently lost in cancer. p16<sup>INK4A</sup> is also known to accumulate under conditions of oxidative stress. Thus, we hypothesized it could potentially be regulated by reversible oxidation of cysteines (redox signaling). Here we report that oxidation of the single cysteine in p16<sup>INK4A</sup> in human cells occurs under relatively mild oxidizing conditions and leads to disulfide-dependent dimerization. p16<sup>INK4A</sup> is an all &#x3b1;-helical protein, but we find that upon cysteine-dependent dimerization, p16<sup>INK4A</sup> undergoes a dramatic structural rearrangement and forms aggregates that have the typical features of amyloid fibrils, including binding of diagnostic dyes, presence of cross-&#x3b2; sheet structure, and typical dimensions found in electron microscopy. p16<sup>INK4A</sup> amyloid formation abolishes its function as a Cyclin Dependent Kinase 4/6 inhibitor. Collectively, these observations mechanistically link the cellular redox state to the inactivation of p16<sup>INK4A</sup> through the formation of amyloid fibrils.

### Keywords
Cysteine oxidation amyloid fibril  p16ink4a

### Affiliations
Center for Molecular Medicine, Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias B. Dansen
Center for Molecular Medicine, Molecular Cancer Research, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.


