### Accession
PXD001304

### Title
Trichoderma RUT C-30 secretome after growth on different cellulosic substrates

### Description
Enzyme production by T. reesei Rut C-30 was studied in submerged cultures on five different cellulose-rich substrates, namely, commercial cellulose Avicel® and industrial-like cellulosic pulp substrates which consist mainly of cellulose, but also contain residual hemicellulose and lignin. In order to evaluate the hydrolysis of the substrates by the fungal enzymes, the spatial polymer distributions were characterised by cross-polarization magic angle spinning carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance (CP/MAS 13C-NMR) in combination with spectral fitting. Proteins in culture supernatants at early and late stages of enzyme production were labeled by Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) and protein profiles were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Three sets of 6-plex TMT compounds were used to analyse all 15 supernatants. Each set had 5 different samples from the cultivations and one sample from the pool, which consisted of equal amounts (by weight) of proteins from all the 15 samples. One hundred µg of total protein of each sample and 100 µg of a pool containing equal amounts of all samples were diluted with 2 volumes of 0.5 M tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) and 1 volume of 18 mΩH2O and 1 µL of 2 % SDS were added to each tube. The samples were reduced by the addition of 2 µL of 50 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) which was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. The samples were subsequently alkylated with the addition of 1 µL of 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) (Fluka, Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO) in gradient grade acetonitrile and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. The samples were digested with 4 µg of sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin in 18 mΩH2O water, incubated overnight at 37 °C. TMT labeling of proteins. The digested samples were dried in a SpeedVac to ~25-30 µL and 70 µL of 0.5 M TEAB was added to each tube in preparation for labeling with the TMT. TMT reagents were allowed to equilibrate to room temperature and 42 µL of gradient grade acetonitrile was added to each tube. The TMT reagent was transferred to the appropriate sample tube and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 8 µL of 5 % hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific, Basel, Switzerland) which was incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. After TMT labeling, the samples were desalted on PepClean C18 spin columns according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. LC-MS/MS Analysis. The desalted and dried fractions were reconstituted with 15 µL of 0.1 % formic acid in 3 % acetonitrile and analysed on a Q Exactive mass spectrophotometer interfaced with an in-house constructed nano-LC column. For each sample, a 2 µl sample injection was made with an Easy-nLC autosampler, running at 200 nL min1. The peptides were trapped on a precolumn (45 × 0.075 mm i.d.) and separated on a reversed phase column, 190 × 0.075 mm, packed in-house with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) in a pico-frit column (New Objective, MA, USA). The gradient was set to: from 0 to 70 min, 7 to 27 % acetonitrile in 0.2 % formic acid, from 70 to 85 min, from 27 to 80 % acetonitrile in 0.2 % formic acid and 85-105 min at 80 % acetonitrile in 0.2 % formic acid. Ions were injected into the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer under a spray voltage of 1.6 kV in positive ion mode. For MS scans, one microscan was performed at 70000 resolution (at m/z 200) and a mass range of m/z 400-1800 operated. MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode, with the top 10 most abundant doubly or multiply charged precursor ions in each MS scan selected for fragmentation (MS2) by stepped high energy collision dissociation (HCD). For MS2 scans, one microscan was performed at 7500 resolution (at m/z 400) with a mass range of m/z 110-2000 with stepped collision energies of 25 %, 35 % and 45 %.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files for each TMT set were merged for relative quantification and identification using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3. A database search for each set was performed with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science LTD., London, United Kingdom) using Trichoderma reesei V2 ‘filtered models’ protein database obtained from the Join Genome institute website (http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/Trire2/Trire2.download.html, Department of Energy, Joint genome institute, CA, USA) (Martinez et al., 2008). MS peptide tolerance was 5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 100 molecular mass units. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, cysteine methylthiolation and fixed modifications of N-terminal TMT6plex and lysine TMT6plex were selected.  An exclusion list of m/z values was generated from the search results whereby only peptide spectral matches accepted at 1 % False Discovery Rate (FDR) were included, with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm. For the exclusion list, the retention time window was set to 2 minutes. The sample was re-injected into the Q Exactive mass spectrophotometer interfaced with an in-house constructed nano-LC column and run as with the exclusion list using the same parameters as in the first MS analysis. The MS raw files from the first and second MS analysis were combined and searched as described above and a second exclusion list was generated with the same settings as previously described. The TMT sample was re-injected for a third run using the second exclusion list and MS analysis was performed with the same parameters as first and second analysis. The three MS raw data files were combined and searched as described above. TMT quantification. The detected peptide threshold in the software was set to 1 % or 5 % FDR by searching against a reversed database and the result was filtered by selecting proteins with at least one unique peptide per protein. Identified proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimise redundancy. For TMT quantification, the ratios of the TMT reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra ([M+H]+ m/z 126-131) from raw data sets were used to calculate fold changes between samples. Ratios were derived by Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 using the following criteria: fragment ion tolerance as 50 ppm for the most confident centroid peak. TMT reagent purity correction factors were used and missing values were replaced with minimum intensity. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for relative quantification, excluding those common to other isoforms or proteins of the same family. The quantification was normalised using the protein median with a minimum protein count of 20. Peptides with co-isolation of greater than 30 % were rejected for quantification purposes. The results were then exported into MS Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) for further data interpretation and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The industrial production of cellulolytic enzymes is dominated by the filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei (anamorph of Hypocrea jecorina). In order to develop optimal enzymatic cocktail, it is of importance to understand the natural regulation of the enzyme profile as response to the growth substrate. The influence of the complexity of cellulose on enzyme production by the microorganisms is not understood. In the present study we attempted to understand how different physical and structural properties of cellulose-rich substrates affected the levels and profiles of extracellular enzymes produced by T. reesei. Enzyme production by T. reesei Rut C-30 was studied in submerged cultures on five different cellulose-rich substrates, namely, commercial cellulose Avicel&#xae; and industrial-like cellulosic pulp substrates which consist mainly of cellulose, but also contain residual hemicellulose and lignin. In order to evaluate the hydrolysis of the substrates by the fungal enzymes, the spatial polymer distributions were characterised by cross-polarisation magic angle spinning carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance (CP/MAS (13)C-NMR) in combination with spectral fitting. Proteins in culture supernatants at early and late stages of enzyme production were labeled by Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) and protein profiles were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001304. In total 124 proteins were identified and quantified in the culture supernatants, including cellulases, hemicellulases, other glycoside hydrolases, lignin-degrading enzymes, auxiliary activity 9 (AA9) family (formerly GH61), supporting activities of proteins and enzymes acting on cellulose, proteases, intracellular proteins and several hypothetical proteins. Surprisingly, substantial differences in the enzyme profiles were found even though there were minor differences in the chemical composition between the cellulose-rich substrates.

### Keywords
Submerged cultivation, Quantitative proteomics, Tandem mass tags, Cellulose i structure, Biomass degrading enzymes

### Affiliations
Industrial Biotechnology, Chalmers University of Technology
Chalmers University of Technology

### Submitter
George Anasontzis

### Lab Head
Dr Lisbeth Olsson
Industrial Biotechnology, Chalmers University of Technology


