### Accession
PXD038076

### Title
Non-poly(A) RNA Interactome Capture (RIC) of mouse brain, kidney and liver

### Description
Male mice on a homogenous C57BL6/J genetic background were sacrificed at 11 to 13 weeks of age by cervical dislocation. Brain, kidneys and liver were immediately harvested, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use. Animal handling was in accordance with guidelines approved by the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL). Organ sections (thickness 30 µm) were prepared in a Cryostat (Leica Biosystems, Leica CM3050 S) set to -20 °C and deposited onto SuperFrost glass slides (Carl Roth, H880); the glass slides were pre-cooled to -20°C in the cryostat. ~10 sections were placed on a glass slide, and a total of around 150 sections were prepared for each sample per mouse. Tissue sections on glass slides were then transferred onto metal plates placed on dry ice. The tissue sections were exposed or not to 1 J/cm2 of 254 nm UV light in a XL 1500 UV Spectrolinker (Spectronics Corporation) and subjected to eRIC (PMID: 30352994). Poly(A) RNA-depleted supernatants obtained after two consecutive rounds of eRIC were stored at -80ºC and then used as input for the column-based guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction of ribonuleoprotein (RNP) complexes, applying an adaptation of the 2C method (PMID: 30035255). Eluates obtained from UV-treated samples from the respective organs of two mice were combined per independent experiment, and the analyses were conducted in duplicate for each organ studied. For the non-crosslink controls, organ sections from four mice were pooled to generate one non-crosslink sample per organ studied. 2 µg of captured RNA per sample were employed.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of non-poly(A) RNP complexes: supernatants obtained after two consecutive rounds of eRIC were stored at -80ºC until use and then subjected to an adaptation of the 2C method using the Quick-RNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo Research, R1055). Two purification rounds with a total of 14 mL were performed with supernatants of brain and kidney origin. One purification with 2.5 mL of liver supernatant was performed. One non-crosslinked control and four crosslinked samples per organ were processed. Supernatants were combined with 4 volumes of RNA Lysis Buffer, mixed, deposited in a syringe barrel and passed through a Spin-Away Filter column applying pressure with a plunger. The flow-through was combined with 1 volume of 100% ethanol, mixed well and loaded into a Zymo-Spin IIICG Column applying vacuum (Qiagen, QIAvac Vacuum System). Columns were centrifuged at 16.000 x g for 30 seconds at room temperature (rt). Flow-though was discarded. Columns were washed with 400 µL of RNA Wash Buffer, centrifuged at 13.000 x g for 30 seconds at rt, and then incubated for 15 min at rt with 80 µL of DNA digestion mix (75 µL of DNA Digestion Buffer, 5 µL of DNase I (1 U/µL)). Columns were washed with 400 µL of RNA Prep Buffer, centrifuged at 13.000 x g for 30 seconds at rt, washed with 700 µL of RNA Wash Buffer, centrifuged likewise, washed with 400 µL of RNA Wash Buffer and centrifuged at 16.000 x g for 60 seconds at rt. To elute RNA and RNP complexes, columns were incubated with 100 µL (liver samples) or 75 µL (brain and kidney samples) of water for 5 min at rt and then centrifuged at 13.000 x g for 30 seconds at rt. Eluates from the two purification rounds (brain and kidney) were pooled. Eluates were brought to a volume of 146 µL with water, combined with 16.8 µL of 10x DNase buffer and 5 µL of TURBO DNase (ThermoFisher, AM2238) and incubated 30 min at 37 ºC. Samples were subjected to a second round of purification (Quick-RNA Miniprep Kit). RNA and RNP complexes were eluted with 100 µL of water. 100 µL of brain and kidney eluates, and 50 µL of liver eluates diluted in one volume of water, were combined with 10 µL of 10x RNase buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1.5 M NaCl, 0.5% (vol/vol) IGEPAL CA-630 (NP-40)), 5 mM DTT, 0.2 µL RNase A and 0.5 µL RNase T1, and incubated at 37ºC for 1 hour. Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry and TMT labeling: samples were concentrated using a SpeedVac, and treated with 10 mM DTT in HEPES buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) for 30 min at 56 ºC. Reduced cysteines were then alkylated for 30 min at rt with 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide in HEPES buffer (protected from light). Samples were prepared using the SP3 protocol and trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Following an overnight incubation at 37 °C, peptides were recovered in HEPES buffer applying two successive elution steps. The peptides were labelled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were combined and cleaned using an OASIS HLB µElution Plate (Waters). Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was carried out on an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 100 x 1.0 mm, Phenomenex). Mass spectrometry data acquisition: An UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column 75 µm x 250 mm C18, 1.8 µm, 100 Å, Waters) was used. Trapping was carried out with a constant flow of trapping solution (0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water) at 30 µL/min onto the trapping column for 6 minutes. Subsequently, peptides were eluted via the analytical column running solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water, 3% DMSO) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min, with increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, 3% DMSO) from 2% to 8% in 4 min, from 8% to 28% for a further 104 min, from 28% to 40% in another 4 min, and finally from 40% to 80% for 4 min, followed by re-equilibration back to 2% B in 4 min. The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the Nanospray Flex ion source in positive ion mode. The peptides were introduced into the Fusion Lumos using a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and an applied spray voltage of 2.4 kV. The capillary temperature was set to 275°C. A full mass scan was acquired with a mass range of 375-1500 m/z in profile mode in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120000. The filling time was set to a maximum of 50 ms with a limitation of 4x105 ions. Data dependent acquisition was performed with the resolution of the Orbitrap set to 30000, with a fill time of 94 ms and a limitation of 1x105 ions. A normalized collision energy of 38 was applied. MS data was acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
IsobarQuant and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process the acquired data, which was searched against the Mus musculus (UP000000589) Uniprot proteome database containing common contaminants and reversed sequences. The following modifications were included into the search parameters: Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT10 (K) (fixed modification), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and TMT10 (N-term) (variable modifications). A mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da was set, respectively, for the full scan (MS1) and MS/MS (MS2) spectra. Further parameters were: Trypsin digestion with a maximum two missed cleavages tolerated; a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; at least two unique peptides required for protein identification. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 on both the peptide and protein level. The protein output files of IsobarQuant were processed in R (ISBN 3-900051-07-0). Raw TMT reporter ion intensities (‘signal_sum’) were first cleaned for batch effects using the ‘removeBatchEffects’ function of the limma package and further normalized using the vsn (variance stabilization normalization) package. Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package. The replicate information was added as a factor in the design matrix given as an argument to the ‘lmFit’ function of the limma package. Non-poly(A)RIC hits were defined as those proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 5 % and a fold change (FC) greater than 2 in eluates from UV-irradiated samples compared to the corresponding non-irradiated control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna interactome capture., Rbp, Rbpome, Eric, Ric, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
EMBL
European Molecular Biology Laboratory,  Meyerhofstrasse 1,  69117 Heidelberg,  Germany.

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias W. Hentze
European Molecular Biology Laboratory,  Meyerhofstrasse 1,  69117 Heidelberg,  Germany.


