### Accession
PXD034255

### Title
Coupling high-field asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry with capillary electrophoresis-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry improves protein identifications in bottom-up proteomic analysis of low nanogram samples

### Description
In this work, we pioneered the assessment of coupling  high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) with ultra-sensitive capillary electrophoresis hyphenated with tandem mass spectrometry (CE-MS/MS) to achieve deeper proteome coverage of low nanogram amounts of digested cell lysates. An internal stepping strategy using three or four compensation voltages (CVs) per analytical run with varied cycle times was tested to determine optimal FAIMS settings and MS parameters for the CE-FAIMS-MS/MS method. The optimized method applied to bottom-up proteomic analysis of 1 ng HeLa protein digest standard identified 1,314±30 proteins, 4,829±200 peptide groups, and 7,577±163 peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) corresponding to a 16%, 25%, and 22% increase, respectively, over CE-MS/MS alone, without FAIMS. Furthermore, the percentage of acquired MS/MS spectra that resulted in PSMs increased nearly 2-fold with CE-FAIMS-MS/MS. Our results also identified from 1 ng HeLa protein digest without any prior enrichment, 76±9 phosphopeptides, 18% of which were multiphosphorylated. These results represent a 46% increase in phosphopeptide identifications over the control experiments without FAIMS yielding 2.5-fold more multiphosphorylated peptides.

### Sample Protocol
A vial of 20 μg lyophilized HeLa protein digest standard (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was reconstituted in 100 μL of 200 mM ammonium acetate adjusted to pH 9 with 1 M ammonium hydroxide (sample buffer) for a final sample concentration of 200 ng/μL. For 1 ng HeLa injections, serial 10-fold dilutions of 200 ng/μL aliquots were performed with sample buffer to obtain 20 ng/μL aliquots of HeLa protein digest standard.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (v.2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific), searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded on 3/11/2020, containing 20,302 sequences). For protein and peptide group identifications, the SequestHT algorithm with INFERYS rescoring23 was used with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a static modification. Additional searches for modified peptides used SequestHT alone with carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues set as a static modification and oxidation of methionine residues, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine loss with N-terminal acetylation set as dynamic modifications for the protein N-terminus. At least one high confidence peptide sequence was required for protein identifications, and a target false discovery rate (≤1% FDR) was used for protein identification. A multi-consensus report was generated for triplicate analyses of all FAIMS and control methods tested.

### Publication Abstract
In this work, we pioneered the assessment of coupling high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) with ultrasensitive capillary electrophoresis hyphenated with tandem mass spectrometry (CE-MS/MS) to achieve deeper proteome coverage of low nanogram amounts of digested cell lysates. An internal stepping strategy using three or four compensation voltages per analytical run with varied cycle times was tested to determine optimal FAIMS settings and MS parameters for the CE-FAIMS-MS/MS method. The optimized method applied to bottom-up proteomic analysis of 1 ng of HeLa protein digest standard identified 1314 &#xb1; 30 proteins, 4829 &#xb1; 200 peptide groups, and 7577 &#xb1; 163 peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) corresponding to a 16, 25, and 22% increase, respectively, over CE-MS/MS alone, without FAIMS. Furthermore, the percentage of acquired MS/MS spectra that resulted in PSMs increased nearly 2-fold with CE-FAIMS-MS/MS. Label-free quantitation of proteins and peptides was also assessed to determine the precision of replicate analyses from FAIMS methods with increased cycle times. Our results also identified from 1 ng of HeLa protein digest without any prior enrichment 76 &#xb1; 9 phosphopeptides, 18% of which were multiphosphorylated. These results represent a 46% increase in phosphopeptide identifications over the control experiments without FAIMS yielding 2.5-fold more multiphosphorylated peptides.

### Keywords
Tandem mass spectrometry, Capillary electrophoresis, Ultra-sensitive proteomics, Ce-ms/ms, Faims, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Barnett Insititute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Kendall Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander R. Ivanov
Northeastern University


