### Accession
PXD023045

### Title
Mycofactocin is critical for Mycobacterium tuberculosis adaptation into microaerophilic conditions

### Description
Mycofactocin is a new class of peptide-derived redox cofactor whose structural elucidation and functional characterization have recently received enormous focus. Among the six-gene cluster, mftD mediates a probable penultimate step in mycofactocin biosynthesis. MftD is a putative lactate dehydrogenase predicted critical for Mycobacterium tuberculosis survival under oxygen-limited conditions. In this study, mftD transcripts levels were found significantly increased in M. tuberculosis cells adapted to 0.01% oxygen. mftD deletion mutant of M. tuberculosis exhibited survival deficit in in vitro hypoxia and wayne models. However, mftD functions was found dispensable for M. tuberculosis L-Lactate metabolism. Rather surprisingly, the growth fitness of mftD mutant was increased in glucose under aerobic conditions. While the cause of this in vitro phenotype remains unestablished, the levels of NAD(P)H and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity was found decreased in ΔmftD when compared to its parental strain. Increased growth fitness did not have any major impact on bacterial cell shape and size except the formation of extracellular fibril-like structures in subpopulations of ΔmftD. Cell-surface proteins analysis showed that genetic deficiency of mycofactocin likely to predispose accumulation of cofactor-free protein aggregates resembling destabilization of the flavoproteome upon riboflavin deprivation. Nevertheless, like in vitro findings, disruption of mftD increased the fitness of M. tuberculosis in C57BL/6J mice at early phase and resulted in growth stasis in a Nos2-/- hypoxia mouse model. Collectively these results establish the relevance of MftD in M. tuberculosis growth, redox and cofactor homeostasis, and pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
The cell surface proteins of Mycobacterium smegmatis were obtained using a trypsin shaving approach. Briefly, bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed with PBS and applied onto a 0.22 µm cellulose membrane filter. Trypsin was added and filter units were incubated for 15 minutes at 37°C. Peptides were harvested by centrifugation. Samples were acidified and peptides were purified using C18 StageTips. All samples were analyzed by LC-MS on a Q-Exactive HF using a 60 min linear gradient delivered by an RSLC nano 3000 HLPC. Peptides were isolated within a 1.2 m/z window and sequenced using a data-dependent acquisition method. MS1 resolution was set to 60,000, MS2 resolution was set to 30,000. The MS2 maximum injection time was set to 45 ms, and the AGC target was set to 20,000. HCD normalized collision energy was set to 28%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Maxquant (v.1.6.0.1) using default settings. MSMS spectra were searched against a Uniprot mycobacterium smegmatis database. Trypsin/P was set as cleavage specificity. Oxidation (M), protein N-terminal acetylation, and N-terminal glutamate to pyroglutamate conversion were selected as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Match between runs was enabled. The iBAQ option was enabled to calculate estimates for protein abundance. Downstream data analysis was carried out in Perseus (v.1.6.2.3). Proteins flagged as “potential contaminant”, “reverse” and “only identified by site” were were moved from the data set. iBAQ values were log2-transformed and the data was normalized in order to center the median of each sample to the same value. A student’s t-test was applied to determine statistical significance of protein abundance differences between sample groups (fudge factor s0 = 0.1). p-values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation-based FDR approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Lactate metabolism, Redox regulation, Hypoxia, Mycofactocin, Redox regulationamyloid formation

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Frese
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Berlin, Germany


### SDRF

