### Accession
PXD012928

### Title
Mass spectrometric analysis of Collagen alpha-1 (II) chain from Capra hircus

### Description
Expressional alterations and post translational modifications (PTM) of type II collagen can be major cause behind osteo and rheumatoid arthritis. PTM of type II collagen α1 chain (COL2A1) such as hydroxylation of proline (P), lysine and glycosylation of hydroxylysine can act as epitopes resulting COL2A1 as autoantigen in cartilage tissues. Previous study stated proline hydroxylation (Hyp) as an important PTM in type II collagen leading to dysfunctional collagen extracellular matrix assembly in vivo. Here we report for the first time peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) identification and tandem mass spectrometry based mapping of Hyp PTM in COL2A1 from Capra hircus (C. hircus) using Mascot database. As mascot database does not contain C. hircus COL2A1 sequence information, our identification is based on the homologous COL2A1 from Bos taurus and Homo sapience (above 98 % identity). Findings include identification of new triplet Gly-F-Hyp in C. hircus COL2A1 and well known Gly-X-Y triplet with Hyp present in the X position, instead of Y position. PMF data contains lager number of Hyp in COL2A1 from C. hircus consistent with other collagen sequences. This study suggests positional alteration of Hyp/P in Gly-X-Y triplet may be used for molecular identification and characterization of type II collagen from other sources.

### Sample Protocol
1) Type II Collagen from Capra ear cartilage was isolated with acedic acid/pepsin digestion, NaCl precipitation, purification with extensive dialysis and lyophilize until use.  2) Isolated type II collagen was separated on 1D SDS PAGE, stained with comasie brilliant blue R-250, 3)  COL2A1 gel band was excised for In-gel trypsin digestion. 4) Digested peptides were extracted from gel, mixed with HCCA matrix and subjected to MALDI MS and MS2 for peptide mass fingerprinting and denovo sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mass spectra were processed using flexanalysis (Ver 3.4) and Biotools (Ver 3.2) software (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) and proteins were identified using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) against SwissProt (555594 sequences; 199016217 residues) Mammalia (mammals) (66759 sequences) protein database setting search parameter as charge +1, peptide tolerance 100 ppm, maximum missed cleavage site 1, MS/MS tolerance  2 Dalton, carbimedomethyl C as fixed, oxidation P as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Collagen II (COLII), the most abundant protein in vertebrates, helps maintain the structural and functional integrity of cartilage. Delivery of COLII from animal sources could improve cartilage regeneration therapies. Here we show that COLII can be purified from the Capra ear cartilage, a commonly available bio-waste product, with a high yield. MALDI-MS/MS analysis evidenced post-translational modifications of the signature triplet, Glycine-Proline-Hydroxyproline (G-P-Hyp), in alpha chain of isolated COLII (COLIIA1). Additionally, thirty-two peptides containing 59 Hyp residues and a few G-X-Y triplets with positional alterations of Hyp in COLIIA1 are also identified. Furthermore, we show that an injectable hydrogel formulation containing the isolated COLII facilitates chondrogenic differentiation towards cartilage regeneration. These findings show that COLII can be isolated from Capra ear cartilage and that positional alteration of Hyp in its structural motif, as detected by newly developed mass spectrometric method, might be an early marker of cartilage disorder.

### Keywords
Capra hircus, Collagen alpha-i (ii), Hydroxyproline mapping, Post translational modifications

### Affiliations
School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India
Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur

### Submitter
Debabrata Dutta

### Lab Head
Dr Priti Prasanna Maity
School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India


