### Accession
PXD018093

### Title
Multi-omics characterization of MEK inhibitor resistant pancreatic cancer based on a genetically engineered mouse model-derived in vitro system

### Description
Tumor heterogeneity and therapy resistance are hallmarks of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Emerging evidence supports treatment-induced resistance to be a multifactorial process mediated by cellular plasticity involving epigenetic regulation. Here, we used a multi-omics approach to analyze in detail molecular mechanisms underlying MEK inhibitor (MEKi) resistance. Therefore, we characterized different cell stages (parental, MEKi resistant, reverted after different passages of drug withdrawal) in primary cell lines derived from a genetic PDAC mouse model, thereby minimizing inter-individual heterogeneity that could distort genome-wide analyses.

### Sample Protocol
To induce resistance, cells were treated with increasing doses of trametinib (LKT) until they grew in 100x of their IC50. One batch was cultivated with 100x IC50 of trametinib in the culture medium (termed resistant ) with medium exchange every 2-3 days on a regular basis. Another batch of each cell line was kept under drug withdrawal and samples were taken after 12 passages in drug-free medium (termed P12). Cell pellets were resuspended in 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.1% NaDOC for cell lysis. Samples were sonicated on ice for 10 min and centrifuged (16,000 g, 15 min, 4°C). Protein concentration was determined via Bradford assay. Due to a very low concentration, technical replicates were pooled. The samples were ridded of remaining viscosity with 10 impulses at 50% power by ultrasonic homogenization via Sonopuls HD 200 MS 72 (Badelin, Berlin, Germany) and centrifuged (16,000 g, 15 min, 4°C). Protein amount was determined via amino acid analysis. DTT (5 mM) was added to the sample for reduction (30 min, 60°C), followed by IAA (15 mM) for alkylation(30 min, RT in the dark). Lysed proteins were tryptically digested over night at 37°C (trypsin/protein ratio 1/24). For acidification, TFA (0.5%) was added (30 min, 37°C), samples were centrifuged (10 min, 16,000 g) for removal of NaDOC and supernatant transferred to glass vials, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and dissolved in 0.1% TFA. A sample amount corresponding to 275 ng was used for one LC-MS/MS measurement.  LC–MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to an upstream-connected Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano high-performance liquid chromatography system (Dionex, Idstein, Germany). Samples were measured shuffled. Peptides dissolved in 0.1% TFA were pre-concentrated on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) within 7 min at a flow rate of 30 μl/min with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then transferred to an in-house packed C18 analytical column (ReproSil®-Pur from Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany, 75 μm × 40 cm, 1.9 μm, 120 Å). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5%–40% solvent B over 98 min at 300 nl/min and 65°C (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid=FA; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 84% acetonitrile). Full-scan mass spectra in the Orbitrap analyzer were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z and within a mass range of 350–2000 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode at a resolution of 5,400. For MS/MS measurements, the 20 most abundant peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID, NCE of 35) and measured for tandem mass spectra in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified with Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release 2018_11; 53,780 entries) using Mascot v.2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Taxonomy setting was Mus musculus and mass tolerance was 5 ppm and 0.4 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Dynamic and static modifications were considered for methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (carbamidomethyl), respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated with the Proteome Discoverer Target Decoy PSM Validator function, and identifications with an FDR > 1% were rejected. The software Progenesis QI v.2.0.5387.52102 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Durham, NC, USA) was used for label-free quantification. The obtained .raw files were aligned to a reference run and a master map of common features was applied to all experimental runs to adjust for differences in retention time. Ion charge states of 2+, 3+, and 4+ with a minimum of three isotope peaks were considered, and raw ion abundances were normalized for automatic correction of technical or experimental variations between runs. Quantified features were identified using the obtained Proteome Discoverer identifications. All non-conflicting peptides were considered for protein quantification. Normalized protein abundances were obtained from Progenesis and analyzed by applying ANOVA followed by Tukey’s honest significant difference (HSD) method. Fold changes between groups were determined based on normalized abundances while ANOVA was calculated using arcsinh-transformed data for consistency with the Progenesis QI software. The FDR was controlled by adjusting ANOVA p-values using the method of Benjamini and Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). For proteins with ANOVA p-values below the significance level of α=0.05, the TukeyHSD method was applied to further characterize the identified differences in abundance levels between groups. Proteins were considered differentially abundant between groups with an absolute fold change ≥ 2 and a p-value ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdac, Lc-ms/ms, Mouse model, Mek inhibitor resistant

### Affiliations
Ruhr-University Bochum
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Kathrin Elisabeth Witzke

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany


