### Accession
PXD042330

### Title
Pathogen protein modularity enables elaborate mimicry of a host phosphatase

### Description
Pathogens produce diverse effector proteins to manipulate host cellular processes. However, how functional diversity is generated in an effector repertoire is poorly understood. Many effectors in the devastating plant pathogen Phytophthora contain tandem repeats of the “(L)WY” motif, which are structurally conserved but variable in sequences. Here, we discovered a functional module formed by a specific (L)WY-LWY combination in multiple Phytophthora effectors, which efficiently recruit the Serine/Threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) core enzyme in plant hosts. Crystal structure of an effector-PP2A complex shows that the (L)WY-LWY module enables hijacking of the host PP2A core enzyme to form functional holoenzymes. While sharing the PP2A-interacting module at the amino terminus, these effectors possess divergent C-terminal LWY units and regulate distinct sets of phosphoproteins in the host. Our results highlight the appropriation of an essential host phosphatase through molecular mimicry by pathogens and diversification promoted by protein modularity in an effector repertoire.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptide samples were analysed with using an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with  High-Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS) Pro Duo Interface and coupled to a U3000 nano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dissolved peptides were injected onto a reverse phase trap column PepMap™ Neo Trap Cartridge (Thermo Scientific). Trap column flowrate was 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. Peptides were eluted from trap column onto the analytical column nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, beads diameter 1.8 μm, inner diameter 75 μm x 250 mm length (Waters). The column was equilibrated with 3% B (B: 80% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid (FA), A: 0.1% FA) before subsequent elution with sigmodal gradient to 32% B over 100 min followed by 48 min gradient to 50% B and 10 min 99% B, for a total of 162 min. The flow rate was set to 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with nano-electrospray ion source with FAIMS enabled and scanning at three different CV values (-35, -50 and -65 v ) per scan cycle (1 sec  per CV for total of 3 sec). Molecular ions were generated by applying voltage +2.8kV to a conductive union coupling the column outlet with fused silica PicoTip emitter, ID 10 μm (New Objective, Inc.) and the ion transfer capillary temperature was set to 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode using a full scan, m/z range 300–1,800, nominal resolution of 120,000, with AGC target set to standard  with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and advanced peak detection enabled. Precursors were isolated in a range between 1 e4 and 1 e20 and MS/MS scans of the 40 most abundant ions were acquired in the Ion Trap in Turbo scan rate. MS/MS spectra were acquired by HCD fragmentation using normalized collision energy of 30%, isolation width of 1.6 m/z, resolution of 120,000, and a AGC target value set to standard and maximum injection time set to auto. Precursor ions with charge states 2-5 were selected for fragmentation and put on a dynamic exclusion list for 15 seconds.  The peptide match feature was set to the preferred mode and the feature to exclude isotopes was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against an in-house constructs and contaminants database and the Araport11 protein database.  The processing workflow was made up of the Sequest HT search engine, Percolator (for target/decoy selection) and IMP-ptmRS (to calculate modification site probabilities). Tryptic peptides with up to 2 possible mis-cleavage and charge states +2, +3 were allowed in the search. The following peptide modifications were included in the search: carbamidomethylated Cysteine (fixed), oxidized Methionine (variable) and phosphorylated Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine (variable). Data were searched with a monoisotopic precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Peptides were quantified using the ‘basic modification analysis’ consensus workflow provided by Proteome Discoverer 2.5 and expressed as abundance ratios. Peptides in the Peptide groups tab in the results files were filtered for ‘phospho’ and reliable and detectable ‘quan’ values. Threshold for differential phosphopeptides was set at minimum 2-fold change in abundance ratio and an adjusted abundance ratio p-value of less than 0.05. Data for Peptide groups were exported to Excel and processed in R.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogens produce diverse effector proteins to manipulate host cellular processes. However, how functional diversity is generated in an effector repertoire is poorly understood. Many effectors in the devastating plant pathogen Phytophthora contain tandem repeats of the "(L)WY" motif, which are structurally conserved but variable in sequences. Here, we discovered a functional module formed by a specific (L)WY-LWY combination in multiple Phytophthora effectors, which efficiently recruits the serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) core enzyme in plant hosts. Crystal structure of an effector-PP2A complex shows that the (L)WY-LWY module enables hijacking of the host PP2A core enzyme to form functional holoenzymes. While sharing the PP2A-interacting module at the amino terminus, these effectors possess divergent C-terminal LWY units and regulate distinct sets of phosphoproteins in the host. Our results highlight the appropriation of an essential host phosphatase through molecular mimicry by pathogens and diversification promoted by protein modularity in an effector repertoire.

### Keywords
Host-pathogen arms race, Microbial pathogenesis, Arabidopsis, Phosphoproteome, Virulence mechanism, Phosphatase holoenzyme

### Affiliations
the Sainsbury laboratory
Sainsbury Laboratory Norwich

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr FRank Menke
Sainsbury Laboratory Norwich


