### Accession
PXD032229

### Title
Protein profiling of mouse fully-grown oocyte

### Description
To verify the Ribo-seq data of mouse oocyte, we performed MS/MS on mouse fully-grown oocytes. And the results show that our Ribo-seq data well reflect the proteomic dynamics in the fully grown oocytes.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome analysis, 100 full-grown oocytes were harvested for each sample. The oocytes were deprived of the zona pellucida in warm acidic Tyrode solution and washed with 1X PBS three times. Oocytes were then resuspended in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), and were boiled for 5 min and sonicated to denature proteins, shear DNA and enhance cell disruption. Proteins were digested by trypsin with a ratio of 1:50 (micrograms of enzyme to micrograms of proteins), and desalted by SDB-RPS StageTips. The eluted peptides were dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X, and the MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot Mouse database using MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse oocyte proteomic

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Kai Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Xie
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.


