### Accession
PXD015939

### Title
Data in support of Absence of miRNA-146a differentially alters microglia function and proteome

### Description
MiR-146a is an important regulator of innate inflammatory responses and is also implicated in cell death and survival. Here, we identified microglia as the main cellular source of miR-146a among mouse CNS resident cells. We further characterized the phenotype of miR-146a KO microglia cells during in vivo demyelination induced by cuprizone (CPZ) and found reduced number of CD11c+ microglia in the KO compared to WT mice. Microglia were also isolated from the brain, and the proteome was analyzed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
miR-146a KO mouse strain applied in this study was generated on a C57Bl/6 background. In order to induce demyelination in mice cuprizonewas used.Brain dissociated to obtain single cell suspensions was performed by using MACS dissociation kits. In total, between 180k-1300k cells were used for filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) for mass spectrometry, essentially as previously described (Meyer et al., 2015), and cells for each sample was obtained from 3-5 brains. In brief, cells were lysed in 0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.6), denaturated by heating to 95 °C for 10 minutes, and ultrasonicated for 10 minutes. The protein concentration was determined by protein A280 (Thermo Nanodrop). A total of 100 μg from each sample was then reduced and alkylated using 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, and 25 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. The samples were then incubated at 37 °C with 1:100 (w/w) trypsin (mass spectrometry grade) per sample overnight. The peptides were extracted by solvent phase transfer, and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS.  Mass Spectrometry analysis The individual samples (5μg) were separated and sequenced using a ThermoSci QExactive High-Field orbitrap mass spectrometer in biological (n=2-4 in each treatment, type) and technical duplicates (n=2). In brief, a UPLC-nanoESI MS/MS setup with a Dionex RSLC nanopump (Dionex/Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) connected to QExactive High-Field mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptide material was loaded onto a C18 reversed phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 2 cm) and separated using a C18 reversed phase column (Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 Å, 75 μm x 75 cm) kept at 60 °C. A full MS scan in the mass range of m/z 375 to 1500 was acquired at a resolution of 120,000. In each cycle, the mass spectrometer would trigger up to 10 MS/MS acquisitions of eluting ions based on highest signal intensity for fragmentation. The MS/MS scans were acquired with a dynamic mass range at a resolution of 15,000. The precursor ions were isolated using a quadrupole isolation window of m/z 2.0 and fragmented using higher-energy collision (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 27 and fixed first m/z of 110. Fragmented ions were dynamically added to an exclusion list for 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw file analysis of mass spectrometry data All MS scans were searched against the mouse isoform proteome from UniProt (date stamp 17MAR2017; 70.939 isoforms), which included indexed retention time standard (iRT standard) using MaxQuant/Andromeda v1.5.8.3.  The results were processed using Perseus v 1.5.8.3. Initially, all reverse database hits and proteins tagged as contaminants were removed before further analysis, and the LFQ intensity data was log2-transformed. The protein abundances were investigated duplicate-wise and raw data investigated by Persons correlation (>0.85). Principle components analysis was performed by imputing missing values from a normal distribution (width 0.3 and down shift 1.8). All protein groups with less than 50% values in each grouping (treatment, type) and unique peptides <1 were removed. Proteins with statistically significant abundance change between exposure (CPZ vs. Ctrl) or strain groups (WT vs. KO) were identified for each group, and treatment using a permutation based FDR corrected p-value based two-sample students t-tests between treatment groups (FDR = 0.05 or 0.15, S0=0.1 and 250 randomizations).

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> MiR-146a is an important regulator of innate inflammatory responses and is also implicated in cell death and survival. <b>Methods:</b> By sorting CNS resident cells, microglia were the main cellular source of miR-146a. Therefore, we investigated microglia function and phenotype in miR-146a knock-out (KO) mice, analyzed the proteome of KO and wild-type (WT) microglia by LC-MS/MS, and examined miR-146a expression in different brain lesions of patients with multiple sclerosis (MS). <b>Results:</b> When stimulated with LPS or myelin <i>in vitro</i>, microglia from KO mice expressed higher levels of IL-1&#x3b2;, TNF, IL-6, IL-10, CCL3, and CCL2 compared to WT. Stimulation increased migration and phagocytosis of WT but not KO microglia. CD11c<sup>+</sup> microglia were induced by cuprizone (CPZ) in the WT mice but less in the KO. The proteome of <i>ex vivo</i> microglia was not different in miR-146a KO compared to WT mice, but CPZ treatment induced differential and reduced protein responses in the KO: GOT1, COX5b, CRYL1, and cystatin-C were specifically changed in KO microglia. We explored discriminative features of microglia proteomes: sparse Partial Least Squares-Discriminant Analysis showed the best discrimination when control and CPZ-treated conditions were compared. Cluster of ten proteins separated WT and miR-146a KO microglia after CPZ: among them were sensomes allowing to perceive the environment, Atp1a3 that belongs to the signature of CD11c<sup>+</sup> microglia, and proteins related to inflammatory responses (S100A9, Ppm1g). Finally, we examined the expression of miR-146a and its validated target genes in different brain lesions of MS patients. MiR-146 was upregulated in all lesion types, and the highest expression was in active lesions. Nineteen of 88 validated target genes were significantly changed in active lesions, while none were changed in NAWM. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our data indicated that microglia is the major source of miR-146a in the CNS. The absence of miR-146a differentially affected microglia function and proteome, and miR-146a may play an important role in gene regulation of active MS lesions.

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Proteomics, Microglia

### Affiliations
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University


