### Accession
PXD018419

### Title
Influenza A virus-triggered succinylation in lung epithelial cells

### Description
Influenza A virus (IAV) is the etiological agent of a highly contagious acute respiratory disease, which causes a considerable socioeconomic burden despite annual vaccination campaigns. Therefore, it is essential to better understand IAV-host cells interaction to help design innovative antiviral therapies. In that regard, recent studies revealed the interplay between metabolic and immune signaling pathways. However, it remains unknown whether IAV alters lung tissues metabolism and what is its potential functional consequence. Using in vitro and in vivo models as well as human respiratory fluids and in-depth metabolomics analysis, we first found that IAV infection alters the glycolysis and mitochondrial oxidative respiration in lung tissues, leading to the accumulation of several immunometabolites in the bronchoalveolar airspaces. We next focused on one mitochondria-derived metabolite, i.e. succinate as its accumulation was found not only in the lungs of IAV-challenged mice but also in the tracheal fluids of IAV-infected patients. Remarkably, we found that succinate exhibits a potent antiviral activity both in vitro and in vivo as it inhibits H1N1 and H3N2 IAV strains and it strongly decreases IAV-triggered inflammatory response. The underlying inhibiting mechanism involves a disruption of IAV replication cycle. Indeed, succinate prevents specifically the nuclear export of the viral nucleoprotein NP, likely due to a specific succinylation at K87 site. Finally, we showed that mice receiving succinate through the intranasal route are more resistant to IAV pneumonia than mock-treated animals. Hence, our study identifies the metabolite succinate as a novel component of the host antiviral arsenal.

### Sample Protocol
Human bronchial epithelial BEAS-B cells were infected with influenza virus (A/Scotland/20/74 (H3N2)) at MOI 1 for 4h, washed and treated or not with 4mg/mL of succinate for 20h. Cells were further washed with 5mL of cold PBS and then lysed with 5mL of urea buffer (8M urea, 200mM ammonium bicarbonate). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was measured with a Nano Drop spectrophotometer and a volume corresponding to 8mg of protein was used for the subsequent steps. Reduction and alkylation of proteins were performed by incubating the sample for 1h at 37°C with 10 mL of DTT 10mM (5mM final) and for 30 min at room temperature with 4mL of iodoacetamide 55mM (10mM final), respectively. After addition of 20mL ammonium bicarbonate 200mM, proteins were digested for 2h at 37°C with Trypsin/LysC diluted 1/1000e. 800µL of TPCK-trypsin at 1mg/mL were added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Next, we added 5mL of 50% formic acid before  peptides purification with Sep-Pak® C18 columns. Eluates were frozen (-80°C) overnight and lyophilized. Immunoaffinity purification of succinylated peptides was performed with PTMScan® Succinyl-Lysine Motif kit (Cell Signaling) according to manufacturer instructions. Immuno-isolate peptide samples were further loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. After elution, peptides were analyzed using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens (UP000005640) and influenza A virus (UP000162741) databases using Sequest-HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.2 or 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of three-missed cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, Methyl-, Acetyl- and Succinyl-Lysine and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (PMID: 17610305) v3.9. FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. To quantify the succinylated peptides containing lysine K87, we extracted from the MS survey of  the nanoLC-MS/MS raw files the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) signal by using the retention time and m/z values of the well characterized tryptic peptide ions using the Xcalibur softwares (manually). XIC areas were integrated in Xcalibur under the QualBrowser interface using the ICIS algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Influenza virus, Succinylation

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


