### Accession
PXD028118

### Title
Protein Signatures to Distinguish Aggressive from Indolent Prostate Cancer

### Description
We performed a mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of normal and malignant prostate tissues from 22 men who underwent surgery for prostate cancer. Prostate cancer samples included Grade Groups (3 to 5), with 8 patients experiencing recurrence and 14 without evidence of recurrence with a mean of 6.8 years of follow-up.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from tissue samples were extracted by adding 800 µL of lysis buffer containing 12.5 mM Tris pH 8.0 (Fisher Scientific), 0.5 mM EDTA (EMD Inc.), 7.5 M urea (Sigma- Aldrich), and 1X protease inhibitor and homogenizing tissues with a PRO-250 (ProScientific) homogenizer. Following lysis, samples were further emulsified using a Branson probe sonicator (Fisher Scientific) with a vibrational amplitude set to 40% and exposing the samples to three 10 s ultrasonication cycles. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected and proteins were quantified by a micro-bicinchoninic acid (micro BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Disulfide bonds were reduced using 50 µg of protein with Tris(2carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 10 mM in HPLC grade water (Fisher Scientific) and incubated at room temperature for 1.5 hours. Free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide (Acros Organics) in 1.5-fold molar excess of TCEP and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. Samples were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a 1:25 enzyme-to-protein ratio and diluting urea concentration to 300 mM using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight, dried using a speed vacuum and desalted with C18 ZipTip columns (EMD Millipore). Peptides were reconstituted in 25 µL of 0.1% formic acid (Fisher Scientific) in HPLC grade water for LC-MS analysis. A Dionex Ultimate Rapid Separation nanoLC 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to load 3 µL of the tryptic peptide mixture onto a C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reversed phase liquid chromatography was used to separate the tryptic peptides on a 25 cm long C18 column (New Objective) packed with Magic C18 AQ resin (Michrom Bioresources). The chromatography gradient consisted of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific)) with initial conditions set at 98% and 2% respectively for the first 10 min. Buffer B was increased to 35% over 100 min, increased to 85% over 7 min, and held constant for 5 min before decreasing buffer B to 2% for 15 min.  The flow rate was set to 0.6 µL/min. Eluted peptides were ionized with a 1.8 kV on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data dependent acquisition was performed with the top 10 most abundant ions per MS1 scan selected for MS/MS using collisional-induced-dissociation (35 eV). MS1 scans were set to m/z = 400-1800, dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s, and MS1 resolution was set to 60,000. All samples were analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data files were searched using Byonic 2.11.0 (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA) against the Swiss-Prot human reference proteome database (2017; 20,484 entries). Search parameters included trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, and fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, variable methionine oxidation, and asparagine deamination, were also specified. Peptide identifications were filtered to remove those with a >1% false discovery rate (FDR) and those identified with less than two spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yy1, Ctsd, Biomarker, Prognosis, Postn, Calr, Recurrent, Prostate cancer, Psa

### Affiliations
Department of Radiology Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Stanford University
Stanford University

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Department of Radiology Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Stanford University


