### Accession
PXD010422

### Title
eXL-MS: An enhanced Cross-Linking Mass Spectrometry Workflow to Study Protein Complexes.

### Description
The analysis of proteins and protein complexes by cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has expanded in the last dec-ade. However, mostly used approaches suffer important limitations in term of efficiency and sensitivity. We describe here a new workflow based on the advanced use of the trifunctional cross-linker NNP9. NNP9 carries an azido group allowing the quantitative and selective introduction of a biotin molecule into cross-linked proteins. The incorporation is performed by click-chemistry using an adapted version of the enhanced filter-aided sample preparation (eFASP) protocol. This protocol, based on the use of a molecular filter, allows a very high recovery of peptides after enzymatic digestion and complete re-moval of contaminants. This in turn offers the possibility to analyze very large membrane proteins solubilized in detergent. After trypsin digestion, biotinylated peptides can be easily enriched on monoavidin beads and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The whole workflow was developed on creatine kinase in presence of detergent. It led to a drastic improvement in the number of identified cross-linked peptides (407 vs 81), compared to the conventional approach using a gel-based separation. One great advantage of our eXL-MS workflow is its high efficiency, allowing the analysis of very low amount of material (15 mi-crograms). We also demonstrate that Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) outperforms Electron-Transfer/Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation (EThcD) in term of number of cross-linked peptides identified, but EThcD leads to better se-quence coverage than HCD and thus easier localization of cross-linking sites.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking reaction. Cross-linking of rabbit creatine kinase (10 μM) was carried out in PBS, pH 7.4, with freshly prepared NNP9 (10 mM in DMSO) using 20:1 cross-linker/protein molar ratio. Cross-linking with NPP9 was performed at 4°C for 30 min and stopped by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (AB, final concentration 50 mM) for 15 min at 4°C.  SDS-PAGE. After cross-linking, protein were separated by SDS-PAGE and digested as described in Nury et al.36 Filter-Aided Sample Preparation. After cross-linking, dodecyl maltoside (DDM) was added at 0.05 % (w:w) final concentration and samples were transferred into a passiv-ated molecular filter device (Amicon ultra 0.5 mL with 30 kDa molecular cut-off ) as described in 40 and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min. The concentrate was then washed 4 times by concentration-dilution cycle with AB 50 mM to remove the excess of cross-linker. Click-Chemistry and Enzymatic Digestion. The biotin tag was introduced into cross-linked proteins via click-chemistry. Biotin-PEG4-Alkyne (BP4A, 1 mM final con-centration) was added in the molecular filter device con-taining the cross-linked proteins with 1 mM CuSO4, 10 mM Tris(3-hydroxypropyltriazolylmethyl) amine (THPTA) in DMSO and 10 mM sodium ascorbate (freshly prepared). The click-chemistry reaction was performed for several times at various temperature. The cross-linked and clicked proteins were then washed 6 times by concentra-tion/dilution cycle with 50 mM AB to remove the reac-tants. The labelled proteins were then digested overnight at 37°C by addition of trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spec-trometry Grade, Promega) at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 (w:w) under 900 rpm shaking. The peptides were re-covered through the molecular filter device by centrifuga-tion (10 min at 10,000g). To improve the peptide recovery 50 µL of 50 mM AB were further added onto the filter and a second centrifugation step was performed.  Enrichment of biotinylated peptides. The biotinylated tryptic peptides were enriched by affinity purification on monomeric avidin agarose beads (Pierce) or on streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce) according to the manufacturer con-ditions with minor modifications. Briefly, after the cross-linking and the click-chemistry reactions, 10 µg of tryptic peptides were added onto 1 µL of monomeric avidin or 1 µL of streptavidin agarose beads previously treated with biotin molecules as required by the manufacturer. After 30 min of gentle mixing at room temperature, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation 1 min at 5,000 g and the super-natant was removed. The monomeric avidin beads were resuspended with 10 µL of formic acid (FA) 0.1 % (v:v) and placed at 95 °C for 10 min to recover the biotinylated peptides. The streptavidin beads were washes 3 times with 50 mM AB, resuspended in 50 % formamide (v:v) and placed at 95 °C for 15 min. Each supernatant was then dried out on a Speedvac and the peptides were resuspend-ed in 0.1 % FA (v:v) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis. Tryptic digests (0.25 µg) were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Dionex, Thermo-Scientific) coupled to the nanoelectrospray ion source of an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap C-18 precolumn (C-18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 5 mm, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min of solvent A (0.1 % FA (v:v) in water) for 5 minutes, and the separation was performed using an in-house packed 25 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C-18 resin (1.7 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18, Phenomex). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a gradient of 2 % to 30 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile (v:v), 0.1 % FA (v:v) in water) for 60 min, followed by a 10 min at 60% solvent B. The column and precolumn were then washed 10 min at 100% solvent B and a reconditioned at 2 % B for 10 min. NanoLC-MS/MS experiments were conducted in Data-Dependent Acquisition mode with a top speed mode. After a MS survey scan at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400 in the Orbitrap) the most intense ions, above an intensity threshold of 5,000 counts, were selected for frag-mentation during 3 seconds using a resolution of 30,000. Different NCE values were tested for HCD (15, 30, 25, 30 and 35) and different reaction time for ETD (15, 25, 50 75 ms). For EThcD experiments, the following combination were tested: 15 ms with Supplemental Activation (SA) of 20 NCE, 25 ms with SA of 15, 20 or 25 NCE, 50 ms with SA of 15, 20 or 25 NCE and 75 ms with SA of 15 NCE. The FT automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1*106 for MS and 5*104 for MS/MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS data were processed automatically using Mass Spec Studio v2.0 with methionine oxidation as a variable modification and lysine, serine, threonine, and tyrosine as residues targeted with NNP9. Mass modifica-tions were set to 771.337 Da for intra- or intermolecular cross-linked peptides, 745.358 and 788.364 for dead-end modifications when NNP9 reacted respectively with water or ammonia. Indeed the dead-end reaction with water leads to the formation of a carboxylic acid that undergoes a rapid decarboxylation to leave a –NH2 group instead of a NH(CO)-NH2 in case of ammonia. The theoretical m/z of 5 reporter ions were added, i.e. 558.307, 501.249, 420.216, 270.127, 227.085. Cross-linked peptides were searched between 300 and 1,500 m/z with “Mass Pairing Generator” algorithm using the following parameters: charge states between 3 and 8, peptides size between 3 and 50 amino acids. The mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for both MS and MS/MS, the elution width was set to 0.5 min and no thresholding of the data were selected. MS/MS spectra of all cross-linked candidates were further assessed using a FDR of 0.1 % (using a decoy database) and further manu-ally validated. The presence of at least 2 reporter ions masses was mandatory to confirm their identification.

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of proteins and protein complexes by cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has expanded in the past decade. However, mostly used approaches suffer important limitations in term of efficiency and sensitivity. We describe here a new workflow based on the advanced use of the trifunctional cross-linker NNP9. NNP9 carries an azido group allowing the quantitative and selective introduction of a biotin molecule into cross-linked proteins. The incorporation is performed by click-chemistry using an adapted version of the enhanced filter-aided sample preparation (eFASP) protocol. This protocol, based on the use of a molecular filter, allows a very high recovery of peptides after enzymatic digestion and complete removal of contaminants. This in turn offers the possibility for one to analyze very large membrane proteins solubilized in detergent. After trypsin digestion, biotinylated peptides can be easily enriched on monoavidin beads and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The whole workflow was developed on creatine kinase in the presence of detergent. It led to a drastic improvement in the number of identified cross-linked peptides (407 vs 81), compared to the conventional approach using a gel-based separation. One great advantage of our enhanced cross-linking mass spectrometry (eXL-MS) workflow is its high efficiency, allowing the analysis of a very low amount of material (15 &#x3bc;g). We also demonstrate that higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) outperforms electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) in terms of number of cross-linked peptides identified, but EThcD leads to better sequence coverage than HCD and thus easier localization of cross-linking sites.

### Keywords
Creatine kinase, Click chemistry, Cross-link, Mass spectrometry, Monoavidin biotin affinty enrichment

### Affiliations
CNRS, Pasteur
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, CNRS USR 2000, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

### Submitter
Martial Rey

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, CNRS USR 2000, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.


