### Accession
PXD019606

### Title
E.coli Proteome Carbamate Search

### Description
Carbon dioxide regulates cellular processes as diverse as metabolism, cellular homeostasis, chemosensing and pathogenesis. CO2 is generally unreactive but can interact with neutral amines on protein under normal introcellular conditions to form a carbamate post-translational modification. This data set contains the results of a screening of E.coli to search for CO2-binding proteins and the identification of several such PTM sites.

### Sample Protocol
These samples came from an E.coli culture which was modified with the carbamate trapping reagent TEO and digested with the protease trypsin. This digestion reaction requires the use of urea to denature the modified sample prior to overnight protease digestion. The digested peptides were run on an LTQ Orbitrap spectrometer coupled to an ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC.

### Data Protocol
The results from the ESI-MSMS raw data files were converted to .mgf files using Proteowizard 3.0 and analysed by PEAKS Studio 10.5 including the variable modifications ethylation (D or E), carboxyethylation (K or Protein N-term), oxidation (M), acetylation (N-terminal) and carbimidomethyl (C). This data was refined using an FDR of 1% and 2 unique peptides per protein. Further refinement of the carbamate hits was done using an AScore of 50 and manual removal of all false positives.

### Publication Abstract
Carbon dioxide can influence cell phenotypes through the modulation of signalling pathways. CO<sub>2</sub> regulates cellular processes as diverse as metabolism, cellular homeostasis, chemosensing and pathogenesis. This diversity of regulated processes suggests a broadly conserved mechanism for CO<sub>2</sub> interactions with diverse cellular targets. CO<sub>2</sub> is generally unreactive but can interact with neutral amines on protein under normal intracellular conditions to form a carbamate post-translational modification (PTM). We have previously demonstrated the presence of this PTM in a subset of protein produced by the model plant species <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. Here, we describe a detailed methodology for identifying new carbamate PTMs in an extracted soluble proteome under biologically relevant conditions. We apply this methodology to the soluble proteome of the model prokaryote <i>Escherichia coli</i> and identify new carbamate PTMs<i>.</i> The application of this methodology, therefore, supports the hypothesis that the carbamate PTM is both more widespread in biology than previously suspected and may represent a broadly relevant mechanism for CO<sub>2</sub>-protein interactions.

### Keywords
E.coli, Carbon dioxide, Carbamate

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE
Durham University

### Submitter
Victoria Linthwaite

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cann
Department of Biosciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE


