### Accession
PXD020041

### Title
Immunological Proteome Resource (ImmPRes): Hypoxia dataset

### Description
Third dataset release from the Immunological Proteome Resource (ImmPRes). This dataset contains the study focussing on the effect of Hypoxia in Cytotoxic CD8+ Lymphocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation and tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling: Cell pellets were lysed in 400 μl lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride). Lysates were boiled and sonicated with a BioRuptor (30 cycles: 30 s on and 30 s off) before alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 22 °C in the dark. The lysates were subjected to the SP3 procedure for protein clean-up before elution into digest buffer (0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 1 mM CaCl2) and digested with LysC and Trypsin, each at a 1:50 (enzyme:protein) ratio. TMT labeling and peptide clean-up were performed according to the SP3 protocol. After labeling, samples were eluted into 2% DMSO in water, combined and dried in vacuo.  Peptide fractionation: The TMT samples were fractionated using off-line high-pH reverse-phase chromatography: samples were loaded onto a 4.6 mm × 250 mm XbridgeTM BEH130 C18 column with 3.5 μm particles (Waters). Using a Dionex BioRS system, the samples were separated using a 25-min multistep gradient of solvents A (10 mM formate at pH 9 in 2% acetonitrile) and B (10 mM ammonium formate at pH 9 in 80% acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 1 ml min−1. Peptides were separated into 48 fractions, which were consolidated into 24 fractions. The fractions were subsequently dried, and the peptides were dissolved in 5% formic acid and analyzed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry.  Liquid chromatography electrospray–tandem mass spectrometry analysis: For each fraction, 1 μg was analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Dionex ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system (RSLCnano). Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed using a Dionex RSLCnano high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 μm × 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 μm × 50 cm RP C18 EASY-Spray temperature-controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 4-h multistep gradient from 5% B to 35% B with a constant flow of 200 nl min−1. The mobile phases were: 2% acetonitrile incorporating 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile incorporating 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The spray was initiated by applying 2.5 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter, and the data were acquired under the control of Xcalibur software in a data-dependent mode using the top speed and 4 s duration per cycle. The survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap covering the m/z range from 400–1,400 Thomson units (Th), with a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0 × 105 ions. The most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation in the ion trap with 30% collision-induced dissociation energy and an isolation window of 1.6 Th. The AGC target was set to 1.0 × 104, with a maximum injection time of 70 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 80 s. During the MS3 analysis for more accurate TMT quantifications, ten fragment ions were co-isolated using synchronous precursor selection, a window of 2 Th and further fragmented using a higher-energy collisional dissociation energy of 55%. The fragments were then analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The AGC target was set to 1.0 × 105 and the maximum injection time was set to 300 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MaxQuant v. 1.6.7.0 with a 1% FDR at the protein and PSM level. The fasta used was a combination of mouse SwissProt along with mouse TrEMBL entries with annotated homologues in human SwissProt and with protein level evidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immpres; ctl; hypoxia; t cells

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Cantrell
Cell Signalling & Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


### SDRF
- organism: Mus musculus
- organism part: T cells
- disease: not applicable
- label: TMT126, TMT127N, TMT127C, TMT128N, TMT128C, TMT129N, TMT129C, TMT130N, TMT130C, TMT131
- instrument: NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
- modification parameters: NT=TMT10plex;PP=Any N-term;AC=UNIMOD:737;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;AC=UNIMOD:4;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.2: NT=Oxidation;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=variable
- modification parameters.3: not available
- modification parameters.4: not available

