### Accession
PXD019693

### Title
The implications of taphonomic alteration of human bone protein profiles for the development of a bone proteomics PMI/AAD estimation method.

### Description
The estimation of the post-mortem interval (PMI) and the age-at-death (AAD) are crucial steps in the medico-legal investigation of unidentified human remains. Current methods to estimate PMI and AAD suffer from a lack of accuracy and objectivity, particularly when the remains are in an advanced state of decomposition. Recently, proteomics studies using animal models have identified potential biomarkers for PMI and AAD estimation. This study investigated the human bone proteome in four human body donors studied throughout decomposition outdoors. We compared different bone tissues (tibia and iliac crest) from body donors of known AAD, and compared bone samples taken shortly after death to bone samples upon complete skeletonization of the body. The effects of ageing phenomena (in vivo and post-mortem) and the surrounding environment on the variability and abundancy of the bone proteome were assessed.

### Sample Protocol
The body donations of four females aged between 61 and 91 years old were placed unclothed to decompose at the Forensic Anthropology Research Facility (FARF) at Texas State University between April 2015 and March 2018. Two body donations (D2 and D3) were shallow buried, two body donations (D1 and D4) were placed in open pits of similar dimensions.  Bone samples of the mid-shaft tibia and iliac crest were collected during intake of the fresh body prior to placement outside and upon retrieval of the skeletonised remains. Circa 1 x 1 cm cube of bone per sample was collected using a 12V Dremel cordless lithium ion drill with fresh diamond wheel drill bit. The total 16 bone samples were stored in sterile plastic bags, and immediately transferred to a lockable freezer at -80ºC. The 16 samples were defrosted prior to their analysis, then cleaned in deionized water for three hours at room temperature, exchanging the water three times, once every hour. They were then dried in a fume cupboard at room temperature until completely dry. Bone samples were then secured in a table clamp for the sampling. Once the bone was secured in the clamp, Dentist’s Protaper Universal Hand Files (Henry Schein Minerva Dental, U.K.) were used to hand-drill ~25mg of fine bone powder for three times, in order to obtain three replicates for each of the bones analysed. Overall, 48 samples were obtained from the 16 bone pieces, and were subjected to bone protein extraction following the protocol of Procopio and Buckley. Briefly, each sample was decalcified with 1 mL of 10 v/v% formic acid (Fisher Scientific, U.K.) for 6 hours at 4 °C. After removing all the acid soluble fraction, the acid insoluble fraction was incubated for 18 hours at 4°C with 500 µL of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride/100mM TRIS buffer (pH 7.4, Sigma-Aldrich, U.K.). The buffer was exchanged into 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium acetate (Scientific Laboratory Supplies, U.K.) with 10K molecular-weight cut off filters (Vivaspin 500 polyethersulfone, 10kDa, Sartorius, Germany), and samples were then reduced with 4.2 µL of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Fluorochem, U.K.) for 40 min at room temperature and alkylated with 16.8 µL of 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, U.K.) for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then quenched with another 4.2 µL of 5 mM DTT, then digested with 0.4 µg of trypsin (Promega, U.K.) for 5 hours at 37°C and finally frozen. By adding 15 µL of 1 v/v% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Fluorochem, U.K.), the digestion was stopped and the samples were then desalted, concentrated and purified using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies, U.S.A.) with 0.1 v/v% TFA as washing solution and 50 v/v% acetonitrile (ACN) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, U.K.)/0.1 v/v% TFA as a conditioning solution. Pipette tips were prepared with two volumes of 100 µL of 0.1 v/v% TFA and washed twice with 100 µL of 50 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA. The sample was then aspirated into the tip at least ten times to efficiently bind peptides to the absorbent membrane. Finally, two washing steps with 100µL of 0.1 v/v% TFA were performed, prior to peptides elution into 100 µL of 50 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA. Purified peptides were left in the fume cupboard at room temperature with lids open to dry prior to their submission for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples resuspended in 5 v/v% ACN/0.1 v/v% TFA were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate™ 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC) nano LC system (Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.). Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray™ reverse phase LC Column (500 mm x 75 µm diameter (i.d.), 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a gradient from 96 v/v% A (0.1 v/v% FA in 5 v/v% ACN) and 4 v/v% B (0.1 v/v% FA in 95 v/v% ACN) to 8 v/v%, 30 v/v% and 50% B at 14, 50, and 60 min, respectively, at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column (5 mm x 0.3 mm i.d., 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used as trap column at a flow rate of 25 µL min-1 kept at 45 °C. The LC separation was followed by a cleaning cycle with an additional 15 min of column equilibration time. Then, peptide ions were analysed in full scan MS scanning mode at 35,000 MS resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 1e6, injection time of 200 ms and scan range of 375-1,400 m/z. The top ten most abundant ions were selected for data-dependent MS/MS analysis with a normalized collision energy (NCE) level of 30 performed at 17,500 MS resolution with an AGC of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The isolation window was set to 2.0 m/z, with an underfilled ratio of 0.4%, dynamic exclusion was employed; thus, one repeat scan (i.e., two MS/MS scans in total) was acquired in a 45 s repeat duration with the precursor being excluded for the subsequent 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mass spectra were then searched against the SwissProt_2019_11 database (selected for Homo sapiens, unknown version, 20368 entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; www.matrixscience.com) for matches to primary protein sequences. This search included the fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine as it results from addition of DTT to proteins. Deamidation (asparagine and glutamine) and oxidation (lysine, methionine and proline) were considered as variable modifications. The enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragmented ions were set at 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. It was assumed that all spectra hold either 2+ or 3+ charged precursors. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm and by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. This resulted in having a calculated decoy FRD of 0.06% for peptides and 1.9% for proteins. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Progenesis Qi for Proteomics (version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, U.K.) was used to perform relative quantitation calculations using the recorded ion intensities (area under the curve, AUC) and averaging the N most abundant peptides for each protein (Hi-N method, where N=3) and protein and post-translational modifications identifications. Peptide ions with a score of <28, which indicates identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05), were excluded from the analysis based on the Mascot evaluation of the peptide score distribution for the searched .mgf file originated from Progenesis (combining all the samples in a single experiment). Proteins with a peptide count of <2 were also excluded from further analysis to improve reliability of the findings. Samples were grouped together using the between-subject design scheme in Progenesis, in order to compare selected group of samples (e.g. skeletonised versus fresh bones) and to calculate ANOVA p-values and maximum fold changes accordingly. Proteins were consequently flagged up in order to highlight the ones that had an ANOVA p-value ≤ 0.05 and a maximum fold change ≥ 2, and only the flagged ones were used to further build Principal Component Analysis (PCA) plots and boxplots with significant proteins. Plots were done using R version … with packages dplyr, ggplot2, ggpubr and patchwork packages. When plotting boxplots, for data following a normal distribution student’s t test and one-way ANOVA and post-hoc pairwise comparisons were used to test mean differences, otherwise Wilcoxon rank sum test and Kruskal Wallis test with post-hoc pairwise comparisons were used. To calculate deamidation ratios we followed the method described in Mizukami et al. Briefly, we filtered peptides used for quantification by Progenesis, we selected the ones that showed both a nondeamidated and a deamidated form we calculated the ratio between the total relative abundance of deamidated states and the total relative abundance of the peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Bone proteomic studies using animal proxies and skeletonized human remains have delivered encouraging results in the search for potential biomarkers for precise and accurate post-mortem interval (PMI) and the age-at-death (AAD) estimation in medico-legal investigations. The development of forensic proteomics for PMI and AAD estimation is in critical need of research on human remains throughout decomposition, as currently the effects of both inter-individual biological differences and taphonomic alteration on the survival of human bone protein profiles are unclear. This study investigated the human bone proteome in four human body donors studied throughout decomposition outdoors. The effects of ageing phenomena (<i>in vivo</i> and post-mortem) and intrinsic and extrinsic variables on the variety and abundancy of the bone proteome were assessed. Results indicate that taphonomic and biological variables play a significant role in the survival of proteins in bone. Our findings suggest that inter-individual and inter-skeletal differences in bone mineral density (BMD) are important variables affecting the survival of proteins. Specific proteins survive better within the mineral matrix due to their mineral-binding properties. The mineral matrix likely also protects these proteins by restricting the movement of decomposer microbes. New potential biomarkers for PMI estimation and AAD estimation were identified. Future development of forensic bone proteomics should include standard measurement of BMD and target a combination of different biomarkers.

### Keywords
Forensic proteomics, Bone proteomics, Post-mortem interval, Chronological ageing, Taphonomy

### Affiliations
The Forensic Science Unit, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Ellison Building, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
University of Central Lancashire 

### Submitter
Noemi Procopio

### Lab Head
Dr Noemi Procopio
The Forensic Science Unit, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Ellison Building, Northumbria University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK


