### Accession
PXD033446

### Title
Functional crosstalk between the cohesin loader and chromatin remodelers

### Description
The cohesin complex has crucial roles in many structural and functional aspects of chromosomes including sister chromatid cohesion, genome organization, gene transcription and DNA repair. Cohesin recruitment onto chromosomes requires nucleosome free DNA and a specialized cohesin loader complex comprised of the Scc2 and Scc4 subunits. The cohesin loader, in addition to stimulating cohesin ATP hydrolysis and facilitating topological loading onto DNA, leads cohesin to chromatin receptors such as the RSC chromatin remodeling complex. Here, we explore the cohesin loader-RSC interaction and show that its Scc4 subunit contacts a conserved RSC ATPase motor module. The cohesin loader enhances RSC chromatin remodeling activity in vitro, as well as promoter nucleosome eviction in vivo. These findings provide insight into how the cohesin loader recognizes, as well as influences, the chromatin landscape, with implications for our understanding of human developmental disorders including Cornelia de Lange and Coffin-Siris syndromes.

### Sample Protocol
0.5 𝜇M cohesin loader and 0.5 𝜇M RSC were mixed for 15 minutes at 25°C. After placing them on ice for 15 minutes, 1 mM DSSO was added, and samples were incubated for 15 minutes at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 0.10% w/v hydroxylamine (HA), dried and resuspended in 8M urea. Cysteine residues were reduced with 2.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and free sulfhydryl groups were then alkylated by adding 5 mM iodoacetamide and incubated at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. Next, protein samples were diluted with triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer pH 8.5 to reach a 1 M urea concentration and digested with trypsin at 1:50 w/w trypsin:protein overnight at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were then acidified and desalted using a C18 StageTip and analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system for liquid chromatographic separation. The identified crosslinked peptides were visualized using xiVIEW.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Uhlmann
The Francis Crick Institute


