### Accession
PXD019293

### Title
Caspofungin induced cell wall changes of Candida species influences macrophage interactions

### Description
The structure and composition of the cell walls of different Candida species alone and in response to the antifungal drug, caspofungin, were investigated. The observed differences were used to evaluate how changes at the fungal cell surface affect interactions with macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
Each Candida species was grown in RPMI-1640 for 3 h at 37°C with shaking at 200 rpm and subsequently treated with a sub-MIC concentration of caspofungin for an additional 2 h. The cells were harvested by centrifugation (5,000 x g, 5 min), washed with 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, at 4°C, suspended in 0.2 ml Tris-HCl buffer and mixed with acid-washed glass beads (Sigma). Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride were added, and cells were disrupted by shaking using a FastPrep cell breakage machine (MP Biosciences). The contents of the tubes were washed out into cold 50 ml tubes with 1 M NaCl and the supernatant was removed (repeated twice). Cell wall suspensions were centrifuged at 3000 x g for 5 min at 4°C, and pellets were washed 5 times with 1 M NaCl and once with double-distilled water (ddH2O). The crude cell walls were then extracted using SDS-mercaptoethanol buffer (50 mM Tris, 2% SDS, 0.3 M β-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM EDTA [pH 8.0]) at 100°C for 10 min to remove noncovalently bound proteins. Finally, cell walls were washed thoroughly by suspension in ddH2O and centrifugation (5 times) followed by freeze-drying. For proteomic analysis 2 mg of freeze dried cell wall was mixed with 0.5 M ammonium bicarbonate in water containing 3 mM dithiothreitol and heated at 60°C for 20 min. Iodoacetamide (30 µl of 55 mM stock solution) was then added, and the suspension was incubated in the dark, at 25°C for 10 min. Following addition of 30 µl of 20 mg/ml trypsin, the suspension was incubated at 37°C for 14 h and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min. The supernatant was freeze-dried and extracted with 10% formic acid, and peptides were purified using ZipTip μ-C18 pipette tips (Millipore) and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (10 µl).  Samples (3 µl) were injected into an LC-MS system which comprised an UltiMate 3000 LC instrument (Dionex) fitted with a PepSwift monolithic poly(styrene-codivinylbenzene) (PS-DVB) column (200 µm i.d. by 5 cm; Dionex) coupled to an HCTultra ion trap mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik) fitted with a low-flow nebulizer in the electrospray ionization (ESI) source and controlled by HyStar software (version 4.0). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 2 µl/min using a linear gradient of 0 to 40% acetonitrile-water-formic acid (80:20:0.04) (solvent B) in water-acetonitrile-formic acid (97:3:0.05) (solvent A) over 40 min, followed by a 1 min column wash in 90% solvent B and a 12-min equilibration step in solvent A. MS/MS data (scan range, m/z 100 to 2,200; averages 2) were acquired in positive data-dependent AutoMS(n) mode using the esquireControl software program (version 6.2). Up to three precursor ions were selected from the MS scan (range,m/z 300 to 1,500; averages 3) in each AutoMS(n) cycle. Precursors were actively excluded after being selected twice within a 1-min window, and singly charged ions were also excluded.

### Data Protocol
Peptide peaks were detected (maximum of 9,999 compounds above an intensity threshold of 50,000) and deconvoluted automatically using DataAnalysis software (version 3.4). Mass lists in the form of Mascot Generic Format (mgf) files were created automatically and used as inputs to Mascot MS/MS ion searches via a local Mascot server (version 2.2; Matrix Science) with databases built from the following sequence files: C_dubliniensis_CD36_orf_trans_all.fasta (03/07/2010, 5983 sequences; candidagenome.org); CglabrataRC2.fasta (29/07/2005, 5272 sequences; Prof. Ken Haynes, personal communication); C_guilliermondii_ATCC_6260_2013_12_11_orf_trans_all.fasta (09/06/2010, 5920 sequences; candidagenome.org); C_lusitaniae_ATCC_42720_2013_12_11_orf_trans_all.fasta (09/06/2010, 5941 sequences; candidagenome.org); C_parapsilosis.reads.fastq.290808 (25/11/2009, 5823 sequences; cgob.ucd.ie); C_tropicalis_MYA-3404_2013_12_11_orf_trans_all.fasta (09/06/2010, 6258 sequences; candidagenome.org). Search parameters used were as follows: enzyme = trypsin; fixed modifications = carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications = oxidation (M); mass values = monoisotopic; peptide mass tolerance = 1.5 Da; fragment mass tolerance = 0.5 Da; max missed cleavages = 1; instrument type = ESI-TRAP. Search results were displayed by Mascot after selection of the following parameters: standard scoring; require bold red; ion score or expect cutoff = 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Candida</i> species are known to differ in their ability to cause infection and have been shown to display varied susceptibilities to antifungal drugs. Treatment with the echinocandin, caspofungin, leads to compensatory alterations in the fungal cell wall. This study was performed to compare the structure and composition of the cell walls of different <i>Candida</i> species alone and in response to caspofungin treatment, and to evaluate how changes at the fungal cell surface affects interactions with macrophages. We demonstrated that the length of the outer fibrillar layer varied between <i>Candida</i> species and that, in most cases, reduced fibril length correlated with increased exposure of &#x3b2;-1,3-glucan on the cell surface. <i>Candida glabrata</i> and <i>Candida guilliermondii</i>, which had naturally more &#x3b2;-1,3-glucan exposed on the cell surface, were phagocytosed significantly more efficiently by J774 macrophages. Treatment with caspofungin resulted in increased exposure of chitin and &#x3b2;-1,3-glucan on the surface of the majority of <i>Candida</i> species isolates that were tested, with the exception of <i>C. glabrata</i> and <i>Candida parapsilosis</i> isolates. This increase in exposure of the inner cell wall polysaccharides, in most cases, correlated with reduced uptake by macrophages and in turn, a decrease in production of TNF&#x3b1;. Here we show that differences in the exposure of cell wall carbohydrates and variations in the repertoire of covalently attached surface proteins of different <i>Candida</i> species contributes to their recognition by immune cells.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Candida, Cell wall

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
University of Aberdeen Institute of Medical Sciences Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD United Kingdom

### Submitter
David Stead

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Carol Munro
University of Aberdeen Institute of Medical Sciences Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD United Kingdom


