### Accession
PXD007065

### Title
Proteomic analysis of sea urchin egg provisioning and development

### Description
Here we present LC-MS/MS proteomic datasets of Heliocidaris erythrogramma, Heliocidaris tuberculata, and Lytechinus variegatus eggs and larvae. We find dramatic proteomic differences likely associated with life history evolution and between developmental stages. This study provides a complimentary dataset to previous transcriptomic analyses of the same three sea urchin species.

### Sample Protocol
00uL of each protein sample was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) containing Roche cOmpleteTM protease inhibitors followed by sonication and centrifugation at 15000 xg for 10 minutes. Protein concentrations from the supernatant were quantified by Bradford assay and each sample was normalized to 0.25 ug/uL with ammonium bicarbonate containing a 0.2% final concentration of acid labile surfactant (ALS-1) for each sample. Dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, and samples were denatured at 80 degrees C for 10 min followed by alkylation with 25mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins were digested at 37 degrees C with Sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w trypsin/protein) overnight. Then, samples were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile, followed by heating at 60 degrees C for 2 hours to inactivate the trypsin and degrade the ALS-1. Waters trypsinized MassPREP yeast alcohol dehydrogenase 1 was added at 50 fmol/ug as a surrogate standard. Following centrifugation, supernatants were transferred to Maximum Recovery LC vials (Waters, Milford, MA) and SPQC pools were prepared by mixing equal volumes of egg and larva samples.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus high resolution tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA) via a nanoelectrospray ionization source as previously described. Approximately 333 ng of peptide digests of each sample was analyzed in a random order and interspersed with QC pools as described in Table SX.   Label-free quantitation used Rosetta Elucidator v4.0. Briefly, all samples were aligned using accurate mass and retention time and relative peptide abundance was calculated based on area-under-the-curve of aligned features across all runs. MS/MS data were searched using Mascot Server v2.5 (Matrix Sciences) with a database containing H. erythrogramma, H. tuberculata, and L. variegatus transcriptomes27 and an equal number of reverse entries for false discovery rate (FDR) determination (901,770 total entries). Database search parameters included fixed modification on Cys (carbamidomethyl) and variable modifications on Met (oxidation) and Asn/Gln (deamidation). Data was annotated at a 1% peptide FDR using the PeptideTeller algorithm in Elucidator and scaled to the robust median intensity across all samples. In addition, identified  were also annotated with S. purpuratus gene models, which was accomplished by blasting consensus alignments of assembled transcripts from each study species to the S. purpuratus genome (e-value cutoff 1e-10) as shown in Israel et al. 2016. Because the proteomic analysis was sensitive to species-specific sequence bias in the relative abundance of the same peptide (Supplementary Data 2), subsequent statistical analysis of spectra intensities was carried out with the S. purpuratus gene annotations.

### Publication Abstract
A dramatic life history switch that has evolved numerous times in marine invertebrates is the transition from planktotrophic (feeding) to lecithotrophic (nonfeeding) larval development-an evolutionary tradeoff with many important developmental and ecological consequences. To attain a more comprehensive understanding of the molecular basis for this switch, we performed untargeted lipidomic and proteomic liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry on eggs and larvae from three sea urchin species: the lecithotroph Heliocidaris erythrogramma, the closely related planktotroph Heliocidaris tuberculata, and the distantly related planktotroph Lytechinus variegatus. We identify numerous molecular-level changes possibly associated with the evolution of lecithotrophy in H. erythrogramma. We find the massive lipid stores of H. erythrogramma eggs are largely composed of low-density, diacylglycerol ether lipids that, contrary to expectations, appear to support postmetamorphic development and survivorship. Rapid premetamorphic development in this species may instead be powered by upregulated carbohydrate metabolism or triacylglycerol metabolism. We also find proteins involved in oxidative stress regulation are upregulated in H. erythrogramma eggs, and apoB-like lipid transfer proteins may be important for echinoid oogenic nutrient provisioning. These results demonstrate how mass spectrometry can enrich our understanding of life history evolution and organismal diversity by identifying specific molecules associated with distinct life history strategies and prompt new hypotheses about how and why these adaptations evolve.

### Keywords
Developmental stage, Sea urchin

### Affiliations
Duke University

### Submitter
Phillip Davidson

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory Wray
Duke University


