### Accession
PXD013309

### Title
Human Transketolase-like 1 protein TAP-LC-MS/MS in HeLa cells.

### Description
The human genome encodes two proteins closely related to transketolase (TKT), transketolase-like protein 1 and 2 (TKTL1 and TKTL2). TKTL1 shares 61% amino acid sequence identity with TKT. More and more evidence suggests a role for TKTL1 in proliferation or cell cycle regulation. Indeed, TKTL1 is overexpressed in various cancers and is correlated with poor prognosis in colon, urothelial, gastric, and lung cancers as well as in ocular adnexa carcinomas, rectum carcinomas, and laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas. Increased TKTL1 levels also correlate with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma metastasis and increased resistance against cisplatin chemotherapy in nasopharyngeal carcinomas. Moreover, TKTL1 overexpression promotes cell proliferation and enhanced tumor growth; in contrast, TKTL1 down regulation attenuates the proliferation of various types of cancer cells. However, the cellular functions and regulatory machineries of TKTL1 are still largely unknown. Through this proteomic analysis, we defined the protein-protein interaction map for the TKTL1 and uncovered the novel regulating function of TKTL1 in regulating TKT transketolase activity.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells were transfected with pMCB-SBP-Flag-TKT or TKTL1 containing a puromycin resistance marker. The TKT or TKTL1-positive stable cells were lysed on ice in 0.1% NP40 buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.3% NONIDET P-40, 1 μg mL-1 aprotinin, 1 μg mL-1 leupeptin, 1 μg mL-1 pepstatin, and 1mM PMSF. After removal of insoluble cell debris by high speed centrifugation, cell lysates were incubated with SBP beads (Millipore) for 3 h at 4 °„C. The precipitates were washed 3 times with 0.1% NP40 buffer, 2 times with ddH2O, and 3 times with 50mM NH4HCO3. On-bead tryptic digestion was performed at 37 °„C overnight. The peptides in the supernatant were collected by centrifugation and dried in a speed vacuum (Eppendorf). Samples were re-dissolved in NH4HCO3 buffer containing 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile before being subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched by Mascot (ver. 2.3 Matrix Science, Boston,USA). Enzyme specificity was set to full tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Modifications included carboxyamidomethyl (cysteines, fixed) and oxidation (methionine, variable). Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. The database searched was the Swiss-Prot reviewed database (release 2013.4). Spectral matches were filtered to contain less than 1% FDR at the peptide level based on the target-decoy method. At last ,the Mascot CSV files were export.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of nucleotide building blocks prior to and during S phase facilitates DNA duplication. Herein, we find that the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) synchronizes ribose-5-phosphate levels and DNA synthesis during the cell cycle. In late G<sub>1</sub> and S phases, transketolase-like 1 (TKTL1) is overexpressed and forms stable TKTL1-transketolase heterodimers that accumulate ribose-5-phosphate. This accumulation occurs by asymmetric production of ribose-5-phosphate from the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway and prevention of ribose-5-phosphate removal by depleting transketolase homodimers. In the G<sub>2</sub> and M phases after DNA synthesis, expression of the APC/C adaptor CDH1 allows APC/C<sup>CDH1</sup> to degrade D-box-containing TKTL1, abrogating ribose-5-phosphate accumulation by TKTL1. TKTL1-overexpressing cancer cells exhibit elevated ribose-5-phosphate levels. The low CDH1 or high TKTL1-induced accumulation of ribose-5-phosphate facilitates nucleotide and DNA synthesis as well as cell cycle progression in a ribose-5-phosphate-saturable manner. Here we reveal that the cell cycle control machinery regulates DNA synthesis by mediating ribose-5-phosphate sufficiency.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Tktl1

### Affiliations
Zhao Lab, School of Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
liyang6411@gmail.com

### Submitter
Yang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jianyuan Zhao
Zhao Lab, School of Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China


