### Accession
PXD008181

### Title
Proteome analysis of Merkel cell carcinoma cell lines using SILAC

### Description
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare and aggressive neuroendocrine tumor of the skin with growing incidence. In research immortalized cell lines are used for in vitro experiments in order to better understand the biology of this malignant disease.

### Sample Protocol
MCC cells were lysed using the “Chemicon® -Total Protein Extraction Kit” containing TM buffer (HEPES, pH7.9, MgCl2, KCl, EDTA, Sucrose, Glycerol, Sodium deoxycholate, NP-40, Sodium Ortho Vanadate, Merck Millipore Vienna, Austria) according to manufacturer’s manual. Protein precipitation was performed using modified Wessel-Fluegge method as described elsewhere. Briefly, lysed cell content was treated with MeOH and dichloromethane (DCM) and the interphase was collected. Proteins were pelleted by addition of MeOH, air dried and dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria). Protein content was measured using the Direct Detect FT-IR spectrophotometer (Merck Millipore Vienna, Austria) and equimolar amounts of proteins from control and the MCC cells were mixed and submitted for tryptic digestion. Protein digest was performed using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany).Briefly, proteins were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60°C, and alkylated for 30 minutes with 15mM IAA in the dark. Finally, porcine trypsin was added in a ratio 1:50 (w/w). After 16 hours of incubation at 37°C, aliquots of 20µl were prepared and stored in 0.5ml protein low-bind vials at -20°C until further usage

### Data Protocol
Fragmented MS/MS data was searched against the Swissprot database (version of November 2016) of human proteins using ProteinScape V 3.1.5 474 (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) and Mascot V2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Protein quantitation was performed using WARP-LC V1.3.136 (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). All samples were analyzed as technical triplicates to ensure statistical sound data and avoid artifacts due to variations in ionization efficiency. Term enrichment analysis. Median H/L ratios where calculated using WARP-LC v. 1.3  (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). Proteins with H/L ratios of >1.5 or <0.5 where considered as up- or downregulated. To put differential protein expression into biologic context, Cytoscape (Seattle, WA, USA) in combination with ClueGO/CluePedia.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Carcinoma, Merkel cell, Silac

### Affiliations
Medizinische Universität Wien
Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine Proteomics Core Facility, E5, LS5H Waehringer Guertel 18-20 A-1090 Wien, Austria

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulović
Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine Proteomics Core Facility, E5, LS5H Waehringer Guertel 18-20 A-1090 Wien, Austria


