### Accession
PXD037380

### Title
Evaluation of peptide pulldown coupled to mass spectrometry approaches for investigation of motif-based protein-protein interactions

### Description
Eight different, SLiM-containing peptides were tested for pulldowns immobilized on magnetic beads, and the same sequences were used for PRISMA experiments. Double repeat of peptides were also used for higher local concentration of the motifs.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide pulldown: Biotinylated peptides were immobilized on streptavidin coated beads and incubated with HaCat cell lysate. After washes the binding proteins were eluted with glycine-HCl pH 2.5 and immediately neutralized. Proteins were digested with trypsin, cleaned up with C18 STageTips. LC-MS/MS with C18 nanoLC and QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. PRISMA: membranes incubated with cell lysate and washed. After drying the peptide spots were punched out and digested with LysC/trypsin. Then processed similarly as peptide pulldowns.

### Data Protocol
Processed in Perseus, filtering min. 3 valid values in min 1 group, imputating missing value, two-tailed, permutation-based FDR t-test. SAINT scoring.

### Publication Abstract
Low affinity and transient protein-protein interactions, such as short linear motif (SLiM)-based interactions, require dedicated experimental tools for discovery and validation. Here, we evaluated and compared biotinylated peptide pulldown and protein interaction screen on peptide matrix (PRISMA) coupled to mass-spectrometry (MS) using a set of peptides containing interaction motifs. Eight different peptide sequences that engage in interactions with three distinct protein domains (KEAP1 Kelch, MDM2 SWIB, and TSG101 UEV) with a wide range of affinities were tested. We found that peptide pulldown can be an effective approach for SLiM validation, however, parameters such as protein abundance and competitive interactions can prevent the capture of known interactors. The use of tandem peptide repeats improved the capture and preservation of some interactions. When testing PRISMA, it failed to provide comparable results for model peptides that successfully pulled down known interactors using biotinylated peptide pulldown. Overall, in our hands, we find that albeit more laborious, biotin-peptide pulldown was more successful in terms of validation of known interactions. Our results highlight that the tested affinity-capture MS-based methods for validation of SLiM-based interactions from cell lysates are suboptimal, and we identified parameters for consideration for method development.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Pulldown, Protein-protein interaction, Slim, Prisma

### Affiliations
Uppsala University
Uppsala University, Chemistry-BMC

### Submitter
Eszter Kassa

### Lab Head
Dr Ylva Ivarsson
Uppsala University, Chemistry-BMC


