### Accession
PXD036167

### Title
Cyclosporine A Modulates LSP1 Protein Levels in Human B Cells to Attenuate B Cell Migration at Low O2 Levels

### Description
Coordinated migration of B cells within and between secondary lymphoid tissues is required for robust antibody responses to infection or vaccination. Secondary lymphoid tissues normally expose B cells to a low O2 (hypoxic) environment. Recently, we have shown that human B cell migration is modulated by an O2-dependent molecular switch, centrally controlled by the hypoxia-induced (transcription) factor-1a (HIF1A), which can be disrupted by the immunosuppressive calcineurin inhibitor, cyclosporine A (CyA). However, the mechanisms by which low O2 environments attenuate B cell migration remain poorly defined. Proteomics analysis has linked CXCR4 chemokine receptor signaling to cytoskeletal rearrangement. We now hypothesize that the pathways linking the O2 sensing molecular switch to chemokine receptor signaling and cytoskeletal rearrangement would likely contain phosphorylation events, which are typically missed in traditional transcriptomic and/or proteomic analyses. Hence, we have performed a comprehensive phosphoproteomics analysis of human B cells treated with CyA after engagement of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 with CXCL12. Statistical analysis of the separate and synergistic effects of CyA and CXCL12 revealed 116 proteins whose abundance is driven by a synergistic interaction between CyA and CXCL12. Among these 116 proteins, Lymphocyte Specific Protein 1 (LSP1) was most interesting due to its original identification as a protein modulating neutrophil migration. We used our previously described algorithm BONITA to reveal a critical role for LSP1 in cytoskeletal rearrangement. Validating these modeling results, we show experimentally that LSP1 levels in B cells increase with low O2 exposure, and CyA treatment results in decreased LSP1 protein levels. This correlates with the increased chemotactic activity observed after CyA treatment. Lastly, we directly link LSP1 levels to chemotactic capacity, as shRNA knock-down of LSP1 results in significantly increased B cell chemotaxis at low O2 levels. These results directly link the CyA to LSP1-dependent cytoskeletal regulation, demonstrating a previously unrecognized mechanism by which CyA modulates human B cell migration.

### Sample Protocol
Human cell line: RAMOS (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA; CRL-1596) Burkitt’s lymphoma B cell line was maintained in complete RPMI 1640 media supplemented with 10% FBS (cR10; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). RAMOS cells were resuspended in cR10 media at 5 x 105 cells/mL to a final volumeof 10 mL in T25 tissue culture flasks (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA USA) and either left untreated or treated with cyclosporine A (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO USA) at 1 μg/mL. Pairs of untreated or CyA treated cells were then incubated in either 19% or 1% O2 chambers for 24 h. Cells were then rapidly harvested into 50 mL conical tubes (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA USA) containing 30 mL of ice cold PBS. Cells were pelleted and washed three times in 10 mL ice cold PBS. After the final wash, cells were resuspended in 1 mL ice cold PBS and transferred to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and pelleted. Supernatants were removed and cell pellets flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 C until lysed for analysis. Cell lysis and protein digestion procedures were adopted and slightly modified from a previously published surfactant cocktail-aided extraction/precipitation/on-pellet digestion protocol, and derived peptides were subjected to desalting using Oasis PRiME HLB Vac Cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Enrichment of phosphopeptides was accomplished based on a titanium dioxide (TiO2) bead-based protocol established by Paulo JA et al. with minor modifications. After that, 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were used to achieve isobaric labeling of the enriched phosphopeptides. TMT-labeled phosphopeptides were first dried by a SpeedVac concentrator, reconstituted in 300 μL 0.1% TFA, and loaded onto conditioned reversed-phase fractionation spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The column was washed with 300 μL 5% ACN/0.1% triethylamine (TEA), and the peptides were sequentially eluted by 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 25%, and 50% ACN with 0.1% TEA. Eluted fractions were dried with a SpeedVac concentrator, reconstituted in 50 μL 0.1% TFA, centrifuged (20,000× g, 4 C, 30 min) and transferred to LC vials for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Each sample fraction was injected in triplicate for LC–MS analysis. The LC–MS system consists of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC system, a Dionex Ultimate 3000 gradient micro LC system with a WPS-3000 autosampler, and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). A trapping nano LC setup was employed by connecting a large inner diameter (i.d.) trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm) to the nano LC column (75 μm i.d. × 65 cm, packed with 2.5 μm Waters XSelect CSH C18 material), which achieves large-capacity sample loading, on-line sample desalting and cleanup, and selective peptide delivery. Mobile phase A and B for nano LC were 0.1% FA in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA in 88% ACN. The nano LC gradient was: 4–11% B for 5 min, 11–32% B for 117 min, 32–50% for 10 min, 50–97% B for 1 min, and isocratic at 97% B for 17 min before equilibration to 4% B. Trapping column was switched on-line with the nano LC column during the first 50 min of the gradient and was switched off-line for cleanup and equilibration. MS acquisition was operated using Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS)-MS3 method. LC–MS raw files were imported to Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) for data processing. Database searching was performed by matching against Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens protein sequence database using Sequest HT. Peptides identified were validated by Percolator. Phosphosite localization was performed by ptmRS. Detailed parameters are listed as follows: Precursor Ion Tolerance, 20 ppm; Fragment Ion Tolerance, 0.02 Da; Maximum Missed Cleavages, 2; Static Modifications, cysteine (C) carbamidomethylation, peptide N-terminal TMT; Dynamic Modifications, methionine (M) oxidation, serine (S)/threonine (T) phosphorylation, N-terminal acetylation; and Percolator q-value threshold, 0.01. For quantitative phosphoproteomics, the addition of several specific parameters was necessary: ptmRS Site Probability Threshold, 50; Apply Quan Value Corrections, true; Co-Isolation Interference, 60%; Average Reporter S/N Threshold, 5; Tag Mass Tolerance, 15 ppm; Normalization Mode, none; and Scaling Mode, none. Each phosphopeptide in the dataset is defined by a unique combination of peptide sequence and modification. For subsequent analysis, each unique phosphopeptide was considered as a separate entity, without further summarization. Each phosphopeptide was mapped to at least one protein and its corresponding gene. The normalized abundance for undetected phosphopeptides was imputed to 0. Abundance values were further processed by log2-transformation (log2(x + 1), where x is the normalized abundance value of a phosphopeptide as obtained above).

### Publication Abstract
Coordinated migration of B cells within and between secondary lymphoid tissues is required for robust antibody responses to infection or vaccination. Secondary lymphoid tissues normally expose B cells to a low O2 (hypoxic) environment. Recently, we have shown that human B cell migration is modulated by an O2-dependent molecular switch, centrally controlled by the hypoxia-induced (transcription) factor-1&#x3b1; (HIF1A), which can be disrupted by the immunosuppressive calcineurin inhibitor, cyclosporine A (CyA). However, the mechanisms by which low O2 environments attenuate B cell migration remain poorly defined. Proteomics analysis has linked CXCR4 chemokine receptor signaling to cytoskeletal rearrangement. We now hypothesize that the pathways linking the O2 sensing molecular switch to chemokine receptor signaling and cytoskeletal rearrangement would likely contain phosphorylation events, which are typically missed in traditional transcriptomic and/or proteomic analyses. Hence, we have performed a comprehensive phosphoproteomics analysis of human B cells treated with CyA after engagement of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 with CXCL12. Statistical analysis of the separate and synergistic effects of CyA and CXCL12 revealed 116 proteins whose abundance is driven by a synergistic interaction between CyA and CXCL12. Further, we used our previously described algorithm BONITA to reveal a critical role for Lymphocyte Specific Protein 1 (LSP1) in cytoskeletal rearrangement. LSP1 is known to modulate neutrophil migration. Validating these modeling results, we show experimentally that LSP1 levels in B cells increase with low O2 exposure, and CyA treatment results in decreased LSP1 protein levels. This correlates with the increased chemotactic activity observed after CyA treatment. Lastly, we directly link LSP1 levels to chemotactic capacity, as shRNA knock-down of LSP1 results in significantly increased B cell chemotaxis at low O2 levels. These results directly link CyA to LSP1-dependent cytoskeletal regulation, demonstrating a previously unrecognized mechanism by which CyA modulates human B cell migration. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD036167.

### Keywords
Cxcr4, Human b cells, Lsp1, Chemotaxis

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, USA
University at Buffalo

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, USA


