### Accession
PXD016289

### Title
Unraveling the complexities of mitochondrial supercomplexes by mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
It is now accepted that mitochondrial respiratory complex subunits assemble in supercomplexes. However, studying supercomplexes has typically relied upon antibody-based protein quantification, often limited to a single subunit per respiratory complex. To provide a deeper insight into mitochondrial plasticity and supercomplex formation, we combined Blue Native Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) and high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics in sedentary and exercise-trained skeletal muscle. We quantified 422 mitochondrial proteins within ten bands. Our analyses revealed the often-unaccounted presence of complex II and V subunits within the majority of supercomplexes. Upon exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis, non-stoichiometric changes in subunits and their incorporation into supercomplexes were apparent. Finally, we uncovered the dynamics of supercomplex-related assembly proteins and mtDNA-encoded subunits within supercomplexes, as well as the high-molecular mass complexes of ubiquinone biosynthesis enzymes and Lactb, a mitochondrial-localized obesogenic polymer. Thus, combining BN-PAGE and mass spectrometry to comprehensively analyze respiratory supercomplexes illuminates previously undetectable complexity in mitochondrial plasticity.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for total proteome of triceps muscle Triceps muscles and differentiated C2C12 cells were lysed in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.1 M DTT and 4% SDS, homogenized with a Ultra Turbax blender (IKA) and boiled for 5 minutes. Lysate was sonicated and clarified by centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 10 minutes. Samples were then processed following filter-aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) protocol, and using sequentially endonucleases LysC and trypsin for protein digestion (Wisniewski and Mann, 2012). Peptide fractions from LysC and trypsin digestion were then purified on C18 stage-tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) prior to LCMS/MS analysis. The C2C12 muscle cells were included in the analysis to enhance protein identification in by using ‘match between runs’ algorithm in MaxQuant software (Tyanova, Nature protocol 2016, Schonke et al Proteomics). Analysis was performed on n=5 biological replicates from each group (Sedentary, Training).  Blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) and in gel digestion Fresh triceps muscle was homogenized in mitochondria isolation buffer (100mM sucrose, 100mM KCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, KH2PO4 1mM, 0.1mM EGTA, 0.2% BSA) supplemented with protease Nagarse. Lysate was cleared by low speed centrifugation (750g, 10 minutes), followed by high speed centrifugation (10000g, 10 min) to enrich for the mitochondrial fraction. The mitochondrial fraction was washed in isolation buffer and mitochondrial protein (50ug) was prepared for electrophoresis on NativePAGE Novex 3-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Invitrogen) as previously described (Jha et al., 2016). In brief, NativePAGE Sample Buffer (Invitrogen), 5% digitonin and 5% Coomassie G-250 was added to mitochondrial pellet that run at 150 V for 30 minutes at 4C followed by 60 min at 250 V. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie G-250 staining., Unstained marker bands (NativeMARK, Invitrogen) were visualized after fixation with 25% isopropanol and 10% acetic acid, and staining with 10% acetic acid and 60mg/L of Coomassie R-250. and ten selected excised bands were cut into 1*1mm pieces followed by in-gel digestion as described in (Shevchenko et al., 2006). We only analyzed the top 10 gel bands because mitochondrial complex proteins were absent in lower molecular weight bands. Peptides from the trypsin digestion were then purified on C18 stage-tips prior to LCMS/MS analysis. Analysis was performed on n=4 biological replicates from each group (Sedentary, Training)  LCMS/MS analysis  For the total proteome analysis, the peptides from the triceps muscle and C2C12 were measured with identical chromatographic conditions. Peptides were injected on a 50cm C18-particle packed column (inner diameter 75 μm, 1.8 μm beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with Buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and separated over a 150-minute linear gradient from 5-40% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/minute. The Easy nano-flow HPLC system was coupled to a LTQ Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS using a top-12 method.MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-1750 m/z and 60,000 resolutions at m/z 200. HCD peptide fragments acquired at 28 normalized collision energy were analyzed at high resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer.For the mitochondrial supercomplex proteome, peptides from in gel digested samples were injected on a 15 cm C18-particle packed column (inner diameter 75 μm, 1.8 μm beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with Buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and separated over a 65-minute linear gradient from 5-40% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/minute. The Easy nano-flow HPLC system was coupled to a LTQ Q-Exactive HFX Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS using a top-12 method.MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-1750 m/z and 60,000 resolutions at m/z 200. HCD peptide fragments acquired at 28 normalized collision energy were analyzed at high resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Tyanova, Nature protocol 2016, https://www.maxquant.org/). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (integrated into MaxQuant) against the decoy UniProt-mouse database supplemented with 262 frequently observed contaminants and forward and reverse sequences. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modification of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cystein. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and a maximum of two misclevages was allowed. For the peptides and protein identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. MS runs from the triceps muscle and C2C12 myotubes were analyzed with the ‘match between runs’ option in MaxQuant. For matching, a retention time window of 30 s was selected. When all identified peptides were shared between two proteins, results were combined and reported as one protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein complex proteomics, Oxidative phosphorylation, Mitochondrial supercomplexes, Blue native gel, Mitochondrial respiratory complexes

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, Department of Health and Medical Sciences, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark
Copenhagen University

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Atul S Deshmukh
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, Department of Health and Medical Sciences, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark


