### Accession
PXD027421

### Title
Multi-layered chromatin proteomics identifies cell vulnerabilities in DNA repair

### Description
DNA damage response (DDR) is instrumental for maintaining genome stability and its deregulation predisposes to carcinogenesis, while revealing attractive targets for innovative therapies. Chromatin governs the DNA repair process via the interplay among different layers consisting of DNA, histones post-translational modifications (hPTMs), and chromatin-associated proteins. Here we employ multi-layered proteomics to follow, during double-strand break repair, chromatin-mediated interactions of repair proteins, signatures of hPTMs, and the DNA-bound proteome. In particular, we functionally attribute novel chromatin-associated proteins to non-homologous end-joining or homologous recombination (HR) repair, we reveal susceptibility to PARP inhibitor treatment upon knockdown of ATAD2, TPX2 and EHMT2, and we profile hPTMs at γH2AX-mononucleosomes. Moreover, through the integration of these multiple chromatin layers we identify a potential role for EHMT2-mediated monomethylation of H3K56 in HR.  Collectively, our results provide an innovative chromatin-centered view of the DDR process, while representing a valuable resource for the use of PARP inhibitors in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
ChIP-SICAP  ChIP-SICAP experiment was performed as already described [Rafiee Mol Cell 2016, Mol Syst Biol 2020] with modifications. U2OS cells were labeled in SILAC (Ong SE et al 2002). Pellets of 24 × 106 cells were cross-linked with formaldehyde 1% in the absence (medium) or after ionizing radiations (IR) (heavy). Control light-labeled sample corresponds to a 1:1 mix of untreated (UT) and IR cells. Pellets were lysed according to ChIP-SICAP protocol. Chromatin fractions from medium and heavy were mixed in equal amounts and subjected to ChIP against target protein, light-labeled sample served as isogenic IgG internal control. Followed DNA biotinylation. 100µL of protease-resistant streptavidin (Rafiee Mol Syst Biol 2020) beads were added, washed, resuspended in AmBic prior reduction and alkylation. Trypsin was added, peptides cleaned via SP3 beads and eluted in 0.1% TFA before MS analysis.  iPOC  40x 106 U2OS cells were labeled in SILAC. Medium- and heavy-labeled samples were also treated with 5-ethynyl-2’-deoxyuridine. Light- and medium-labeled samples were collected in UT conditions, while heavy labeled cells were harvested at 1h, 4h or 8h upon IR. Each cell pellet was permeabilized, washed and subjected to click reaction mix as from Sirbu JBC 2013. Samples were lysed and sonicated until a chromatin input around 600bp. Supernatants were mixed in equal amount before adding 200µL of pre-conditioned magnetic prS beads (Rafiee Mol Syst Biol 2020). PrS beads-chromatin sample complexes were recovered, washed, conditioned in AmBic, followed by alkylation and reduction. Proteins were digested with trypsin and peptides were cleaned up via SP3 protocol [Hughes C. S, Mol Syst Biol 2014, Nat Protoc 2019] and eluted in 0.1% TFA before high pH fractionation on an Agilent 1200 Infinity HPLC system with a Gemini C18 column (3µm, 110Å, 100 × 1.0mm, Phenomenex) using a linear 60min gradient from 0% to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile in 20mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at a flow rate of 0.1ml/min. Elution of peptides was detected with a variable wavelength UV detector set to 254nm.  N-ChroP Native Chromatin Proteomic (or N-ChroP) protocol was performed as already described in [Soldi et al MCP 2013, NAR 2017] with some modifications. 50x106 U2OS cells were collected in UT conditions or 30min, 1h, 4h, 8h recovery from IR (heavy). Each pellet was lysed and mononucleosomes prepared as from N-ChroP protocol. ChIP was performed against γH2AX. Immunopurified material and respective input were separated on SDS-PAGE. Histone bands were excised from the gel, chemically alkylated with D6-acetic anhydride, followed by in-gel tryptic digestion. Peptides were extracted from the gel, concentrated and desalted with handmade StageTips [Rappsilber An Chem 2013] with C18 resin. Eluted peptides were lyophilized, resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analyzed with Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. MS analysis Peptides were trapped on PepMap100 C18 Nano-Trap 100µm × 20mm and separated over a 25cm analytical column (Waters nanoEase BEH, 75μm × 250mm, C18, 1.7μm, 130Å) using the Thermo Easy nLC 1200 nanospray source (Thermo Easy nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3 to 8% in 4min, then 10% in 2 min, to 32% in 68 min, to 50% in 12min and to 100% in 1min. Peptides were analyzed on a Tri-Hybrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in positive (+2.5 kV) DDA mode with HCD fragmentation. The MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap and ion trap, respectively, with a total cycle time of 3s. MS1 detection occurred at 120,000 resolution, AGC target 1E6, maximal injection time 50ms and a scan range of 375–1500 m/z. Peptides with charge states 2–4 were selected for fragmentation with an exclusion duration of 40s. MS2 occurred with NCE 33%, detection in topN mode and scan rate was set to Rapid. AGC target was 1E4 and maximal injection time allowed of 50ms. Data were recorded in centroid mode. For histone samples, peptides were loaded and separated on same trap and analytical columns as above; but the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 8 to 40% in 100min, then to 60% in 3min, to 95% in 5min. Peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operated in positive (+2.5kV) data dependent acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. MS1 detection occurred at 60,000 resolution, AGC target 3E6 maximal injection time 150ms and a scan range of 300–1500m/z. Peptides with charge states 2–5 were selected for fragmentation with an exclusion duration of 60s. MS2 occurred with NCE 30%, detection in top20 mode. AGC target was 5E4 and maximal injection time allowed of 250ms. Data were recorded in centroid mode

### Data Protocol
RAW data were processed with Maxquant free software (1.5.1.2) including the Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008, Tyanova et al Nature protocol 2016a). Peptide identification was performed using Homo sapiens Uniprot database concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of contaminants. (canonical and isoform). Default parameters of Maxquant were used with the following modifications: digestion by Trypsin/P and LysC, default variable modification (methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation), cytosine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Instrument set Orbitrap (with precursor tolerance 20ppm, MS tolerance 0.5Da). FDR was set to 1% at both protein and peptide level. Match between runs option was enabled, Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ calculated. For protein analysis, Perseus free software was used (Tyanova et al 2016b). Potential contaminants, reverse and proteins only identified by sites were removed and only proteins identified with at least one unique peptide in both biological replicates were considered for further analysis. Missing values in the untreated samples were replaced with constant corresponding to the lower LFQ log10 value of that experiment. Two-sided t-test statistics was used for the generation of the volcano plots based on LFQ log10 values of expressed proteins. FDR was 0.05 and S0 constant was 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
The DNA damage response (DDR) is essential to maintain genome stability, and its deregulation predisposes to carcinogenesis while encompassing attractive targets for cancer therapy. Chromatin governs the DDR via the concerted interplay among different layers, including DNA, histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) and chromatin-associated proteins. Here, we employ multi-layered proteomics to characterize chromatin-mediated functional interactions of repair proteins, signatures of hPTMs and the DNA-bound proteome during DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair at high temporal resolution. Our data illuminate the dynamics of known and novel DDR-associated factors both at chromatin and at DSBs. We functionally attribute novel chromatin-associated proteins to repair by non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ), homologous recombination (HR) and DSB repair pathway choice. We reveal histone reader ATAD2, microtubule organizer TPX2 and histone methyltransferase G9A as regulators of HR and involved in poly-ADP-ribose polymerase-inhibitor sensitivity. Furthermore, we distinguish hPTMs that are globally induced by DNA damage from those specifically acquired at sites flanking DSBs (&#x3b3;H2AX foci-specific) and profiled their dynamics during the DDR. Integration of complementary chromatin layers implicates G9A-mediated monomethylation of H3K56 in DSBs repair via HR. Our data provide a dynamic chromatin-centered view of the DDR that can be further mined to identify novel mechanistic links and cell vulnerabilities in DSB repair.

### Keywords
Chip-sicap, Chromatin, Dsb, Ddr, Proteomics, Hptms, Ipoc, Dna damage foci

### Affiliations
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer
DKFZ

### Submitter
Gianluca Sigismondo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer


