### Accession
PXD033940

### Title
An optimized proteomics approach reveals novel alternative proteins in mouse liver development

### Description
Alternative open reading frames (AltORFs) are unannotated sequences in genome that encode novel peptides or proteins named alternative proteins (AltProts). Although ribosome profiling and bioinformatics predict a large number of AltProts, mass spectrometry (MS) as the only direct way of identification, is hampered by the short lengths and relative low abundance of AltProts. Here we report an approach based on size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) for simultaneous enrichment and fractionation of AltProts from mouse livers. With this strategy we compared and discovered 89 novel AltProts between embryonic and adult mouse livers and will extend our optimized workflow in various disease models in future study.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissues were homogenized with RIPA lysis buffer, and then we compared the effectiveness of enrichment methods including acetic acid (AA), trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation, C8 solid phase extraction (SPE) and hydrophilic-lipophilic-balanced (HLB) SPE, hexagonal mesoporous silica materials, ultrafiltration tubes and size exclusion chromatography (SEC).

### Data Protocol
For data-dependent acquisition, MS data was collected on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS equipped with the FAIMS interface and coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a self-packing capillary column. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) were used to separate peptides. The full scan spectra were measured with a resolution of 120,000 within 50 ms max injection time, followed by MS2 scans with a resolution of 30,000 within 55 ms max injection time. The isolation window of the MS2 scan was set to 1.6 m/z, and only ions with 2-6 charges were triggered for the MS2 event. The dynamic exclusion time was set as 45 s. Compensation voltages were set at -45 V and -65 V to remove singly charged ions. The LC-MS/MS raw data were analyzed with MSFragger (version 3.3). Common parameters settings were as follows: precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; 2 missed cleavages; oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative ORFs (AltORFs) are unannotated sequences in genome that encode novel peptides or proteins named alternative proteins (AltProts). Although ribosome profiling and bioinformatics predict a large number of AltProts, mass spectrometry as the only direct way of identification is hampered by the short lengths and relative low abundance of AltProts. There is an urgent need for improvement of mass spectrometry methodologies for AltProt identification. Here, we report an approach based on size-exclusion chromatography for simultaneous enrichment and fractionation of AltProts from complex proteome. This method greatly simplifies the variance of AltProts discovery by enriching small proteins smaller than 40&#xa0;kDa. In a systematic comparison between 10 methods, the approach we reported enabled the discovery of more AltProts with overall higher intensities, with less cost of time and effort compared to other workflows. We applied this approach to identify 89 novel AltProts from mouse liver, 39 of which were differentially expressed between embryonic and adult mice. During embryonic development, the upregulated AltProts were mainly involved in biological pathways on RNA splicing and processing, whereas the AltProts involved in metabolisms were more active in adult livers. Our study not only provides an effective approach for identifying AltProts but also novel AltProts that are potentially important in developmental biology.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Fractionation, Alternative open reading frames (altorfs), Alternative proteins (altprots), Liver development., Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
the Hong Kong Polytechnic University
State Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, SAR, China

### Submitter
Ying YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Qian Zhao
State Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Department of Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, SAR, China


