### Accession
PXD025967

### Title
Deciphering the O-glycosylation of HKU1 Spike Protein with the Dual-Functional Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography Materials

### Description
HKU1 is a human betacoronavirus and infects host cells via highly glycosylated spike protein (S). At present, N-glycosylation of HKU1 S has been reported, however, little is known about its O-glycosylation, which hinders an in-depth understanding of its biological functions. Herein, a comprehensive study of O-glycosylation of HKU1 S was carried out based on dual-functional histidine-bonded silica materials (HBS). The enrichment method for O-glycopeptides with HBS was developed and validated using standard proteins. The application of the developed method to HKU1 S1 subunit resulted in 61 novel O-glycosylation sites, among which 56% were predicted to be exposed on protein outer surface. Moreover, the O-linked glycans and their abundance on each HKU1 S1 site were also analyzed. The obtained O-glycosylation dataset would provide valuable insights for the understanding of the structure of HKU1 S.

### Sample Protocol
Dual-functional histidine-bonded silica materials，ZIC-HILIC materials,C18 column

### Data Protocol
MassLynx,Xcalibur,Byonic,Origin,Adobe illustrator,Excel

### Publication Abstract
HKU1 is a human beta coronavirus and infects host cells <i>via</i> highly glycosylated spike protein (S). The N-glycosylation of HKU1 S has been reported. However, little is known about its O-glycosylation, which hinders the in-depth understanding of its biological functions. Herein, a comprehensive study of O-glycosylation of HKU1 S was carried out based on dual-functional histidine-bonded silica (HBS) materials. The enrichment method for O-glycopeptides with HBS was developed and validated using standard proteins. The application of the developed method to the HKU1 S1 subunit resulted in 46 novel O-glycosylation sites, among which 55.6% were predicted to be exposed on the outer protein surface. Moreover, the O-linked glycans and their abundance on each HKU1 S1 site were analyzed. The obtained O-glycosylation dataset will provide valuable insights into the structure of HKU1 S.

### Keywords
Enrichment, O-glycosylation abundance, O-glycosylation sites, Spike glycoprotein, Hku1

### Affiliations
School of Bioengineering, Dalian Polytechnic University
School of Bioengineering, Dalian Polytechnic University,

### Submitter
Dongmei Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Dongmei Fu
School of Bioengineering, Dalian Polytechnic University


