### Accession
PXD016511

### Title
Proteomic adaptation of Streptococcus pneumoniae to the human antimicrobial peptide LL-37

### Description
Secreted antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are an important part of the human innate immune system and prevent local and systemic infections by inhibiting bacterial growth in a concentration dependent manner. In the respiratory tract, the cationic peptide LL-37 is one of the most abundant AMPs and capable of building pore complexes in usually negatively charged bacterial membranes, leading to destruction of bacteria. However, adaptation mechanisms of several pathogens to LL-37 are already described and are known to weaken the antimicrobial effect of the AMP, for instance, by repulsion, export or degradation of the peptide. This study examines proteome wide changes in Streptococcus pneumoniae D39, the leading cause of bacterial pneumonia, in response to physiological concentrations of LL-37 by high resolution mass spectrometry. Our data indicate that pneumococci may use some of the known adaptation mechanisms to reduce the effect of LL-37 on their physiology, too. Additionally, several proteins seem to be involved in resistance to AMPs which have not been related to this process before, such as the teichoic acid flippase TacF (SPD_1128). Understanding colonization and infection relevant adaptations of the pneumococcus to AMPs, especially LL-37, could finally uncover new drug targets to weaken the burden of this widespread pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Digested and fractionated protein samples were measured on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer in combination with an EASY nLC-1000 liquid chromatography system. First, 2 μl of the sample was loaded with 12 μl buffer A (water with 0.1% acetic acid) on an in-house packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm material) of 20 cm length and 100 μm inner diameter. Then, a non-linear 180-minute gradient from 1% to 99% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid) was used for elution of peptides with a flowrate of 300 nl/min. The MS measurement was performed in the data-dependent mode. The MS1 scans covered a mass range of 300-1700 m/z at a resolution of 30,000 (at 400 m/z) and the 20 most intense precursors were selected and fragmented via collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a normalized collision energy of 35. Ions with unknown charge or charge one were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment ions were measured in the ion trap (MS2). Additionally, precursors were excluded for 20 seconds after fragmentation for additional fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 and its Andromeda search engine was used for protein identification and quantification with the following settings. Trypsin/P was selected as protease that cleaves after lysine and arginine also if a proline follows. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Likewise, the minimal number of unique peptides per protein group was set to 2 to be considered as identified. Oxidation (M) was considered as a variable- and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification whereas the maximal number of modifications per peptide was 5. For quantification solely unique peptides were used. Databases loaded to MaxQuant were: the S. pneumoniae D39 proteome containing 1915 proteins obtained from Uniprot.org (Proteome ID: UP000001452, last modified November 9, 2018), the MaxQuant contaminants file and sequences for human LL-37, yeast enolase and iRT peptides. Data were analyzed using Perseus version 1.6.5.0

### Publication Abstract
Secreted antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are an important part of the human innate immune system and prevent local and systemic infections by inhibiting bacterial growth in a concentration-dependent manner. In the respiratory tract, the cationic peptide LL-37 is one of the most abundant AMPs and capable of building pore complexes in usually negatively charged bacterial membranes, leading to the destruction of bacteria. However, the adaptation mechanisms of several pathogens to LL-37 are already described and are known to weaken the antimicrobial effect of the AMP, for instance, by repulsion, export or degradation of the peptide. This study examines proteome-wide changes in <i>Streptococcus pneumoniae</i> D39, the leading cause of bacterial pneumonia, in response to physiological concentrations of LL-37 by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Our data indicate that pneumococci may use some of the known adaptation mechanisms to reduce the effect of LL-37 on their physiology, too. Additionally, several proteins seem to be involved in resistance to AMPs which have not been related to this process before, such as the teichoic acid flippase TacF (SPD_1128). Understanding colonization- and infection-relevant adaptations of the pneumococcus to AMPs, especially LL-37, could finally uncover new drug targets to weaken the burden of this widespread pathogen.

### Keywords
Ll-37, Lc-msms, Adaptation, Antimicrobial peptide, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Pierre-Alexander Mücke

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


