### Accession
PXD010820

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation enhances double strand break repair, promotes cancer cell proliferation and prevents therapy-induced senescence in irradiated tumors

### Description
The metabolic reprogramming associated with characteristic increases in glucose and glutamine metabolism common in advanced cancer is often ascribed to answering a higher demand for metabolic intermediates required for rapid tumor cell growth. Instead, recent discoveries have pointed to an alternative role for glucose and glutamine metabolites as cofactors for chromatin modifiers and other protein post-translational modification enzymes in cancer cells. Beyond epigenetic mechanisms regulating gene expression, many chromatin modifiers also modulate DNA repair, raising the question whether cancer metabolic reprogramming may mediate resistance to genotoxic therapy and genomic instability. Our prior work had implicated N-acetyl-glucosamine (GlcNAc) formation by the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP) and resulting protein O-GlcNAcylation as a common means by which increased glucose and glutamine metabolism can drive double strand break (DSB) repair and resistance to therapy-induced senescence in cancer cells. Here, we have examined the effects of modulating O-GlcNAcylationon the DNA damage response in MCF7 human mammary carcinoma xenograft tumors. Promotingprotein O-GlcNAc modification, whether by targeting O-GlcNAcase (OGA) with shRNA or the inhibitor PUGNAc or simply treating animals with GlcNAc, protected tumor xenografts against radiation. In turn, suppressing protein O-GlcNAcylation by silencing O-GlcNActransferase (OGT) or treating animals with alloxan led to delayed DSB repair, reduced cell proliferation, and increased cell senescence in vivo. Taken together, these findings confirm critical connections between cancer metabolic reprogramming, DNA damage response, and senescence and provide a rationale to evaluate agents targeting O-GlcNAcylation in patients as a means to restore tumor sensitivity to radiotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and IR treatment 2x106 MCF7 (shOGA (A2) and shOGT (T1)) shRNA Gene Knockdown Cells were seeded in 150 mm Petri dishes in duplicate and were grown under standard conditions for 24 hours.  Two sets of samples were irradiated with 6Gy IR to induce DSB and samples taken at 1hr time post IR, along with the non-IR samples were cross-linked in 1% PFA for 10 min, stopped rxn with 0.125M Glycine, scrapped, washed in ice cold PBS with 1x PUGNAc (1,5-hydroximolactone), pelleted, snap frozen with Ln2 stored at -80C until processed for ChIP.  Cytoplasmic Lysis All steps performed on ice or in 4C Cold Room.  Cell Pellets (ranging from 6x105-7x106) were lysed with 500ul Cytoplasmic Lysis Buffer (10mM TrisCL pH 8.0, 10mM NaCl, 0.2% NP-40) in presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 1x PUGNAc (Thermo Scientific), and passed through a 27g needle 10 times.  Cells were kept on ice for 10 min, then centrifuged at 2000 rcf for 5 min at 4C.  The Cyto fraction was transferred to a new 1.5mL tube, snap frozen with Ln2, and saved at -80C.    Nuclear Lysis Nuclear lysate was prepared by resuspending the pellet in 300ul Nuclear Lysis Buffer (50mM TrisCL pH 8.0, 10mM EDTA, 1% SDS) supplemented with (300u MNase and 15ul 100mM CaCl2 per sample).  MNase digestion was carried out at 37C for 10min then centrifuged at 14,000 rcf for 30min at 4C.  The Nuclear lysate was transferred to a new 1.5mL vial.   The pellet was snap frozen in Ln2 and stored at -80C.    SDS-Page Gel Plug for Mass Spectrometry 10ug of the Nuc Lysate was loaded in duplicate and separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis on a 12% MOPS buffered 1D Gel (Thermo Scientific) and run for 10min at 200v resulting in a ~2cm “gel plug”. After staining with 25mL Imperial Protein stain (Thermo Scientific) at room temperature, peptides were digested for LC-MS/MS analysis.     Peptide digestion  The gel plugs for each sample to be analyzed were excised by sterile razor blade, divided into 1 section and chopped into ~ 1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine HCl at 37°C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20°C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted first with 5% formic acid, then with 75% ACN:5% formic acid, combined and vacuum dried.  HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC–MS/MS analysis The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS Data analysis  All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, searching against the SPROT Human database (Downloaded: 11/07/2016 with isoforms) *.fasta sequence, using the following criteria: LFQ was selected for Quantitation with a min of 1 high confidence peptide to assign LFQ Intensities.  Trypsin was selected as the protease with max miss cleavage set to 2. Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Oxidization (M), Formylation (n-term), Deamidation (NQ), and OHexNAc (ST). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da.  1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the LFQ Intensities of protein peak areas determined by MaxQuant and reported in the proteinGroups.txt.  The proteingroups.txt file was processed in Perseus, described briefly. Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Three replicates were performed consisting of two biological and one technical.  Samples were filtered to require hits to have been seen in at least 2 replicates per condition (shOGA(IR), shOGA(NIR), shOGT(IR), shOGT(NIR)). LFQ peak intensities Log2 transformed and median normalized and missing values were imputed via defualt settings in perseus.  Gene Ontology enrichment was performed with a significance cutoff of >= 2 fold change up and <= 2 fold down (+/-1.00 Log2 ratio respectively) via David.

### Publication Abstract
The metabolic reprogramming associated with characteristic increases in glucose and glutamine metabolism in advanced cancer is often ascribed to answering a higher demand for metabolic intermediates required for rapid tumor cell growth. Instead, recent discoveries have pointed to an alternative role for glucose and glutamine metabolites as cofactors for chromatin modifiers and other protein posttranslational modification enzymes in cancer cells. Beyond epigenetic mechanisms regulating gene expression, many chromatin modifiers also modulate DNA repair, raising the question whether cancer metabolic reprogramming may mediate resistance to genotoxic therapy and genomic instability. Our prior work had implicated N-acetyl-glucosamine (GlcNAc) formation by the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP) and resulting protein O-GlcNAcylation as a common means by which increased glucose and glutamine metabolism can drive double-strand break (DSB) repair and resistance to therapy-induced senescence in cancer cells. We have examined the effects of modulating O-GlcNAcylation on the DNA damage response (DDR) in MCF7 human mammary carcinoma <i>in vitro</i> and in xenograft tumors. Proteomic profiling revealed deregulated DDR pathways in cells with altered O-GlcNAcylation. Promoting protein O-GlcNAc modification by targeting O-GlcNAcase or simply treating animals with GlcNAc protected tumor xenografts against radiation. In turn, suppressing protein O-GlcNAcylation by blocking O-GlcNAc transferase activity led to delayed DSB repair, reduced cell proliferation, and increased cell senescence <i>in vivo</i>. Taken together, these findings confirm critical connections between cancer metabolic reprogramming, DDR, and senescence and provide a rationale to evaluate agents targeting O-GlcNAcylation in patients as a means to restore tumor sensitivity to radiotherapy. IMPLICATIONS: The finding that the HBP, via its impact on protein O-GlcNAcylation, is a key determinant of the DDR in cancer provides a mechanistic link between metabolic reprogramming, genomic instability, and therapeutic response and suggests novel therapeutic approaches for tumor radiosensitization.

### Keywords
Lfq quantification, Q-exactive, Shogt, Shoga, Hbp pathway, Dna repair, O-glcnacylation, Mass spectrometry, Chromatin modification

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology and Ludwig Center for Metastasis Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago IL

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Stephen J. Kron
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology and Ludwig Center for Metastasis Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago IL


