### Accession
PXD005592

### Title
Mouse EL4 Tumor Proteome Comparison via LC-MSMS

### Description
The EL4 mouse tumor model is widely utilized within the field of oncology due to its ease of use and excellent response to chemotherapy, with tumors typically experiencing a reduction in mass of 70% following chemotherapy treatment with cyclophosphamide and etoposide for three days. As not much is known regarding the biochemical changes that result in these drastic reductions in tumor mass, we decided to analyze treated and untreated tumors using shotgun proteomics to identify the changes that occur in relative protein abundance following chemotherapeutic treatment, which will help determine the biological processes resulting in tumor death.

### Sample Protocol
One million EL4 cells were injected into the flanks of 10 C57BL/6 mice and allowed to grow for 7 days. Following gestation of tumors, mice were either treated for two days with intraperitoneal dosings of 40uL cyclophosphamide (50mg/mL) and 120uL etoposide (12.5mg/mL) in 50% DMSO, or a 160uL 50% DMSO control. Following treatment, mice were sacrificed and tumors excised and flash frozen in glycerol suspensions using liquid nitrogen. Tumors were subsequently thawed, washed using PBST, and weighed. Tumors were then homogenized using a mechanical piston homogenizer in a homogenization buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, 8% glycerol, 4.8% SDS, 100mM 2-ME, 1mM PMSF, 10ng/mL leupeptin, 1X phosphatase inhibitor) using a 4mL:1g tissue ratio. Homogenates were run on 10% sterile-filtered SDS polyacrylamide gels. Protein was visualized using coomassie, and lanes were excised with a scalpel. Lanes were cut into 30 bands each, with each band being cut into 1mm cubes, and 2 bands worth of cubes places into a well of a 96-well conical bottom plate. Gel bits were destained using 50% acetonitrile in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to dehydration with acetonitrile. Samples were then reduced using 10mM 2-ME in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate before alkylating with 55mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then subject to in-gel trypsinization (18 hours at 37 degrees Centigrade). Digestion was quenched using 1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile in water. Two subsequent extractions were performed (1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile in water, 1% formic acid in 75% acetonitrile in water), and collected extractions were concentrated using a vacuum concentrator. Each well was resuspended in 60uL of 0.2% formic acid in HPLC grade water. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS using a Thermo Easy nLC-1000 in tandem with a Q-Exactive benchtop orbitrap mass spectrometer. 5uL of sample from each well was subject to a 120 minute gradient (0-45% buffer B; buffer B = 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile) on a 2cm Acclaim 100 PepMap Nanoviper C18 trappling column with a New Objective PicoChip reverse-phase analytical LC column.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files comprising an entire gel lane were grouped and searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14's SEQUEST search algorithm using the reviewed, non-redundant Mus musculus complete proteome retrieved from Uniprot KB on October 16, 2015. Search parameters were as follows: event detector mass precision= 2ppm; spectrum selector minimum precursor mass = 350Da, maximum precursor mass = 5000Da; maximum collision energy = 1000; input data digestion enzyme = trypsin (full) with maximum missed cleavage sites = 2; precursor mass tolerance =10ppm with fragment mass tolerance =0.01Da; dynamic modifications to peptides = oxidation of methionine(+15.995Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984Da); static modifications to peptides = carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da). Precursor Ion Areas (extracted ion chromatograms) were included for each protein identified from the raw data. Search results were filtered using a minimum of 2 medium confidence peptides/protein. Magellan storage files from all n=10 lanes were opened in unison using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 software package. Protein lists were exported to Microsoft Excel. Protein abundance was determined by looking at each protein's 'Area'. 'Area's for an entire lane were totaled to give a relative TIC, and each protein's individual 'Area' was divided by the TIC to give a 'proportion-of-total' value per sample. Untreated and Treated proteins were compared. To determine the significance of proteins that changed in abundance between experimental conditions, a two-tailed, heteroscedastic Student's T-test was applied to the protein data arrays. P-values were uploaded to qvalue.princeton.edu to generate false-discovery rates (q-values)for the changes in abundance observed for each protein. Fold-changes in abundance were generated using log2 ratios of the average treated and untreated protein abundance. Using q-values and the log2 ratios, proteins deemed to be more abundant in a single experimental condition with high-confidence were uploaded to the DAVID v6.7 web tool and enriched for GO-identifiers and KEGG pathway identifiers.

### Publication Abstract
The murine mouse lymphoblastic lymphoma cell line (EL4) tumor model is an established in vivo apoptosis model for the investigation of novel cancer imaging agents and immunological treatments due to the rapid and significant response of the EL4 tumors to cyclophosphamide and etoposide combination chemotherapy. Despite the utility of this model system in cancer research, little is known regarding the molecular details of in vivo tumor cell death. Here, we report the first in-depth quantitative proteomic analysis of the changes that occur in these tumors upon cyclophosphamide and etoposide treatment in vivo. Using a label-free quantitative proteomic approach a total of 5838 proteins were identified in the treated and untreated tumors, of which 875 were determined to change in abundance with statistical significance. Initial analysis of the data reveals changes that may have been predicted, such as the downregulation of ribosomes, but demonstrates the robustness of the dataset. Analysis of the dataset also reveals the unexpected downregulation of caspase-3 and an upregulation of caspase-6 in addition to a global upregulation of lysosomal proteins in the bulk of the tumor.

### Keywords
Tumor death, Chemotherapy, Proteomics, El4 lymphoma, Mouse tumor

### Affiliations
University of Alberta Department of Biochemistry
Associate Professor, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry, University of Alberta

### Submitter
David Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Richard P Fahlman
Associate Professor, Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry, University of Alberta


