### Accession
PXD029010

### Title
Molecular insight into palmitic acid-induced hepatocellular carcinoma cell death.

### Description
The accumulation of lipid is a histological and biochemical hallmark of obesity-associated hepato-steatosis.Moreover, growing evidenceindicatesthathigher free fatty acids (FFAs) level in hepatocytes affects a myriad of biological processes leading to excessive metabolic imbalance, increased reactive oxygen species (ROS), deregulated autophagy, and impairment of mitochondrial and ER stress, that collectively drives cell death. Lipotoxicity and cell death mechanisms have been studied for many years. However, the molecular signals that link these two events during lipid stress remain poorly understood. From the very beginning, to systematically study hepato-lipotoxicity, HepG2 treated with PA providentially recapitulates the global lipotoxic responses, including insulin resistance to hepatocyte death. Therefore, using this cell-based model system, we pursued a comprehensive, differential quantitative approach where measurements of protein dynamics are analysed by mass spectrometry. Given that indispensable information, successive temporal phosphoproteomics dynamics are allowed us to in-depth analysis of lipotoxicity associated mechanistic network of cell death more precisely.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amount of proteins (~100 μg) fromcontrol vehicle (BSA) and treated (0.5 mM palmitic acid) conditions were subjected for tryptic digestion (1:20 enzyme-substrate ratio) at 37°C followed by reduction and alkylation. The peptides were labelled by iTRAQ 4-plex Kit (AB Sciex, USA). The experiment was performed with two biological replicates. Control vehicle and PA treated samples were labelled with 114, 115, 116 and 117 iTRAQ tags, respectively.

### Data Protocol
For differential proteomics, proteins identification and relative quantification were performed by ProteinPilot software (v 4.5; AB Sciex, USA) using Paragon algorithm. Proteins were identified with 1% FDR, and the results were exported to Excel for manual data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
Nutrient surplus and consequent free fatty acid accumulation in the liver cause hepatosteatosis. The exposure of free fatty acids to cultured hepatocyte and hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines induces cellular stress, organelle adaptation, and subsequent cell death. Despite many studies, the mechanism associated with lipotoxicity and subsequent cell death still remains poorly understood. Here, we have used the proteomics approach to circumvent the mechanism for lipotoxicity using hepatocellular carcinoma cells as a model. Our quantitative proteomics data revealed that ectopic lipids accumulation in cells severely affects the ubiquitin-proteasomal system. The palmitic acid (PA) partially lowered the expression of deubiquitinating enzyme USP7 which subsequently destabilizes p53 and promotes mitotic entry of cells. Our global phosphoproteomics analysis also provides strong evidence of an altered cell cycle checkpoint proteins' expression that abrogates early G2/M checkpoints recovery with damaged DNA and induced mitotic catastrophe leading to hepatocyte death. We observe that palmitic acid prefers apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) mediated cell death by depolarizing mitochondria and translocating AIF to the nucleus. In summary, the present study provides evidence of PA-induced hepatocellular death mediated by deubiquitinase USP7 downregulation and subsequent mitotic catastrophe.

### Keywords
Hepg2, Palmitic acid, Itraq analysis, Lipotoxicity

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India.
Regional Centre for Biotechnology

### Submitter
TUSHAR KANTI MAITI

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Tushar Kanti Maiti
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India.


