### Accession
PXD023135

### Title
Dysregulation of the cGAS/STING axis due to COPI-deficiency

### Description
COPA syndrome is caused by mutations in the COP- subunit of coatomer protein complex 1 (COP-I), which participates in retrograde vesicular trafficking of proteins from the Golgi to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Disease manifests early in life with arthritis, lung disease, kidney dysfunction and systemic inflammation associated with NFB and type I interferon. We sought to identify the upstream innate immune sensor that drives inflammation in COPA syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 3 x 106 HEK293T cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes. The following morning cells were transiently transfected with 10 µg of either pEF-BOS empty vector control or pEF-BOS-mCitrine-hSTING plasmid DNA. After 48 hours cells were lysed in 750 µL 1 x Nonidet P-40 (NP-40) [1% Nonidet P-40, 10% Glycerol, 20nM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EGTA, 10mM NaPPi, 5mM NaF, 1mM, Na3VO4] supplemented with 1mM PMSF and 1 x cOmplete protease inhibitors (Roche Biochemicals). WCLs were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 min at 4 deg C. For each IP sample, 1 µg of mouse 1gG2A monoclonal GFP antibody (ThermoFisher, [E36] A-11120) was crosslinked to 50 ul of Protein A Dynabeads (Thermo Scientific, 10002D) using 5 mM BS3 (Thermo Scientific) and incubated for 30 min at RT. The crosslinking reaction was quenched by adding 1 M Tris-HCl [pH 7.4]. Antibody-crosslinked beads Protein A Dynabeads were thoroughly washed before 50 ul was then added to each IP sample and incubated on a rotator at 4 deg C for 2 hours. Beads were then washed four times with 1 x NP-40 using a DynaMag-2 magnetic holder (Thermo Scientific) before proteins were eluted with 0.5% SDS in PBS. Eluted protein material was subjected to tryptic digestion using the FASP method as previously described. Peptides were lyophilised using CentriVap (Labconco) prior to reconstituting in 60 μl 0.1% FA/2% acetonitrile (ACN). Peptide mixtures (2 μl) were separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 fused silica column (I.D. 75 µm, O.D. 360 μm x 25 cm length) packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks), using a nano-flow HPLC (M-class, Waters). The HPLC was coupled to an Impact II UHR-QqTOF mass spectrometer (Bruker) using a CaptiveSpray source and nanoBooster at 0.20 Bar using acetonitrile.  Peptides were loaded directly onto the column at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min with 0.1% formic acid in MilliQ water and eluted with a 90 min linear gradient from 2 to 34% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Raw files consisting of high-resolution MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine as previously described. Extracted peak lists were searched against the reviewed Homo sapiens (UniProt, March 2019) database as well as a separate reverse decoy database to empirically assess the false discovery rate (FDR) using strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. LFQ quantification was selected, with a minimum ratio count of 2. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at an FDR of 1%. Only unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with intensity values present in at least 2 out of 3 replicates per group. Statistical analyses were performed using LFQAnalyst.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Copa syndrome, Cyclic gmp-amp-synthase (cgas), Type i interferons, Stimulator of interferon genes (sting), Inflammation, Retrograde trafficking

### Affiliations
WEHI
Laboratory Head Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, AUS 3052

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr A/Prof Seth Masters
Laboratory Head Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, AUS 3052


