### Accession
PXD026818

### Title
CD68+ region of rat scar tissue by AutoSTOMP

### Description
To test the ability of the Automated Spatially Targeted Optical Micro Proteomics (AutoSTOMP) protocol to selectively biotinylate structures of interest within tissue sections we first examined a rat myocardial infarction model. In this model, trauma caused by ligation and infiltrating immune cells causes fibroblast activation and deposition of scar tissue that ultimately impairs cardiac function. Macrophages are thought to play a role in inflammatory regulation and damaged cell turnover in the tissue. We decide to grab the proteome of the macrophage rich regions.

### Sample Protocol
8-week-old male Sprague-Dawley rats (Envigo) by left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery permanent ligation.  1-week post-surgery, the scar region was dissected, frozen in liquid-nitrogen-chilled isopentane, and embedded in OTC. 7 μm cryosections were acquired and processed by AutoSTOMP protocol. https://github.com/boris2008/AutoSTOMP_2.0.git. Rat cardiac sections were lysed in the hydroxylamine lysis buffer (1 M NH2OH−HCl, 8 M urea, 0.2 M K2CO3, pH = 9.0) at 45 oC for 17 h to extract proteins. Proteins were precipitated on streptavidin beads. The bound proteins was eluted, processed, and further characterized on Thermo Electron Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra data were parsed by MaxQuant (versions 1.6.14.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). The MaxQuant results were then analyzed following the label-free quantification (LFQ) data analysis protocol. Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR < 0.05) and t-SNE clustering were applied in Perseus (versions 1.6.14.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). The resulting data were plotted in R (www.r-project.org) with the installed packages “ggplot2”, “ggrepel”, “heatmap.2” or using GraphPad Prism (version 8.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
Tissue microenvironment properties like blood flow, extracellular matrix, or proximity to immune-infiltrate are important regulators of cell biology. However, methods to study regional protein expression in the native tissue environment are limited. To address this need, we developed a novel approach to visualize, purify, and measure proteins <i>in situ</i> using automated spatially targeted optical microproteomics (AutoSTOMP). Here, we report custom codes to specify regions of heterogeneity in a tissue section and UV-biotinylate proteins within those regions. We have developed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)/MS-compatible biochemistry to purify those proteins and label-free quantification methodology to determine protein enrichment in target cell types or structures relative to nontarget regions in the same sample. These tools were applied to (a) identify inflammatory proteins expressed by CD68<sup>+</sup> macrophages in rat cardiac infarcts and (b) characterize inflammatory proteins enriched in IgG4<sup>+</sup> lesions in human esophageal tissues. These data indicate that AutoSTOMP is a flexible approach to determine regional protein expression <i>in situ</i> on a range of primary tissues and clinical biopsies where current tools and sample availability are limited.

### Keywords
Autostomp, Rat cardiac scar, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Virginia

### Submitter
BOCHENG YIN

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah E. Ewald
University of Virginia


