### Accession
PXD008643

### Title
THE EXOPROTEOME PROFILES OF THREE STAPHYLOCOCCUS SAPROPHYTICUS STRAINS REVEAL DIVERSITY IN PROTEIN SECRETION CONTENT

### Description
Staphylococcus saprophyticus is a gram-positive microorganism responsible for urinary tract infections (UTIs). Although some virulence factors have been characterized, such as urease, autolysins, adhesins, hemagglutinins and cell wall proteins, large-scale proteomic studies have not been performed within this species. In our research, we performed the characterization of the exoproteome from three clinical S. saprophyticus strains (ATCC 15305-capsular strain, 7108 non-capsular strain and 9325, a strain containing a thick capsule) which were cultured until the stationary phase of bacterial growth by using mass spectrometry approach. In these strains we observed a core of 72 secreted proteins. In addition, we identified proteins that were not secreted by all the strains. It was possible to detect diversity in the protein profiles of the exoproteomes, and consequently proteins that were differentially expressed were identified. Interestingly, strain 7108 presented no secretion of three antigenic proteins, including the classical SsaA antigen. In addition, the level of antigenic proteins secreted by strain 9325 was higher than in ATCC 15305. This result was confirmed by Western blot analysis using anti-SsaA polyclonal antibodies, and no production or secretion of SsaA was detected in strain 7108. Moreover, when compared with the other strains that were analyzed, it was possible to detect higher levels of proteases secreted by strain 7108. The results reveal diversity in protein secretion among strains. This research is an important first step towards understanding the variability in S. saprophyticus and could be significant in explaining differences in virulence.

### Sample Protocol
The digests were dried and the peptides were resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10. The obtained peptides were further separated by RPRP-HPLC using a nanoACQUITYTM system (Waters Corp). Each sample was run in three technical replicates. The column loads were 5 µg of protein digests for the analysis of samples in triplicate. First, the samples were separated in 5 fractions in the mobile phase at pH 10. Each fraction was further separated by reverse phase chromatography with a mobile phase at pH 2.5. Label-free data-independent scanning (MSE) experiments were performed with a Synapt HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK), which switched between low collision energy MS (3 eV) and elevated collision energies MSE (12–40 eV) applied to the trap “T-wave” CID cell with argon gas.

### Data Protocol
The ProteinLynx Global server v.2.5.2 (PLGS) with ExpressionE informatics v.2.5.2 was used to proper spectral processing, database searching conditions and quantitative comparisons. The database was randomized to access the false-positive rate of identification (4%). Trypsin was the primary digest reagent, allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Carbamidomethyl-C was specified as fixed modification and phosphorylation STY and oxidation M were used as variable modifications. The minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, the minimum fragment ion matches per protein, and the minimum peptide matches per protein were, respectively set as 2, 5 and 1. It was used 50 ppm as mass variation tolerance. A protein detected in all replicates presenting a variance coefficient less than 10% was used to normalize the expression data to compare the protein levels between control and argentilactone-treated conditions

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus saprophyticus is a gram-positive microorganism responsible for urinary tract infections (UTIs). Although some virulence factors are characterized, such as urease, autolysins, adhesins and hemagglutinins, large-scale proteomic studies have not been performed within this species. We performed the characterization of the exoproteome from three S. saprophyticus strains: the reference strain ATCC 15,305, a non-capsular strain 7108 and the 9325 strain containing a thick capsule which were cultured in BHI medium and culture supernatants were analysed by using mass spectrometry approach. We observed a core of 72 secreted proteins. In addition, it was possible to detect diversity in the protein profiles of the exoproteomes. Interestingly, strain 7108 presented no secretion of three antigenic proteins, including the classical SsaA antigen. In addition, the level of antigenic proteins secreted by strain 9325 was higher than in ATCC 15,305. This result was confirmed by Western blot analysis using anti-SsaA polyclonal antibodies, and no production/ secretion of SsaA was detected in strain 7108. Transcriptional data shows that 7108 strain produces transcripts encoding SsaA, suggesting post-transcriptional regulation occurs in this strain. Moreover, when compared with the other strains that were analyzed, it was possible to detect higher levels of proteases secreted by strain 7108 and higher levels of antigenic proteins and transglycosylases secreted by 9325 strain. The results reveal diversity in protein secretion among strains. This research is an important first step towards understanding the variability in S. saprophyticus exoproteome profile and could be significant in explaining differences among strains.

### Keywords
Antigenic proteins, Proteases, Exoproteome, Diversity, Ssaa secretion, Staphylococcus saprophyticus

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil 
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil

### Submitter
CLAYTON BORGES

### Lab Head
Dr Juliana Alves Parente Rocha
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil


