### Accession
PXD036434

### Title
Panomics reveals patient individuality as the major driver of colorectal cancer progression

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent cancers, with over one million new cases per year. Overall, prognosis of CRC largely depends on the disease stage and metastatic status. As precision oncology for patients with CRC continues to improve, this study aimed to integrate genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic analyses to identify significant differences in expression during CRC progression using a unique set of paired patient samples while considering tumour heterogeneity.
We analysed fresh-frozen tissue samples prepared under strict cryogenic conditions of matched healthy colon mucosa, colorectal carcinoma, and liver metastasis from the same patients. Somatic mutations of known cancer-related genes were analysed using Illumina's TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Panel; the transcriptome was assessed comprehensively using Clariom D microarrays. The global proteome was evaluated by liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry (LC‒MS/MS) and validated by two-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis. Subsequent unsupervised principal component clustering, statistical comparisons, and gene set enrichment analyses were calculated based on differential expression results.
Although panomics revealed low RNA and protein expression of CA1, CLCA1, MATN2, AHCYL2, and FCGBP in malignant tissues compared to healthy colon mucosa, no differentially expressed RNA or protein targets were detected between tumour and metastatic tissues. Subsequent intra-patient comparisons revealed highly specific expression differences (e.g., SRSF3, OLFM4, and CEACAM5) associated with patient-specific transcriptomes and proteomes.
Our research results highlight the importance of inter- and intra-tumour heterogeneity as well as individual, patient-paired evaluations for clinical studies. In addition to changes among groups reflecting CRC progression, we identified significant expression differences between normal colon mucosa, primary tumour, and liver metastasis samples from individuals, which might accelerate implementation of precision oncology in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Paired tissue samples from normal adjacent colon mucosa (NM), corresponding primary colorectal carcinomas (T), and corresponding liver metastases (LM) were obtained from four patients (P1-4). For one patient, eight samples were collected in total: normal colon mucosa, six samples from different locations within the primary tumor, and one sample from the corresponding liver metastasis, respectively. Briefly, all patients were diagnosed with metastasized colorectal carcinoma and received a primary resection. Samples were surgically removed at the Department of Surgery, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, and stored in liquid nitrogen until further processing. The study was approved by the local Ethics Committee of the University of Lübeck (No. 07-124 and 16-282). Equal aliquots of 47 µg of protein from each protein sample were diluted with DIGE buffer [30 mM TRIS, 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS] to a total volume of 50 µl and prepared using a filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP). Dried protein pellets were diluted in 40 µl of 5% formic acid before mass spectrometric analysis and half of the sample was prepared on a StageTip as previously described. Peptides were separated chromatographically using a 25 cm long C18 column (SilicaTip™ 360 µm OD, 100 µm ID, New Objective, USA) in an EASY-nLC1000™ nanoflow LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). With a flow rate of 300 nL/min, peptides were eluted at a linear gradient from 2 to 26% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for 120 min. Mass spectrometric detection of eluted peptides was carried out using a Q Exactive™ Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in the data-dependent mode. The survey mass spectrum was acquired at the resolution of 140,000 (@ m/z 200) in the range of m/z 300-1650 targeting 5·106 ions. The MS/MS data for the 16 most intense precursors were obtained with a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) set at 28% normalized collision energy following isolation of precursor ions with 4 Th targeting 2·105 ions with charge z>1 at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using Raw2MGF (in-house-written program) and the resulting Mascot generic files (.mgf) were searched against a concatenated SwissProt protein database (Human taxonomy) using Mascot 2.3.0 search engine (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). Carbamidomethylations of cysteins was set as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modiﬁcations. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed and the mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and to 0.05 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Only peptides having individual MS/MS Mascot score above signiﬁcant threshold corresponding to E<0.05 were accepted. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides with a significant score and at 0.25% false discovery rate (FDR) were considered for further quantification. Acquired mass spectra were analyzed with in-house developed Quanti software (v2.5.4.4) and relative abundance of proteins identified with ≥ 2 unique peptides. Minimal requirements were a peptide length of six amino acids and a false discovery rate of 0.01. The areas of the chromatographic peaks were taken as the peptide abundances and the same peptides were quantiﬁed in each nLC-MS/MS data file using accurate mass and the order of elution as identifiers.   Following settings were applied: (1) enzyme "trypsin", (2) fixed modifications "cysteine carbamidomethyl", (3) optional modifications "methionine oxidation, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation, N-terminal acetylation" and (4) a maximum of two missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Patient individuality, Colorectal cancer, Tumor heterogeneity, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck Germany

### Submitter
Thorben Sauer

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Gemoll
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck Germany


