### Accession
PXD023934

### Title
Exploring the glycosylation state of the Cryptosporidium parvum CpTSP protein family-Cman pulldowns

### Description
Cryptosporidium parvum is a zoonotic apicomplexan parasite and a common cause of diarrheal disease worldwide. The development of vaccines to prevent or limit infection remains an important goal for tackling these diarrheal diseases, which are a significant cause of infant morbidity in the developing world. The only approved vaccine against an apicomplexan parasite targets conserved adhesins possessing a thrombospondin repeat (TSR) domains. Orthologous TSR domain-containing proteins are commonplace in the apicomplexa and C. parvum possess 12 such proteins. Here, we explore the molecular evolution and conservation of these proteins and examine their abundance in C. parvum oocysts to assess the likelihood that they may be useful as vaccine candidates. We go onto examine the glycosylation states of these proteins using antibody-enabled and ZIC-HILIC enrichment techniques, which revealed that these proteins are modified with C-linked Hex and N-linked Hex5-6HexNAc2 glycans.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µl denaturation buffer (20 mM NH4HCO3, 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea) with vortexing and the protein concentration re-determined by BCA assay. DTT (1 µl, 1 M) was added and the sample nutated for 60 min at 22 °C to complete peptide dissolution. 2-Chloroacetamide (50 µl, 100 mM) was added and the sample nutated with the exclusion of light for 60 min at 22 °C. The alkylation reaction was quenched with more DTT (4 µl, 1 M) and nutated for 10 min at 22 °C. The sample was diluted with 465 µl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 before the addition of 20 µg trypsin (Promega) and incubation for 16 h at 25 °C and 500 rpm. The sample was acidified by the addition of 20 µl HCO2H, centrifuged (10,000×g, 10 min, 22 °C) and the supernatant applied to a 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak column (Waters) conditioned in Buffer A (0.1% TFA, 2% MeCN, 97.9% H2O). The column was washed with Buffer A (3×800 µl), eluted with 800 µl Buffer B (0.1% TFA, 80% MeCN, 19.9% H2O) and the eluate dried on a SpeedVac system (ThermoFisher) then stored at -20 °C until further use.  5G12 and an isotype control IgG (100 µg) were separately incubated with protein G agarose beads (500 µl of a 50% suspension) in IP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM Na3PO4) for 16 h at 4 °C. The agarose beads were collected in a spin cup (Pierce) by centrifugation (500×g, 5 min, 4 °C) and washed three times with 500 µl IP buffer. The purified tryptic peptides were resuspended in 1 ml IP buffer and 100 µl samples added to ten microcentrifuge tubes. Five tubes were treated with 100 µl of the 5G12-coupled agarose beads and the other five tubes were treated with the 100 µl of the isotype control-coupled beads, then the samples were nutated for 4 h at 22 °C. The beads from each sample were collected in a spin cup (Pierce) by centrifugation (500×g, 5 min, 4 °C) and washed five times with 200 µl IP buffer. Peptides were eluted from the beads using two consecutive treatments with 200 µl 0.2% TFA in MilliQ H2O. Peptides from each of the five treatment and control samples were captured from solution using C18 stage tips, eluted using 0.1% HCO2H/MeCN 1:4, dried and stored at -20 °C prior to analysis by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptides enriched by 5G12 immunoprecipitation were identified using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4)1. Searches were performed against two C. parvum IOWA strain databases (UniProt Accession: UP000006726 and CryptoDB version 48) with carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification and variable modifications set as oxidation of methionine (M), Hex (W) and dHexHex (S/T). Searches were performed with trypsin cleavage specificity allowing 2 missed cleavage events. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the main search, with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0% set for protein and peptide identifications. The “match between run”2 setting was enabled to improve the detection of peptides between samples. The output protein group was processed within the Perseus (v1.4.0.6)3 analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior to quantitative analysis using the peptide ion intensities. Missing values were imputed based on the observed total peptide intensities with a range of 0.3σ and a downshift of 2.0σ. Samples were grouped based on the antibody used for the enrichment (5G12 or isotype control). The Student T-test was used to assign p-values and multiple hypothesis correction was undertaken using a Benjamini Hochberg correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptosporidium, Thrombospondin repeat, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.


