### Accession
PXD027493

### Title
Comparing the plasma membrane proteins of Nek1+/+ and Nek1Kat2J/Kat2J MEFs

### Description
Mass spectrometry data comparing the plasma membrane proteins of Nek1-WT and Nek1-Kat2J MEFs enriched by Pierce™ Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit.

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface protein isolation The isolation of cell surface proteins was conducted by following the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce™ Cell Surface Protein Isolation Kit, #89881, Thermo Scientific). Briefly, MEFs were seeded in 150 mm dishes at the density of 3 million cells per dish overnight. Six dishes were prepared for each sample. One vial of Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin was dissolved in 96 mL of ice-cold PBS. MEFs were washed with ice cold PBS quickly and 15mL of the biotin solution was added to each dish. Plates were placed on orbital shaker and gently agitated for 30 min at 4°C. Quenching solution (0.37 mL) was added to each dish to quench the reaction after the agitation. Cells were scraped and centrifuged down at 500 × g for 3 min and supernatant was discarded. Cells were washed with ice cold TBS. Lysis buffer supplemented with proteases inhibitors was added to cells and sonicated on ice to lyse the cells. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 2 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and incubated with prewashed NeutrAvidin Agarose at room temperature with end-over-end mixing using a rotator for 60 min. The NeutrAvidin Agarose was then washed with washing buffer supplemented with proteases inhibitors and eluted with SDS-PAGE sample buffer supplemented with 50mM DTT. Eluted proteins were precipitated with TCA and subjected to quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Methods for Protein Sequence Analysis by LC-MS/MS. Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility  Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1).  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.    On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).    As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (3).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.      References: 1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91 3. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994

### Publication Abstract
Loss-of-function mutations in NEK1 gene, which encodes a serine/threonine kinase, are involved in human developmental disorders and ALS. Here we show that NEK1 regulates retromer-mediated endosomal trafficking by phosphorylating VPS26B. NEK1 deficiency disrupts endosomal trafficking of plasma membrane proteins and cerebral proteome homeostasis to promote mitochondrial and lysosomal dysfunction and aggregation of &#x3b1;-synuclein. The metabolic and proteomic defects of NEK1 deficiency disrupts the integrity of blood-brain barrier (BBB) by promoting lysosomal degradation of A20, a key modulator of RIPK1, thus sensitizing cerebrovascular endothelial cells to RIPK1-dependent apoptosis and necroptosis. Genetic inactivation of RIPK1 or metabolic rescue with ketogenic diet can prevent postnatal lethality and BBB damage in NEK1 deficient mice. Inhibition of RIPK1 reduces neuroinflammation and aggregation of &#x3b1;-synuclein in the brains of NEK1 deficient mice. Our study identifies a molecular mechanism by which retromer trafficking and metabolism regulates cerebrovascular integrity, cerebral proteome homeostasis and RIPK1-mediated neuroinflammation.

### Keywords
Plasma membrane proteins, Nek1, Retromer

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Huibing Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junying Yuan
Harvard Medical School


