### Accession
PXD006799

### Title
Oxygen-Sensitive Remodeling of Central Carbon Metabolism by Archaic eIF5B

### Description
The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5B (eIF5B) is a homolog of the ancient IF2, a translation factor that facilitates initiator methionine-tRNAiMet (met-tRNAiMet) delivery to ribosomes in prokaryotes. IF2 evolved during early anaerobic cellular life and can be traced back to the last universal common ancestor. Here, we show that eIF5B is essential for eukaryotic hypoxia tolerance, reminiscent of how IF2 supports prokaryotic anaerobiosis. Global protein synthesis analyses identified eIF5B as a hypoxia-specific translation factor involved in translocating met-tRNAiMet to initiating ribosomes. Systemic translatome studies revealed that eIF5B-dependent mRNAs encode proteins of central carbon metabolism, fructolysis, and other pathways enhanced in organisms inhabiting hypoxic niches. These pathways rely preferentially on eIF5B rather than eIF2, the canonical initiation factor that delivers met-tRNAiMet during aerobic eukaryotic protein synthesis. We suggest that eIF5B/IF2 was retained during evolution of the aerobic eukaryotic lineage to cope with episodes of oxygen deprivation.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were re-suspended in 100 uL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.3), 8 M Urea, and DTT was added to reduce cysteines at a final concentration of 10 mM.Cysteines were reduced at 60°C for 1 hour. Sample was cooled to room temperature and iodoacetamide was added to a final volume of 20 mM. Samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Samples were then acetone precipitated overnight, and protein precipitates were centrifuged at 23,000 g for 15 min. Precipitates were re-suspended in 50 uL of NH4HCO3 (pH 8.3), and MS grade Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added to a final protease:protein ratio of 1:50 and samples were digested overnight at 37 0C. Samples were lyophilized and re-suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reverse Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample was fractionated into 8 high pH fractions. Fractionated peptides were lyophilized, and lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a 75 μm x 2 cm PepMap 100 Easy-Spray pre-column filled with 3 μm C18 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by an in-line 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2 μm C18 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a pressure of 700 BAR. Peptides were eluted over 120 to 240 min at a rate of 250 nl/min using a 0 to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid. For ribosome density fractionated samples, “free” fractions were eluted over 120 min each, while “40/60/80S” and “polysome” fractions were eluted over 180 each. eIF5B-depleted and control samples were eluted over 240 min each. Peptides were introduced by nanoelectrospray into an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher) outfitted with a nanospray source and EASY-nLC split-free nano17 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument method consisted of one MS full scan(400–1500 m/z) in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, an automatic gain control target of 1e6 with a maximum ion injection of 200 ms, one microscan, and a resolution of 240,000. Ten datadependent MS/MS scans were performed in the linear ion trap using the ten most intense ions at a normalized collision energy of 35. The MS and MS/MS scans were obtained in parallel fashion. In MS/MS mode automatic gain control targets were 1e5 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. A minimum ion intensity of 5000 was required to trigger an MS/MS spectrum. The dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count with a repeat duration of 30 s and exclusion duration of 15 s. Raw MS files acquired from the mass spectrometer were processed using PEAKS software (Bioinformatics Solutions Incorporated).

### Data Protocol
Data was loaded into the software program and data from each fraction was refined to merge scans within 2 min and 10.0 ppm. Spectra with PEAKS filter scores <0.5 were excluded. De novo sequencing and database searching was done using a precursor mass cutoff of 10.0 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Carbidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02 Da) residues was selected as a fixed modification while variable modifications included 13C6-15N2 SILAC on K (8.01Da), 13C8-15N2 SILAC on R (10.02), Oxidation of M (15.99). Label Free Quantification was performed in PEAKS using SILAC labels.

### Publication Abstract
Protein expression evolves under greater evolutionary constraint than mRNA levels, and translation efficiency represents a primary determinant of protein levels during stimuli adaptation. This raises the question as to the translatome remodelers that titrate protein output from mRNA populations. Here, we uncover a network of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that enhances the translation efficiency of glycolytic proteins in cells responding to oxygen deprivation. A system-wide proteomic survey of translational engagement identifies a family of oxygen-regulated RBPs that functions as a switch of glycolytic intensity. Tandem mass tag-pulse SILAC (TMT-pSILAC) and RNA sequencing reveals that each RBP controls a unique but overlapping portfolio of hypoxic responsive proteins. These RBPs collaborate with the hypoxic protein synthesis apparatus, operating as a translation efficiency checkpoint that integrates upstream mRNA signals to activate anaerobic metabolism. This system allows anoxia-resistant animals and mammalian cells to initiate anaerobic glycolysis and survive hypoxia. We suggest that an oxygen-sensitive RBP cluster controls anaerobic metabolism to confer hypoxia tolerance.

### Keywords
Eif5b, Oxygen, Translation, Matrix, If2, Evolution, Hypoxia, Carbon metabolism

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA 2Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Lee
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA 2Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA


