### Accession
PXD014376

### Title
Membrane-Enriched Brain Proteome Across Stages of Alzheimer's Disease

### Description
Previous systems-based proteomic approaches have characterized alterations in protein co-expression networks of unfractionated asymptomatic (AsymAD) and symptomatic Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brains.  However, it remains unclear how sample fractionation and sub-proteomic analysis influences the organization of these protein networks and their relationship to clinicopathological traits of disease.  In this proof-of-concept study, we performed a systems-based sub-proteomic analysis of membrane-enriched post-mortem brain samples from pathology-free control, AsymAD, and AD brains (n=6 per group).  Label-free mass spectrometry based on peptide ion intensity was used to quantify the 18 membrane-enriched fractions.  Differential expression and weighted protein co-expression network analysis (WPCNA) were then used to identify and characterize modules of co-expressed proteins most significantly altered between the groups.  We identified a total of 27 modules of co-expressed membrane-associated proteins.  In contrast to the unfractionated proteome, these networks did not map strongly to cell-type specific markers.  Instead, these modules were principally organized by their associations with a wide variety of membrane-bound compartments and organelles.  Of these, the mitochondrion was associated with the greatest number of modules, followed by modules linked to the cell surface compartment.  In addition, we resolved networks with strong associations to the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, nucleus, and other membrane-bound organelles.  Fourteen of the 27 modules demonstrated significant correlations with clinical and pathological AD phenotypes.  These results revealed that the proteins within individual compartments feature a heterogeneous array of AD-associated expression patterns, particularly during preclinical stages of disease.  In conclusion, this systems-based analysis of the membrane-associated AsymAD brain proteome yielded a unique network organization highly linked to cellular compartmentalization.  Further study of this membrane-associated proteome may reveal novel insight into the complex pathways governing the earliest stages of disease.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane Enrichment All tissue samples were derived from the middle frontal gyrus, corresponding to Brodmann areas 8 and 9, with minimal inclusion of white matter. This region was selected because it demonstrates cortical thinning during preclinical AD and its CERAD scores tend to mirror the brain as a whole [18]. The membrane-enrichment strategy employed was modified from previously published methods [19-21]. In brief, frozen tissue (200 ± 20 mg) was first homogenized in a low salt, buffered sucrose solution (0.24 M sucrose, 25 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Total tissue homogenate (H) was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1500 x g (Eppendorf 5417C) and the supernatant (S1’) removed. The remaining pellet (P1’) was resuspended in sucrose buffer and again centrifuged for 10 minutes at 1500x g. This supernatant (S1”) was combined with S1’ to generate S1. The remaining pellet (P1), comprised largely of unhomogenized tissue, large cellular debris, and nuclear components, was stored at -80°C.  S1 was then centrifuged at 180,000x g for one hour at 4°C (Beckman Optima TLX ultracentrifuge, TLA 100.4 rotor). Afterward, the supernatant (S2), comprised of cytosol-enriched sample, was removed and stored at -80°C. The resulting pellet (P2) was resuspended in 1 mL of 0.1 sodium carbonate pH 11 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich) and sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) three times for five seconds each at 20% amplitude (maximum intensity). The sonicated sample was then centrifuged at 180,000x g for one hour at 4°C. The supernatant (S3) was removed and stored at -80°C and the resulting membrane-enriched pellet (P3) was dissolved in 100 µL 8M urea to generate the final membrane fraction (M). The H, S1, S2, and M fractions of an individual control case were analyzed by silver stain as previously described [19] (Figure S1A).  Briefly, protein (1 ug) from each fraction was separated on a 10% SDS gel. To ensure equal loading, protein concentrations of all fractions were determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method (Pierce, Rockford, IL). The gel was then fixed in a solution containing 50% methanol and 5% acetic acid for 10 minutes.  After a brief wash in deionized water, the gel was rinsed in 0.02% sodium thiosulfate for 1 minute, stained with 0.1% silver nitrate for 10 minutes, and developed in a solution of 3% sodium carbonate and 0.05% formaldehyde until protein bands were sufficiently stained.  All 18 membrane-enriched fractions were also analyzed using this silver staining protocol (Figure S1B).

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Based Proteomics In preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis, individual membrane (M) fractions (20 µg) from each case including internal standards was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 minutes at 37°C and then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at 37°C in the dark [22].  The alkylated samples were separated on a 10% SDS gel and stained with Coomassie Blue G-250.  Each sample lane was cut into five gel bands corresponding to molecular weight ranges to increase the depth of coverage of the proteome. The gel pieces were then digested overnight in 12.5 µg/ml trypsin at 37°C. Subsequently, the samples were extracted in a solution of 5% formic acid and 50% acetonitrile (ACN).  The resulting peptides were analyzed by high resolution LC-MS/MS as essentially described [22].  An equal amount of each peptide sample was resuspended in loading buffer, comprised of 0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, and 1% acetonitrile. The samples were then loaded onto a 20 cm nano-LC column (internal diameter 100 µm) packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and eluted over 1 hour with 4-80% buffer B reverse phase gradient (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, 1% acetonitrile in water; Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) generated by a NanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation).  Peptides were ionized with 2.0 kV electrospray ionization voltage from a nano-ESI source (Thermo) on a hybrid LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo).  Data dependent acquisition of centroid MS spectra at 30,000 resolution and MS/MS spectra were obtained in the LTQ following collision induced dissociation (collision energy 35%, activation Q 0.25, activation time 30 ms) for the top 10 precursor ions with charge determined by the acquisition software to be z ≥ 2. The SageN Sorcerer SEQUEST 3.5 algorithm was used to search and match MS/MS spectra to a complete semi-tryptic human proteome database (NCBI reference sequence revision 50, with 66,652 entries) including pseudo-reversed decoy sequences [23, 24] and the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP version 2012.01.01) with a 20 ppm mass accuracy threshold. Only b and y ions were considered during the database match. In addition, Xcorr and ΔCn were dynamically increased for groups of peptides organized by a combination of trypticity (fully or partial) and precursor ion charge state to remove false positive hits and decoys until achieving a false discovery rate (FDR) of < 1%.  Searching parameters included precursor ion mass tolerance (20 ppm), partial tryptic restriction, fixed mass shift for modification of carboxamidomethylated Cys (+57.0215 Da) and dynamic mass shift for oxidized Met (+15.9949). Peptide quantification was performed based on the extracted ion current (XIC) measurements of identified peptides [21, 25]. Ion intensities for identified peptides were extracted in full-MS survey scans of high-resolution and a ratio of the peak intensities for the peptide precursor ion was calculated using in-house software as previously published [21, 25-27]. Accurate peptide mass and retention time (RT) was used to derive signal intensity for every peptide across LC-MS/MS runs for each case. For those proteins identified by ≥3 peptides, we averaged the extracted ion intensities for the three most intense tryptic peptides, which yields an abundance measurement for each identified protein with a coefficient of variation (CV) less than ±10% across technical replicates [28].

### Publication Abstract
Previous systems-based proteomic approaches have characterized alterations in protein co-expression networks of unfractionated asymptomatic (AsymAD) and symptomatic Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains. However, it remains unclear how sample fractionation and sub-proteomic analysis influences the organization of these protein networks and their relationship to clinicopathological traits of disease. In this proof-of-concept study, we performed a systems-based sub-proteomic analysis of membrane-enriched post-mortem brain samples from pathology-free control, AsymAD, and AD brains (<i>n</i> = 6 per group). Label-free mass spectrometry based on peptide ion intensity was used to quantify the 18 membrane-enriched fractions. Differential expression and weighted protein co-expression network analysis (WPCNA) were then used to identify and characterize modules of co-expressed proteins most significantly altered between the groups. We identified a total of 27 modules of co-expressed membrane-associated proteins. In contrast to the unfractionated proteome, these networks did not map strongly to cell-type specific markers. Instead, these modules were principally organized by their associations with a wide variety of membrane-bound compartments and organelles. Of these, the mitochondrion was associated with the greatest number of modules, followed by modules linked to the cell surface compartment. In addition, we resolved networks with strong associations to the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and other membrane-bound organelles. A total of 14 of the 27 modules demonstrated significant correlations with clinical and pathological AD phenotypes. These results revealed that the proteins within individual compartments feature a heterogeneous array of AD-associated expression patterns, particularly during the preclinical stages of disease. In conclusion, this systems-based analysis of the membrane-associated AsymAD brain proteome yielded a unique network organization highly linked to cellular compartmentalization. Further study of this membrane-associated proteome may reveal novel insight into the complex pathways governing the earliest stages of disease.

### Keywords
Ad, Transmembrane proteins, Synaptic proteome

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Department of Biochemistry
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine Department of Biochemistry


