### Accession
PXD036279

### Title
Impact of pneumococcal and viral pneumonia on the respiratory and intestinal tract microbiome of mice part II

### Description
With annually 2.56 million deaths worldwide, pneumonia is one of the leading causes of death. Most frequent causative pathogens are Streptococcus pneumoniae and influenza A virus. Lately, the interaction between pathogens, the host and its microbiome gained more attention. A healthy microbiome is known to enhance the immune response towards pathogens, however, our knowledge on how infections affect the microbiome is still scarce. In this study, a meta-omics approach was used to investigate the impact of S. pneumoniae and influenza A virus infection on structure and function of the respiratory and gastrointestinal microbiomes of mice. In particular, the taxonomic composition of the respiratory microbiome was less affected by bacterial colonization and viral infection compared to S. pneumoniae infection. Pneumococcal pneumonia led to reduction of bacterial families and lower diversity in the respiratory microbiome, whereas diversity/richness was unaffected following H1N1 infection. Within the gastrointestinal microbiome we found exclusive changes in structure and function depending on the pneumonia inducing pathogen. Exemplarily, increased abundance of Akkermansiaceae and Spirochaetaceae, as well as decreased amounts of Clostridiaceae in response to S. pneumoniae infection, while increased presence of Enterococcaceae and Staphylococcaceae was specific for viral-induced pneumonia. Investigation of the intestinal microbiomes functional composition revealed reduced expression of flagellin and rubrerythrin and increased levels of ATPase during pneumococcal infection, while increased amounts of acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase and, enoyl-CoA transferase were unique after H1N1 infection. The identification of specific taxonomical and functional profiles during infection with a respective pathogen could deliver new insights in the role of the microbiome during disease and be beneficial for discrimination of pneumococcal- or viral-induced pneumonia.

### Sample Protocol
To extract the total protein amount, a TRIzol based protocol was applied on the cecal samples, following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 100 mg cecal content were resuspended in an appropriate volume of TRIzol and incubated for 5 minutes. Afterwards, 0.2 ml chloroform have been added and centrifugation was performed for separation in phenol-chloroform, inter and aqueous phase. Finally, Phenol-chloroform phase was used for protein extraction. To quantify the amount of protein Pierce BCA Protein Assay was performed on the protein extracts. Afterwards, a 4 - 20 % Criterion TGX precast Gel (BioRAD, Hercules, CA, USA) was loaded with 30 µg of protein of each sample, run for one hour at 150 V and stained with Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250, subsequently. After washing the gel, each lane was cut in 10 pieces, which were further processed to smaller blocks, destained and tryptic digested. To desalt the peptide containing solution, ZipTip purification (C18, Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), was performed, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The desalted peptide mixture was vacuum centrifuged until dryness, and finally resuspended in 10µl of buffer A (0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid). All samples were analyzed by an Easy nLC 1000 coupled online to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 8 µl peptide mixture were loaded into in-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 µm, o.d. 360 µm, length 200 mm; packed with 3.0 µm Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ) were firstly loaded and subsequently eluted with 18 µl of buffer A  at a maximum pressure of 220 bar. Peptide elution was performed in a nonlinear 100 min buffer B (0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid in 99 % (v/v) acetonitrile) gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were measured in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R= 30,000 with lock-mass correction activated. Following each MS-full scan, up to 20 dependent scans were performed in the linear ion trap based on precursors’ intensity after collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis with Mascot Deamon 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK), Scaffold 4.10.0, X!Tandem (version X!Tandem Alanine 2017.2.1.4), and annotation pipeline Prophane was performed as described in Gierse et al. (2020). For statistical analysis, one-way ANOVA with Benjamini-Hochberg correction (p = 0.05) was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pneumonia, Influenza, Mice, Multi-omics, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Institute of microbiology, University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Kathrin Riedel
Institute of microbiology, University of Greifswald


