### Accession
PXD036162

### Title
LKB1/STK11-sensing of mitochondrial function controls Th17 cell responses

### Description
T helper 17 (Th17) cells are a distinct subset of CD4+ T cells necessary for maintaining gut homeostasis and have prominent roles in autoimmunity and inflammation. Th17 cells have unique metabolic features, including a stem cell-like signature and reliance on mitochondrial respiratory chain function and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle to coordinate metabolic and epigenetic remodeling. Dynamic changes in mitochondrial membrane morphology are key to sustain organelle function. However, it remains unclear whether mitochondrial membrane remodeling orchestrates metabolic and differentiation events in Th17 cells. Here we demonstrate that mitochondrial membrane fusion and tight cristae organization are required for Th17 cell function (i.e. cytokine expression). As a genetic model system we employ Th17 specific deletion of optic atrophy 1 (OPA1), a gene that encodes a protein involved in mitochondrial inner membrane fusion and cristae organization. As a result, we find that Th17 cells rely on mitochondrial fusion (due to their low metabolic activity). Here, we carry out DIA-based differential quantitative proteomic analysis of murine wild-type and OPA1 knock-out Th17 cells. Through Ingenuity pathway analysis and together with transcriptional and metabolomic profiling we identify the serine/threonine kinase liver associated kinase B1 (LKB1/STK11) as an essential node coupling mitochondrial function to IL-17A cytokine expression in T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation was carried out using 5 × 10^6 cells using an iST 8X kit (PreOmics), according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. All samples used for data-independent acquisition (DIA) analyses were spiked with index retention time (iRT) kit peptides (Biognosys), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The general nanoLC–MS setup was similar to that previously described [doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00369], with minor modifications. A Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) hyphenated in the liquid junction configuration to a nanoLC-1200 (Thermo Fisher) was used. For the chromatographic separation of peptides, 4 μg peptide digest was analysed at 50 °C (controlled by Sonation column oven) on a 50-cm in-house packed fused-silica emitter microcolumn (75 μm inner diameter × 360 μm outer diameter SilicaTip PicoTip; New Objective) packed with 1.9-μm reverse-phase ReproSilPur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated by a 4-h linear gradient of 5–80% (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
A mouse T cell spectral library was previously generated by Spectronaut version 10.0 using MaxQuant results as an input. Seventy shotgun (DDA) runs (using 2 or 3 biological replicates from each biological conditions) were acquired using a Q Exactive Plus instrument, and data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0). The spectral library was constructed using an FDR cut-off of 1% and a minimum and maximum of 3 and 6 fragment ions, respectively, and protein grouping was performed according to MaxQuant search results. The MS2-based label-free quantification was carried out by analysing DIA raw data using Biognosys Spectronaut (version 10.0) software using default parameters [doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00369], with minor modifications. In brief, the decoy method was set to ‘mutated’, data extraction and extraction window were set to ‘dynamic’ with correction factor 1, identification was set to ‘normal-distribution p-value estimator’ with q-value cut-off of 0.1, and the profiling strategy was set to ‘iRT profiling’ with q-value cut-off of 0.01. Ultimately, protein quantity was set to ‘Average precursor quantity’ and smallest quantitative unit was set to ‘Precursor ion’ (summed fragment ions). For statistical testing and identification of deregulated proteins in all approaches, a two-sample Student’s t-test was used to identify differentially expressed proteins filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell differentiation requires metabolic reprogramming to fulfil the bioenergetic demands of proliferation and effector function, and enforce specific transcriptional programmes<sup>1-3</sup>. Mitochondrial membrane dynamics sustains mitochondrial processes<sup>4</sup>, including respiration and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolism<sup>5</sup>, but whether mitochondrial membrane remodelling orchestrates CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell differentiation remains unclear. Here we show that unlike other CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell subsets, T helper 17 (T<sub>H</sub>17) cells have fused mitochondria with tight cristae. T cell-specific deletion of optic atrophy 1 (OPA1), which regulates inner mitochondrial membrane fusion and cristae morphology<sup>6</sup>, revealed that T<sub>H</sub>17 cells require OPA1 for its control of the TCA cycle, rather than respiration. OPA1 deletion amplifies glutamine oxidation, leading to impaired NADH/NAD<sup>+</sup> balance and accumulation of TCA cycle metabolites and 2-hydroxyglutarate-a metabolite that influences the epigenetic landscape<sup>5,7</sup>. Our multi-omics approach revealed that the serine/threonine kinase liver-associated kinase B1 (LKB1) couples mitochondrial function to cytokine expression in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells by regulating TCA cycle metabolism and transcriptional remodelling. Mitochondrial membrane disruption activates LKB1, which restrains IL-17 expression. LKB1 deletion restores IL-17 expression in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells with disrupted mitochondrial membranes, rectifying aberrant TCA cycle glutamine flux, balancing NADH/NAD<sup>+</sup> and preventing 2-hydroxyglutarate production from the promiscuous activity of the serine biosynthesis enzyme phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). These findings identify OPA1 as a major determinant of T<sub>H</sub>17 cell function, and uncover LKB1 as a sensor linking mitochondrial cues to effector programmes in T<sub>H</sub>17 cells.

### Keywords
Th17 t cells, Opa1 knock out th17 cells, Serine/threonine kinase liver associated kinase b1 (lkb1/stk11)., Dia, Spectronaut

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Proteomics Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics


