### Accession
PXD017949

### Title
Secretome Analysis of Mycobacterial-infected Bovine Macrophages

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is the causative agent of tuberculosis, a chronic granulomatous disease. Mtb is mostly restricted to humans and seldom causes disease in animals. M. bovis (Mbv) on the other hand causes tuberculosis in cows (bovine tuberculosis) and several wild animals. Each of these pathogens therefore has unique host adaptations and the host- and pathogen-specific factors driving this differential tropism still remain largely unknown. Here we profiled the secretomes of Mtb- and Mbv-infected bovine macrophages to characterise host-specific responses to each pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided sample preparation and trypsin digestion of protein samples Samples were processed using a modified version of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Briefly, 800 µl of cell-free supernatant was denatured in 4 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) and loaded onto a 0.5 ml Amicon ultra 30 kDa cut-off spin filter. Samples were centrifuged at 12, 000 xg for 15 min. Four hundred µl UB buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM TEAB) was added to each filter and the samples were centrifuged (12, 000 xg, 15 min). This process was repeated twice for a total of three UB washes. Proteins from each sample was reduced with 5 mM TCEP at RT for 1 hour and subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour in the dark. Four hundred µl UB buffer was added to each filter, and the samples were centrifuged (12, 000 xg, 15 min). This process was repeated twice for a total of three UB washes. Four hundred µl 50 mM TEAB was added to each filter, and the samples were centrifuged (12, 000 xg, 15 min). This was repeated twice for a total of three TEAB washes. Proteins were on-filter digested for 24 h at 37 °C using 200 ng trypsin in a humidified chamber. The filter unit was placed in a new collection tube after digestion, and the peptides were obtained in the flow-through by centrifugation (12, 000 xg, 15 min). Peptides were eluted once more from the filter unit by the addition of 250 μl 50mM TEAB and further centrifugation (12, 000 xg, 15 min). Trypsin digestion was stopped with the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 1%, and peptides were desalted using Macro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus). Peptides were dried before storage at -20 °C.  Mass spectrometry Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA, and each sample was independently analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (100 μm ID × 20 mm, 3μm, 100Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 ID μm × 500 mm, 2μm, 100Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid, 3% dimethyl sulfoxide in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid, 3% dimethyl sulfoxide, 20% water in acetonitrile. The gradient used for analysis was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 5 min, followed by an increase from 3 to 35% B in 99 min, 35-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 5 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 3% for 10 min. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in positive ion data-dependent mode for Orbitrap-MS and Ion trap-MS2 data acquisition. The precursor ion scan (full scan) was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1600 m/z with a nominal resolution of 120, 000. Ion filtering for Ion trap-MS2 data acquisition was performed using the quadrupole with a transmission window of 1.6 m/z. The most intense ions above an intensity threshold of 5E3 were selected for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). An HCD normalized collision energy of 30% was applied to the most intense ions, and fragment ions were analysed in the Ion trap using Rapid scan rate. The number of Ion trap-MS2 events between full scans was determined on-the-fly to maintain a 3 s fixed duty cycle. Dynamic exclusion of ions within a ±10 ppm m/z window was implemented using a 35 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV and capillary temperature of 275 °C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used. The automatic gain control (AGC) settings were 4E5 ions with a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms for Orbitrap-MS, and 1E4 ions with a maximum ion accumulation time of 45 ms for Ion trap-MS2 scans, respectively. Ions with <2+ or undetermined charge state were excluded from MS2 selection.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis All tandem mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.6, and searched against the Bos taurus proteome database (containing 23,965 entries) downloaded from Uniprot on 01 December 2018. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was allowed as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Proteins were considered confidently identified when they contained at least one unique tryptic peptide. Proteins that contained similar peptides and that could not be differentiated based on tandem mass spectrometry analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Reverse hits, contaminants and protein groups only identified by site were removed before downstream analysis. A label-free quantification strategy was employed using the MaxLFQ algorithm within MaxQuant. Assigned LFQ values of protein groups containing ≥2 unique peptides were used for statistical analysis in Perseus 1.6.2.3. Data were log2 transformed and filtered to contain at least two valid LFQ values in one group for comparison. Missing values were imputed using random numbers drawn from a normal distribution that simulates signals from low abundance proteins. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) as performed, and p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR method. A Tukey’s post-hoc test was performed to determine pairwise comparisons among means of the different groups. A total of 192 differentially regulated proteins were identified using an ANOVA and Tukey’s post-hoc test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tropism, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Bovine macrophages, Mycobacterium bovis, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom


