### Accession
PXD009948

### Title
Comprehensive ADP-ribosylome analysis identifies tyrosine as an ADP-ribose acceptor site

### Description
Despite recent mass spectrometry (MS)-based breakthroughs, comprehensive ADP-ribose (ADPr)-site identification and localization remain challenging. Here, we report the establishment of an unbiased, multistep ADP-ribosylome data analysis workflow that led to the identification of tyrosine as a novel ARTD1/PARP1 dependent in vivo ADPr-acceptor. MS analyses of in vitro ADP-ribosylated proteins confirmed tyrosine as an ADPr-acceptor amino acid in RPS3A (Y155) and HPF1 (Y238) and demonstrated that trans modification of RPS3A is dependent on HPF1. We provide an ADPr-site Localization Spectra Database (ADPr-LSD), which contains 288 high-quality ADPr-modified peptide spectra, to serve as ADPr spectral references for correct ADPr-site localizations.

### Sample Protocol
shControl, shARTD1 and shARTD2 HeLa cells (Kyoto) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium [DMEM, supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and 1% penicillin/streptavidin] at 37°C with 5% CO2. Cells were processed as described before [1]. Briefly, cells were either untreated or treated in triplicated with 1 mM H2O2 in PBS containing and 1 mM MgCl2. Cells were stimulated with H2O2 (Sigma Aldrich) for 10 min in PBS at 37 °C, collected by washing with ice-cold PBS and lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 400 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate), protease inhibitor mixture (Roche) supplemented with 40 μM PJ-34 (Enzo Life Sciences) and cleared by high-speed centrifugation. Proteins were precipitated by adding fourfold excess volumes of ice-cold acetone and stored at −20 °C overnight. Subsequently, proteins were solubilized in a urea solution (6 M urea/2 M thiourea/10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Protein concentrations in lysates were measured using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Next, proteins were reduced by adding dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 1 mM, and alkylated with chloroacetamide at 5.5 mM. Proteins were digested using modified sequencing grade trypsin (1:100 w/w) after a fourfold dilution in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Protease digestion was terminated by slow addition of trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2. Precipitates were removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 3,000g. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Peptides were eluted off the Sep-Pak with 50 and 80% acetonitrile. After eluting off Sep-Pak, appropriate amounts of IP buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8, 10 mM MgCl2, 250 μM dithiothreitol and 50 mM NaCl) was added before the acetonitrile and the volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation. PAR complexity was reduced by incubation with PARG (4.2 μg per sample) for 3 h at 37 °C. The peptide mixture was cooled down before it was incubated rotating for 2 h at 4 °C with the purified Af1521 macro domain. The peptides were washed three times in ice-cold IP buffer followed by one wash in water, and modified peptides were eluted with 2 × 100 μl 0.15% TFA in Milli-Q water. Peptide eluates were desalted on reverse phase C18 StageTips. [1] Martello R, Leutert M, Jungmichel S, Bilan V, Larsen SC, Young C, Hottiger MO, Nielsen ML (2016) Proteome-wide identification of the endogenous ADP-ribosylome of mammalian cells and tissue. Nat Commun 7: 12917

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using Proteome Discoverer, v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Separate MGF files were created from the raw file for each type of fragmentation and the files processed further as previously described [1]. The resulting MGF files were searched against UniProtKB human database (taxonomy 9606, version 20140422) using Mascot 2.5.1.3 (Matrix Science) as previously described [1] (Supplementary Table 1). For HCD fragmentation, ADP-ribosylation was defined as previously described by Rosenthal et al [2]. For EThcD fragmentation, the modification was defined similarly, but marker ions at m/z 428.0372, 348.0709, 250.0940, 136.0623 were ignored for scoring. The files were searched using Mascot with fixed carbamidomethylation (C), variable oxidation (M) and variable ADP-ribosylation on S, D, E, R, K and Y (SDERKY) [1] Bilan V, Leutert M, Nanni P, Panse C, Hottiger MO (2017) Combining HCD and EThcD fragmentation in a product dependent-manner confidently assigns proteome-wide ADP-ribose acceptor sites. Anal Chem 89: 1523-1530 [2] Rosenthal F, Nanni P, Barkow-Oesterreicher S, Hottiger MO (2015) Optimization of LTQ-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer Parameters for the Identification of ADP-Ribosylation Sites. J Proteome Res 14: 4072-9

### Publication Abstract
Despite recent mass spectrometry (MS)-based breakthroughs, comprehensive ADP-ribose (ADPr)-acceptor amino acid identification and ADPr-site localization remain challenging. Here, we report the establishment of an unbiased, multistep ADP-ribosylome data analysis workflow that led to the identification of tyrosine as a novel ARTD1/PARP1-dependent <i>in vivo</i> ADPr-acceptor amino acid. MS analyses of <i>in vitro</i> ADP-ribosylated proteins confirmed tyrosine as an ADPr-acceptor amino acid in RPS3A (Y155) and HPF1 (Y238) and demonstrated that <i>trans</i>-modification of RPS3A is dependent on HPF1. We provide an ADPr-site Localization Spectra Database (ADPr-LSD), which contains 288 high-quality ADPr-modified peptide spectra, to serve as ADPr spectral references for correct ADPr-site localizations.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Hpf1, Rsp3a, Genotoxic stress, Parp1, Artd1, Tyrosine adp-ribosylation

### Affiliations
UZH
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Michael Hottiger

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland


