### Accession
PXD016304

### Title
Towards the molecular architecture of the peroxisomal receptor docking complex

### Description
Import of yeast peroxisomal matrix proteins is initiated by cytosolic receptors, which specifically recognize and bind the respective cargo proteins. At the peroxisomal membrane, the cargo-loaded receptor interacts with the membrane docking complex, composed of Pex14p, Pex17p and Pex13p. Previous data suggest that this interaction triggers the formation of an import pore for further translocation of the cargo. The mechanistic principles and the underlying mechanism are however unclear, mainly because structures of higher order assemblies are still lacking. Here, using an integrative approach, we provide the first structural characterization of the major components of the peroxisomal docking complex Pex14p/Pex17p, in a native bilayer environment and reveal its subunit organization. Our data show that three copies of Pex14p and a single copy of Pex17p assemble to form a 20 nm rod-like particle. The different subunits are arranged in a parallel manner, showing interactions along their complete sequences and providing receptor binding-sites on both membrane sides. The long rod facing the cytosol is mainly formed by the coiled-coil domains of Pex14p and Pex17p, possibly providing the necessary structural support for the formation of the import pore. Further implications of Pex14p/Pex17p for formation of the peroxisomal translocon are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Expression of recombinant proteins (StrepII-Pex14p(M51L)/His6-Pex17p and Pex14p variants T7-Pex14p1-95-His6, T7-Pex14p119-341-His6, T7-Pex14p213-341-His6, Pex14pWT-His6, Pex14pM51L-His6) was performed in E. coli BL21-CodonPlus(DE3)-RIL cells (Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany). StrepII-Pex14p(M51L)/His6-Pex17p was purified using a Strep-Tactin-column (IBA-Lifescience, Goettingen, Germany) and a Ni-NTA column (Protino Ni-NTA-Agarose, Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). Gel filtration was performed on a Superose 6 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare, Munich) equilibrated with TBS (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0,1 % (w/v) DDM, pH 8.0) at 4 °C.  For purification of Pex14p variants, a Ni-NTA column (Histrap HP, 1 ml, GE Healthcare, Munich, Germany) was used followed by size exclusion chromatography on a Superdex 16/600 200pg column (GE Healthcare, Munich, Germany). For cross-linking of Pex14p/Pex17p complexes, bis[sulfosuccinimidyl]suberate (BS3; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was added to a final concentration of 0.25 mM. The mixture was further incubated for 1 h at 16°C and 1100 rpm of agitation. The reaction was quenched by adding 1 M Tris (pH 7.4) to a final concentration of 20 mM. For crosslinking of Pex14p variants, purified proteins were buffer exchanged in 20 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.4, by Amicon Ultra 2 ml centrifugal filter units (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) with a MWCO of 3 kDa and diluted to 0.2 mg/ml for crosslinking reactions. BS3 crosslinker was dissolved and corresponding to the final concentration diluted in ddH2O and directly added to the protein solution. The reaction was performed at 25°C, 300 rpm for 30 min and quenched by adding 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.8 and further incubation with same conditions as before. Crosslinked proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250. For tryptic digestion of proteins, either in-solution or in-gel, proteins were reduced using 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide followed by digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37°C with a trypsin to protein mass ratio of 1:25 in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptide mixtures were separated on a UltiMateTM RSLCnano system (Thermo scientific, Dreieich, Germany) (precolumn: PepMapTM 0.3 mm / 5 mm, C18; analytical column: Acclaim PepMapTM 75 µm/500 mm, C18, 100 Å pore size) using binary solvent systems consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and 86% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent B) with a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. Peptides derived from tryptic in-gel digests were separated with a gradient of 4 to 42% B in 35 min, followed by 42 to 95% B in 3 min, and 95% B for 5 min. Crosslinked peptides derived from in-solution digests were separated with a gradient of 4 to 40% B in 50 min, followed by 40 to 95% B in 5 min, and 95% B for 5 min. Eluted peptides were measured online on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific, Dreieich, Germany) in a data-dependent acquisition mode, with a scan range of m/z 375 – 1,700 at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. The 12 most intense multiple charged precursor ions (TOP12 method) were selected for higher energy dissociation fragmentation (HCD) and MS2 data were acquired with a scan range of m/z 200 2000, resolution of 35,000, AGC of 1 x 105 ions and a maximum fill time of 120 ms. Peptides derived from Pex14pWT-His6 and Pex14pM51L-His6 were separated using a binary solvent systems consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 4% (v/v) DMSO (solvent A) and 4% (v/v) DMSO, 50% (v/v) methanol, 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0,1% (v/v) formic acid, a gradient of 1 to 65% B in 30 min, followed by 65 to 95% B in 5 min, and 95% B for 5 min, and analysed on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo scientific, Dreieich, Germany) operated with the following parameters: scan range of m/z 370 – 1,700, resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400), AGC of 5 x 105 maximum fill time of 500 ms, TOP5 method with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap and acquisition of MS2 spectra with an AGC of 1 x 104 ions and a maximum fill time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
For identification of crosslinked peptides, the software pLink2 (version 2.3.5) was used to search against the forward and reversed amino acid sequences of the recombinant proteins. For data from Pex14p119-341 variant, a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for MS1 and MS2, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages for trypsin, peptide length of 5-60, oxidation of methionine as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, Lys and the protein N-terminus as crosslink sites were used as parameters. For filtering of search results, a MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and an initial false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level of 5% were applied. The resulting set of crosslinked peptide spectrum matches was filtered to remove possible false identifications. Matches having E-values above 5 × 10−2 or comprising adjacent tryptic peptides of the same protein were rejected. After deriving intensity ratios as described below, only peptide matches with at least one identification at a q-value (FDR) of 0.01 were retained. For data from Pex14p/Pex17p complexes, the same settings were used with the following modifications: minimum peptide length was restricted to 6 and Ser, Thr, Tyr were additionally considered as potential crosslink sites. As no crosslink pairs involving Tyr residues were identified it was omitted in the final search. FDR filter at PSM level was 1% and, for further filtering, all peptide spectrum matches were manually checked using pLabel (version 2.3.5) and matches that did not follow a pattern of fragment ions including for both peptides at least a series of two consecutive fragment ions were rejected. For graphical representation of crosslinked residue pairs, the software xiNet (version 2.0) was used. To compare the abundances of cross-linked peptides recovered from gel bands of protein oligomers and monomers, a quantitative analysis was performed using the program MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1). For each cross-linked peptide identified, intensities were retrieved from the list of peptide isotope patterns quantified by MaxQuant applying tolerances for precursor m/z values of 20 ppm and a retention time window of 1 min. To establish intensity ratios, missing values were imputed assuming peptide intensities below or near the detection limit. To this end, missing values were simulated based on a normal distribution with a mean and standard deviation derived from the measured log10 intensities distribution median and standard deviation of all peptides quantified by MaxQuant. We used a downshift of the mean by 2.0 and adjustment of the width by a factor of 0.2, respectively. Intensity ratios were normalized to the median of log ratios of non-crosslinked (regular) peptides. Cross linked peptides selected for quantitative analysis were first manually verified by inspection of PSMs using pLabel, and subsequently quantified using Skyline, version 4.2 by extracting ion chromatograms after import of linearized cross-linked peptides. Linearization of crosslinked peptides was performed as described in (Müller et al., 2018; DOI:10.1007/s13361-017-1837-2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Structural ms, Yeast, Native ms, Crosslinking

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


