### Accession
PXD043552

### Title
NEMO is essential for directing IKKα and ATM to the sites of DNA damage

### Description
We previously demonstrated that IKKα binds to and phosphorylates ATM thus potentiating the non-homologous end joining DNA damage repair pathway in cancer cells. Hence, inhibiting IKKα enhances the efficacy of DNA damage-based anticancer therapy. Whether additional elements contribute to this resistance-related mechanism remains unknown. We here show that NEMO physically interacts with the ATM-IKKα complex before damage. Upon exposure to damaging agents, NEMO is dispensable for ATM activation, but it is required to drive active ATM and IKKα to the sites of damage thus enabling DNA damage resolution. Recognition of damaged DNA by this IKKα/NEMO/ATM complex is partially mediated by direct interaction of NEMO to histones but highly dependent on PARP1 activity. Finally, we detected increased ATR activity in NEMO-deficient cells, and that ATR inhibition potentiates the effect of chemotherapy upon NEMO or IKKα depletion. Bioinformatic analysis of public CRC datasets support the functional impact of the IKKα/NEMO/ATM pathway in patient prognosis, which could be therapeutically exploited.

### Sample Protocol
Beads used in immunoprecipitation were resuspended in 6M Urea, 200mM ammonium bicarbonate and then they were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with to trypsin. Digested samples were desalted (C18) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis in an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200. Peptides mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column and a 90-minute gradient of water/acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid solvents. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were acquired over a mass range of 350-1400 m/z with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at 120,000 resolution. Following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold of 10000 were selected for fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. Digested bovine serum albumin was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.6 (Matrix Science). The data was searched against a Swiss-Prot human database (as in February 2020) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification the precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed.  Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. SAINTexpress algorithm was used to score protein-protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ikkalpha, Dna damage, Atm, Nemo

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Centre for Genomic Regulation


