### Accession
PXD030883

### Title
Protein composition of circulating exosomes depend on tuberculosis disease state

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB) is a contagious disease that is a primary cause of mortality and illness in around a quater of the world' population particular in low income nations. The disease most commonly affects lung, but pathogens can also be found in other parts of the body. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is the etiologic agent of TB and its ability to penetrate immune cells and develop a niche by beating the host's defense mechanism is crucial to its pathogenic sucess. Mtb has a diverse lipid and protein spectrum. Understanding the host-pathogen-interplay in active TB will have a substantial impact in understanding molecular mechanisms of Mtb infection and guide the development of vaccination, diagnostics and therapy response monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
Protein content was extracted from plasma-derived exosomes of 6 PTB patients, 3 TBL patients, 3 treated PTB patients and 6 healthy volunteers. Combined exosome-containing SEC fractions were concentrated and lysed on a centrifugal filter unit (Vivacon 500, 10K MWCO, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) using a modified RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 125 mM NaCl; 1 % Triton X-100 (v/v); 1 % Na-Deoxycholate (w/v); 0.1 % SDS in ddH2O) by incubation at 4°C and additional sonication treatment. Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 5 min to clear the fraction and supernatant was further used as protein fraction. Protein concentration was determined with Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Extracted proteins were further processed by filter-aided sample preparation (Ref ) with slight modifications. Briefly, proteins were washed in urea buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) and subsequently reduced and alkylated in 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively. Proteolytic cleavage to peptides was carried out by Trypsin/Lys-C protease mix (Promega GmbH, Walldorf, Germany) overnight at 37 °C and protein:enzyme-ratio = 50:1. Digested peptides were recovered by ultrafiltration. All steps were carried out on centrifugal filter unit (Vivacon 500, 10K MWCO, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). Collected peptides were desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol and eventually resuspended in 100 mM TEAB. Peptides were chemically labeled with 10-plex tandem mass tag kit (TMT, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to user’s manual and combined to two TMT batches, also including a common reference consisting of equal amounts of all samples (Table 1). Finally, TMT batches were desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin columns.  For sample acquisition 1 µg of labeled peptides were injected to Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Peptides were separated on 20 cm analytical HPLC column (75 µm ID Pico Tip fused silica emitter, New Objective, Littleton, USA) in-house packed using ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9‐μm silica beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) applying a 120 min multistep gradient from 10 % solvent B to 90 % solvent B at a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mobile phases were prepared as 0.1 % formic acid in water (solvent A) and 80 % ACN, supplemented with 0.1 % formic acid in water (solvent B). Eluting peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 3.2 kV. Data were acquired in data dependent mode and controlled by XCalibur software (version 2.9). Survey scans were acquired in orbitrap mass analyzer in scan range 300-1650 m/z with a mass resolution of 60,000, AGT target of 3 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Top 10 most abundant precursor ions were selected for isolation (window of 0.7 m/z) and fragmentation by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy: 34). For MS2 scans in orbitrap mass analyzer, AGT target and maximum injection time were set to 1 x 105 and 110 ms, respectively. A dynamic exclusion for MS2 scans was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) and the integrated algorithm Andromeda (Ref ). Experimental spectra were matched against reference proteomes of H. sapiens (79,038 protein entries) and M. tuberculosis (strain ATCC 25618 / H37Rv; 3,993 protein entries). Trypsin was set as protease in fixed mode and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) as well as acetylation (protein N-terminus) were set was optional modifications. Mass tolerances of 20 ppm (first search and fragment ions) and 4.5 ppm (main search) were allowed. One unique peptide was required for protein inference controlling the FDR to 0.05 for peptide spectrum matches, peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis (TB), which is caused by the bacterium <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (<i>Mtb</i>), is still one of the deadliest infectious diseases. Understanding how the host and pathogen interact in active TB will have a significant impact on global TB control efforts. Exosomes are increasingly recognized as a means of cell-to-cell contact and exchange of soluble mediators. In the case of TB, exosomes are released from the bacillus and infected cells. In the present study, a comprehensive lipidomics and proteomics analysis of size exclusion chromatography-isolated plasma-derived exosomes from patients with TB lymphadenitis (TBL) and treated as well as untreated pulmonary TB (PTB) was performed to elucidate the possibility to utilize exosomes in diagnostics and knowledge building. According to our findings, exosome-derived lipids and proteins originate from both the host and <i>Mtb</i> in the plasma of active TB patients. Exosomes from all patients are mostly composed of sphingomyelins (SM), phosphatidylcholines, phosphatidylinositols, free fatty acids, triacylglycerols (TAG), and cholesterylesters. Relative proportions of, e.g., SMs and TAGs, vary depending on the disease or treatment state and could be linked to <i>Mtb</i> pathogenesis and dormancy. We identified three proteins of <i>Mtb</i> origin: DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit beta (RpoC), Diacyglycerol O-acyltransferase (Rv2285), and Formate hydrogenase (HycE), the latter of which was discovered to be differently expressed in TBL patients. Furthermore, we discovered that <i>Mtb</i> infection alters the host protein composition of circulating exosomes, significantly affecting a total of 37 proteins. All TB patients had low levels of apolipoproteins, as well as the antibacterial proteins cathelicidin, Scavenger Receptor Cysteine Rich Family Member (SSC5D), and Ficolin 3 (FCN3). When compared to healthy controls, the protein profiles of PTB and TBL were substantially linked, with 14 proteins being co-regulated. However, adhesion proteins (integrins, Intercellular adhesion molecule 2 (ICAM2), CD151, Proteoglycan 4 (PRG4)) were shown to be more prevalent in PTB patients, while immunoglobulins, Complement component 1r (C1R), and Glutamate receptor-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) were found to be more abundant in TBL patients, respectively. This study could confirm findings from previous reports and uncover novel molecular profiles not previously in focus of TB research. However, we applied a minimally invasive sampling and analysis of circulating exosomes in TB patients. Based on the findings given here, future studies into host-pathogen interactions could pave the way for the development of new vaccines and therapies.

### Keywords
Plasma, Immunoglobulins, Tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Apolipoproteins, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology
Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology IZI, Department Preclinical Development and Validation, Proteomics Unit, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Stefan Kalkhof
Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology IZI, Department Preclinical Development and Validation, Proteomics Unit, Leipzig, Germany


