### Accession
PXD001112

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis reveals the adaptation strategies of the alpine plant Potentilla saundersiana along the altitude gradient of the Northwestern Tibetan Plateau

### Description
The altitude gradient limits the growth and distribution of alpine plants.Alpine plants have developed strategies to survive the extremely cold conditions prevailing at high altitudes; however, the mechanism underlying the evolution of these strategies remains unknown. The alpine plant Potentilla saundersiana is widespread in the Northwestern Tibetan Plateau. In this study, we conducted a comparative proteomics analysis to investigate the dynamic patterns of protein expression of P. saundersiana located at five different altitudes. We detected and functionally characterized 118 differentially expressed proteins. Our study confirmed that increasing levels of antioxidant proteins, and their respective activities, and accumulation of primary metabolites, such as proline and sugar, confer tolerance to the alpine environment in P. saundersiana. Proteins species associated with the epigenetic regulation of DNA stability and post-translational protein degradation were also involved in this process. Furthermore, our results showed that P. saundersiana modulated the root architecture and leaf phenotype to enhance adaptation to alpine environmental stress through mechanisms that involved hormone synthesis and signal transduction, particularly the cross-talk between auxin and strictosidine. Based on these findings, we conclude that P. saundersiana uses multiple strategies to adapt to the high-altitude environment of the Northwestern Tibetan Plateau.

### Sample Protocol
This study was conducted in mid-July, 2012, on the south-facing slope of the Nyainqentanglha Mountains from 4350 to 5200 m in altitude (30°30′–30°32′N, 91°03′E) near Damxung County in central Tibet. The summit of the slope is at an elevation of approximately 5600 m. A site was selected approximately every 100 to 200 m in the altitude along the transect from 4350 to 5200 m for a total of 5 sample sites, at 4350 m, 4600 m, 4800 m, 5100 m, and 5200 m. Samples were collected at each location at 10 am on sunny days to limit the effects of the weather. At each site, a total of 100 to 200 fully expanded and intact leaves from a 10-m2 region were randomly selected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for later protein extraction and enzyme analysis. The samples were collected and the experiments were conducted in triplicate..

### Data Protocol
After image analysis, the normalized spot volume were used for SD and CV calculation, since the structure of raw proteomic data is known to be very disturbing for multivariate statistics and clustering algorithms, because of the high rate of missing spot values and the know dependence between the volume and variance for individual spots. To deal with this problem, we only considered “consistent spots,” which are those present in the three biological replicates, thus preventing the assignment of normalized volume values to missing spots for multivariate analysis. To reduce this variance-mean dependence between different spot intensities and sample sets, spot volumes were first normalized as a proportion of the total spot intensities per gel (spot volume×105 /Σgel spot volumes), and then the normalized volumes were Log transformed to reduce the volume-variance dependency. These steps also reduced the coefficient of variation of each spot, increasing the reliability of the analyses. Differentially expressed spots were defined after applying a one-way ANOVA test. Spot values passed the Kolmogorov–Smirnov normality test. False discovery rates (FDR) were controlled at level 0.05. A multivariate analysis was performed over the whole set of spots and on those showing differences. PCA was applied to the correlation matrix to reduce its dimensionality (SPSS v. 19 package). Heat maps were also plotted employing PermutMatrix software v.1.9.3

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Comparative proteomics; potentilla saundersiana; adaptation;

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Xiangyang Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiangyang Hu
Chinese Academy of Sciences


