### Accession
PXD010657

### Title
Inverse data-driven modelling and multiomics analysis reveals PHGDH as a metabolic signature of M2 macrophages

### Description
Activation of immune cells is accompanied by a metabolic reconfiguration of their cellular energy metabolism including shifts in glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration that critically regulate functional effector responses. However, while current mass spectrometry strategies identify overall or flux-dependent metabolite profiles of cells or tissues, they fail to comprehensively identify the checkpoint nodes and enzymes that are responsible for different metabolic outputs. Here, we demonstrate that a data-driven inverse modelling approach from mass spectrometry metabolomics data can be used to identify a causal biochemical node that influence overall metabolic profiles and reactions. In our study we applied this strategy to TSC2/mTORC1-dependent macrophage polarization. Using multiomics metabolomics, proteomics and transcriptomics analysis as well as enzymatic activity measurements we demonstrate that TSC2, a negative regulator of mTORC1 signaling, critically influences the cellular metabolism of macrophages by regulating the enzyme phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), a rate-limiting enzyme that diverts carbon from glycolysis for de novo serine/glycine biosynthesis. This is the first evidence that the metabolic kinase mTORC1 positively regulates PHGDH activity in macrophages. Importantly, PHGDH itself is a central regulator of macrophage polarization. Anti-inflammatory (M2) macrophages have high PHGDH activity that is required for the expression of typical anti-inflammatory molecules. Inhibition of PHGDH activity suppressed marker genes in IL-4 stimulated M2 macrophages. This identifies PHGDH as a metabolic signature of M2 macrophages. The presented concept of data-driven inverse modelling and multiomics analysis allows for the systematic integration of genome-scale metabolic reconstruction, prediction and analysis of causal biochemical regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Measurement of proteins was performed according to Weckwerth et al. (Weckwerth et al., 2004). Pellets from the MCW extraction step were dried and dissolved in 500μl protein extraction buffer (50mM TRIS, 1,5% SDS, 1% β- mercaptoethanol, pH7,6). 1ml water saturated phenol was added to the protein solution and incubated on a thermoshaker at 37°C and 700rpm. After having induced a phase separation by centrifugation at 16000g for 20 minutes at room temperature the upper polar phase was discarded, 600μl centrifugation buffer (50mM TRIS, 1% β- mercaptoethanol, 600mM sucrose), 8M urea, 100mM NH4+-bicarbonate) were added and after another centrifugation step (16000g / 20 minutes / 30°C) the upper apolar phase was transferred to a 15ml falcon tube containing 5ml ice cold 100mM ammonium acetate in methanol to precipitated the proteins at -20°C over night. On the next day the tubes were centrifuged at 4000rpm at 4°C for 10 minutes, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed by adding 1ml ice cold 100mM ammonium acetate in methanol, resuspending the pellet by carefully pipetting up and down and ultrasonicate the Krainer tube for 5 minutes at room temperature. The solution was transferred to a new LoBind Eppendorf tube and the Krainer tube was washed with 1ml of ice-cold methanol to get the entire protein out of the tube and ultrasonicated for 5 minutes before the solution was combined with the first one in the LoBind Eppendorf tube. The Eppendorf tubes were centrifuged at 16000g for 10 minutes at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1ml ice cold acetone for the final washing step before it was centrifuged, the supernatant was discarded and the protein pellets were dried at room temperature until no liquid could be observed anymore and stored at -80°C over night. On the next day the amount of protein in the lung and BMDM samples respectively was determined with a Bradford assay. The BMDM protein pellets were solved in 60μl, lung samples in 300μl solubilisation buffer (8M urea, 100mM NH4+-bicarbonate) by gently pipetting up and down and individually ultrasonicating them for 5 seconds.  60μg of BMDM protein of each sample were taken and solubilisation buffer (8M urea, 100mM NH4+-bicarbonate) was added to a final volume of 60μl for further proteomic analysis of the BMDM samples.To reduce disulfide bonds the samples were adjusted to 5mM DTT and incubated for 45 minutes at 37°C and 700rpm on a thermoshaker and subsequently to 10mM IAA and incubated 60 minutes at 23°C and 700rpm in the dark for the alkylation of the received thiol groups. To inactivate spare IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10mM and the Eppendorf tubes were incubated at 23°C and 700rpm for another 15 minutes in the dark. For the digestion of the proteins the urea concentration in the samples was adapted from 8M to 4M with aqueous 100mM ammonium bicarbonate in 20% acetonitrile. 1μl endoproteinase Lys-C (0,1μg/μl) was added to the BMDM samples and 10μl to the lung samples respectively before they were incubated on a thermoshaker for 5 hours at 30°C and 500rpm in the dark. For the digestion with Trypsin the urea concentration was set to 2M with 10% acetonitrile, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10mM CaCl2 in H2O before 3μl of Trypsin beads were added to the BMDM samples and 20μl to the lung samples respectively and incubated at 37°C on a rotating incubator for 15,5 hours. The peptides were desalted with C18 and graphite according to Nukarinen et al. . The measurements of the alkylated, reduced and LysC and trypsine digested BMDM peptides were conducted on a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 equiped with a Thermo Scientific ES803 easy-spray C18 reversed phase column [50cm x 75µm ID / 2µm particles / 100Å pore size] coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite al. .

### Data Protocol
We have used Proteomediscoverer for analysis. Raw data were searched with the SEQUEST algorithm present in Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo, Germany) as described by (Chaturvedi et al., 2013). We have used the following settings in Proteome Discoverer for data analysis which include: Peptide confidence: High, which is equivalent to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR), and Xcorr of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 for peptides of charge 2, 3, 4,5, 6. The variable modifications were set to acetylation of N-terminus and oxidation of methionine, with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for parent ion and 0.8 Da for the fragment ion. The number of missed and/or non-specific cleavages permitted was 2. There were no fixed modifications, as dynamic modifications were used. For identification, the UniProt database containing the annotation of 256922 genes for the mouse was used. Peptides were matched against these databases plus decoys, considering a significant hit when the peptide confidence was high. All raw data and result files (annotated spectra) are further uploaded to proteomeXchange (http://www.proteomexchange.org).

### Publication Abstract
Mechanistic or mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is an important regulator of effector functions, proliferation, and cellular metabolism in macrophages. The biochemical processes that are controlled by mTORC1 are still being defined. Here, we demonstrate that integrative multiomics in conjunction with a data-driven inverse modeling approach, termed COVRECON, identifies a biochemical node that influences overall metabolic profiles and reactions of mTORC1-dependent macrophage metabolism. Using a combined approach of metabolomics, proteomics, mRNA expression analysis, and enzymatic activity measurements, we demonstrate that Tsc2, a negative regulator of mTORC1 signaling, critically influences the cellular activity of macrophages by regulating the enzyme phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (Phgdh) in an mTORC1-dependent manner. More generally, while lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages repress Phgdh activity, IL-4-stimulated macrophages increase the activity of the enzyme required for the expression of key anti-inflammatory molecules and macrophage proliferation. Thus, we identify Phgdh as a metabolic checkpoint of M2 macrophages.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Tor, Serin pathway, Metabolic modelling, Biochemical jacobian, Tsc2, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, Division Molecular Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfram Weckwerth

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Weckwerth
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, Division Molecular Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Austria


