### Accession
PXD031320

### Title
Proteomic analysis of aqueous humor and rejected graft in pig-to-nonhuman primate corneal xenotransplantation

### Description
Although pig-to-nonhuman primate (NHP) corneal xenotransplantation has shown long-term graft survival, xenogeneic antigenrelated immune responses are still stronger than allogenic antigen-associated responses. Therefore, there is an unmet need to investigate major rejection pathways in corneal xenotransplantation, even with immunosuppression. This study aimed to identify biomarkers in aqueous humor for predicting rejection and to investigate rejection-related pathways in grafts from NHPs transplanted with porcine corneas following administration of steroids combined with tacrolimus/rituximab. NHPs who had received corneas from wild‐type (WT) or α‐1,3‐galactosyltransferase gene‐knockout (GTKO) pigs were divided into groups with or without rejection according to clinical examinations. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was used to analyze the proteomes of corneal tissues or aqueous humor. The biological functions of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were assessed using Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) for pathways and protein–protein interaction network analysis. Among the 66 DEPs in aqueous humor, complement proteins (C3, C5, and C9) and cholesterol metabolic proteins (APOA1 and APOA2) were related to xenogeneic rejection as biomarkers, and alternative pathways of the complement system seemed to be important in xenogeneic graft rejection. Among 416 DEPs of the cornea, NF‐κB1 and proteosomes (PSMD7, PSMA5, and PSMD3) seemed to be related with xenogeneic graft rejection. Additionally, oxidative phosphorylation and leukocyte activation‐related pathways are involved in rejection. Overall, our proteomic approach highlights the important role of NF‐κB1, proteosomes, oxidative phosphorylation, and leukocyte activation-related inflammation in the cornea, and the relevance of complement pathways of the aqueous humor as a predictive biomarker of xenogeneic rejection.

### Sample Protocol
(1) Proteomics in aqueous humor In order to study the proteins in AH, which has low protein concentration, we adopted direct in-solution digestion and LFQ analysis to minimize the protein loss during experiments. Each AH samples were collected, and protein concentration of each sample was measured using BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Equal protein amount of each AH sample (20ug) was digested in to peptides using 8M urea in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) incubated for 20 mins at room temperature (RT). Reduction using 10mM dithiothreitol (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and alkylation with 30mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was held to denature the proteins. Trypsin was treated to sample with 1:50 (trypsin : sample) ratio and incubated at 37°C for 12hr. To quench the trypsin activation, 0.4% TFA was added to sample and digested peptides were desalted using C18 spin column (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Desalted peptides were dried and resuspended with sol A (0.1% Formic Acid) for the next step, LC-MS/MS.  (2) Proteomics in cornea  Cornea is composed of keratocytes and ECM with collagens. Therefore, unlike AH, corena was individually cryopulverized using a Cryoprep device (CP02, Covaris) and dissociated in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6) with sonication using a focused ultrasonicator. 20 sonication cycles were repeated at 16°C. The homogenate was centrifuged with 16,000 g at 20°C for 10 min and supernatant was collected and measured protein concentration as AH sample followed. Lysed sample was digested using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method .  Equal amount of sample (100ug) with SDT buffer (4% SDS in 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT) was transferred to a microcon filter tube(YM-30, Millipore Corporation). 8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 was mixed with sample and centrifuged at 14,000g for 60 mins to remove SDS. After alkylation with 0.05M iodoacetamide in 8M urea for 30mins, trypsin with 1:50 (trypsin : sample) ratio was treated at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides were dried and resuspended with 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) in water (pH 7.5) for labelling Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents . 6plex TMT was labelled as instructor guide followed. (C_R4(GTKO) – 126, C_R3(GTKO) – 127, C_R2(WT) – 128, C_R1(WT) - 129, C_S1(WT) – 130, C_S2(WT) – 131) Labelled peptides were pooled together and dried for next step, high pH fractionation. Dried peptides were suspended and underwent the high pH fractionation. The Xbridge C18 analytical column (4.6 mm x 250 mm, 130 A˚ , 5 mm) was used for the peptide separation. Sol A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH = 10) and sol B (10 mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN, pH = 10) were used as mobile phase. The gradient was as follows: 0~10 min, 5% B; 10~70 min, 35% B; 70~80 min, 70% B; 80~85 min, 70% B; 85~90 min, 5% B; 90~105 min, 5% B. Peptides were separated into 12 fractions and separated peptides were dried in a speed-vac and desalted with a C18 spin column.

### Data Protocol
(1) Proteomics in aqueous humor All quantified intensity (LFQ intensity) was processed with R software (v. 4.0.2). Potential contaminants were removed (reversed database, contaminants, only identified by site) and the intensity of protein left converted into log2 value and undergo the statistical analysis. Differentially expressed proteins with strict cutoff ( ±2 fold change, 0.05 < p-value from independent t-test) were enriched and used for further analysis.   (2) Proteomics in cornea  Raw files from LC-MS/MS analysis was proceeded with post-experiment monoisotopic mass refinement (PEMMR) to increase sensitivity in peptide identification and accuracy  by selecting the unique mass class (UMC). MSGF+ was used to find proteins using two species database (Macaca Mulatta, Sus Sucrofa), Uniprot database (2021.09 released. Reviewed + TrEMBL). In modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 6-plex modification of lysine, and N-termination as static modifications, and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification was used. The 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide level was adopted. Unlike Maxquant LFQ analysis, TMT quantitative analysis used the reporter ions intensity as quantifying the proteins. Exported reporter ions were normalized and used for statistical analysis. Since, TMT quantitative analysis reduce the variation during the experiments, different c.off was applied on cornea proteomics. Differentially expressed proteins with cutoff ( ±1.5 fold change, 0.05 < p-value from independent t-test) were enriched and used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Although pig-to-non-human primate (NHP) corneal xenotransplantation has shown long-term graft survival, xenogeneic antigen-related immune responses are still stronger than allogeneic antigen-associated responses. Therefore, there is an unmet need to investigate major rejection pathways in corneal xenotransplantation, even with immunosuppression. This study aimed to identify biomarkers in aqueous humor for predicting rejection and to investigate rejection-related pathways in grafts from NHPs transplanted with porcine corneas following the administration of steroids combined with tacrolimus/rituximab. NHPs who had received corneas from wild-type (WT) or &#x3b1;-1,3-galactosyltransferase gene-knockout (GTKO) pigs were divided into groups with or without rejection according to clinical examinations. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was used to analyze the proteomes of corneal tissues or aqueous humor. The biological functions of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were assessed using Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) for pathways and protein-protein interaction network analysis. Among the 66 DEPs in aqueous humor, complement proteins (C3, C5, and C9) and cholesterol metabolic proteins (APOA1 and APOA2) were related to xenogeneic rejection as biomarkers, and alternative pathways of the complement system seemed to be important in xenogeneic graft rejection. Among the 416 DEPs of the cornea, NF-&#x3ba;B1 and proteosomes (PSMD7, PSMA5, and PSMD3) seemed to be related to xenogeneic graft rejection. Additionally, oxidative phosphorylation and leukocyte activation-related pathways are involved in rejection. Overall, our proteomic approach highlights the important role of NF-&#x3ba;B1, proteosomes, oxidative phosphorylation, and leukocyte activation-related inflammation in the cornea and the relevance of complement pathways of the aqueous humor as a predictive biomarker of xenogeneic rejection.

### Keywords
Rejection, Cornea, Xenotransplantation, Proteomics, Nonhuman primate (macaque), Aqueous humor, Pig

### Affiliations
Kyung Hee University
Kyung Hee university

### Submitter
Jaewon Oh

### Lab Head
Dr Jae Won Oh
Kyung Hee university


