### Accession
PXD045119

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 infection of human lung epithelial cells induces TMPRSS-mediated acute fibrin deposition

### Description
Twenty microliter aliquots of BALF samples were dissolved in SDS-sample buffer and applied onto a 4-12% Nupage gel with MOPs running buffer. The run stopped after the samples migrated approximately ¼ distance into the gel.  Each lane of the gel was sliced into smaller pieces, and subjected to destaining, reducing/alkylation, and in-gel trypsin digestion.  The extracted peptides were applied for LC-MS/MS analysis using either a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion or a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operated with an in-line Thermo nLC 1200 and an EASY-Spray ion source.  Pepetides were separated using a 2 cm Pepmap 100 C18 trap column and a 25 cm Easy-spray Pepmap 100 C18 analytical column. MS/MS data acquisitions were operated at a 120,000 resolution (m/z 200) with a scan range of 350-1950 m/z and CID fragmentation.

### Sample Protocol
Twenty microliter aliquots of BALF samples were dissolved in SDS-sample buffer and applied onto a 4-12% Nupage gel with MOPs running buffer. The run stopped after the samples migrated approximately ¼ distance into the gel.  Each lane of the gel was sliced into smaller pieces, and subjected to destaining, reducing/alkylation, and in-gel trypsin digestion.  The extracted peptides were applied for LC-MS/MS analysis using either a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion or a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operated with an in-line Thermo nLC 1200 and an EASY-Spray ion source.  Pepetides were separated using a 2 cm Pepmap 100 C18 trap column and a 25 cm Easy-spray Pepmap 100 C18 analytical column. MS/MS data acquisitions were operated at a 120,000 resolution (m/z 200) with a scan range of 350-1950 m/z and CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Twenty microliter aliquots of BALF samples were dissolved in SDS-sample buffer and applied onto a 4-12% Nupage gel with MOPs running buffer. The run stopped after the samples migrated approximately ¼ distance into the gel.  Each lane of the gel was sliced into smaller pieces, and subjected to destaining, reducing/alkylation, and in-gel trypsin digestion.  The extracted peptides were applied for LC-MS/MS analysis using either a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion or a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operated with an in-line Thermo nLC 1200 and an EASY-Spray ion source.  Pepetides were separated using a 2 cm Pepmap 100 C18 trap column and a 25 cm Easy-spray Pepmap 100 C18 analytical column. MS/MS data acquisitions were operated at a 120,000 resolution (m/z 200) with a scan range of 350-1950 m/z and CID fragmentation.  All data was processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Scientific) with a SEQUEST HT search against the Uniprot KB/Swiss-Prot Human Proteome (02/2021) and common contaminants (theGPM.org) using a 5ppm precursor mass tolerance and a 0.5 Da fragment tolerance. Dynamic modifications included in the search were limited to oxidation [M], deamidation [NQ], and acetylation [Protein N-terminal] while carbamidomethylation [C] was the only static modification utilized. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) using a target-decoy approach with a 2 peptide per protein minimum.  A set of samples were also processed allowing for a lower false discovery rate to determine if there were any indications of ST14 and TMPRSS11D in the mass spectrometry data.

### Publication Abstract
Severe COVID-associated lung injury is a major confounding factor of hospitalizations and death with no effective treatments. Here, we describe a non-classical fibrin clotting mechanism mediated by SARS-CoV-2 infected primary lung but not other susceptible epithelial cells. This infection-induced fibrin formation is observed in all variants of SARS-CoV-2 infections, and requires thrombin but is independent of tissue factor and other classical plasma coagulation factors. While prothrombin and fibrinogen levels are elevated in acute COVID BALF samples, fibrin clotting occurs only with the presence of viral infected but not uninfected lung epithelial cells. We suggest a viral-induced coagulation mechanism, in which prothrombin is activated by infection-induced transmembrane serine proteases, such as ST14 and TMPRSS11D, on NHBE cells. Our finding reveals the inefficiency of current plasma targeted anticoagulation therapy and suggests the need to develop a viral-induced ARDS animal model for treating respiratory airways with thrombin inhibitors.

### Keywords
Bronchoalveolar lavage, Fibrin deposit, Sars-cov-2 infection, Nhbe cells

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA
NIAID,National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Peter Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Peter D. Sun
Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD, USA


