### Accession
PXD011156

### Title
Proteomic analysis of DNA synthesis on a structured DNA template in human cellular extracts: Interplay between NHEJ and replication-associated proteins

### Description
It has been established that short inverted repeats (SIRs) trigger base substitution mutagenesis in human cells. However, how the replication machinery deals with this structured DNA is unknown. We have previously reported that in human cell-free extracts, DNA primer extension using a structured single-stranded DNA template is transiently blocked at DNA hairpins [1](Schmutz et al., 2007). Here, we report the proteomic analysis of proteins bound to the DNA template providing evidence that proteins of the NHEJ pathway, particularly the DNA-PK complex (composed of DNA-PKcs and the Ku70/Ku80 dimer) recognize structured single-stranded DNA. DNA-PKcs inhibition results in the mobilization on the template DNA of the DNA-PK complex, along with other proteins acting downstream in the NHEJ pathway, especially the XRCC4-DNA Ligase 4 complex and the recently identified cofactor PAXX. The retention of NHEJ factors to the template DNA in the absence of DNA-PKcs activity correlates with additional halts of primer extension, suggesting that NHEJ proteins may hinder the progression of the DNA synthesis at these sites. Conversely, hijacking of the DNA-PK complex by double-stranded oligos (dsO) results in a large removal of the pausing sites and an elevated DNA extension efficiency. Overall these results raise the possibility that, upon binding to DNA hairpins formed onto ssDNA during fork progression, the DNA-PK complex may play some role in replication fork dynamics in vivo, role that is however not related to repair of double-strand breaks.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared as described in a previous study (Chicher et al., 2015). Briefly, each sample was precipitated overnight with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol. After washing twice the protein pellets with cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol, proteins were further resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were further reduced (5mM dithiothreitol, 10 min, 95°C) and alkylated (10mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT, in the dark). After a quenching step (5 mM dithiothreitol), proteins were digested overnight with 200ng of sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, MA, USA). Each sample was further analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (Chicher et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the human UniprotKB sub-database with a decoy strategy (UniprotKB release 2016_08, taxon 9606, 149870 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates. After a column-wise normalization of the data matrix, the spectral count values were submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.2.5). For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC). The results are presented in a Volcano plot using protein log2 fold changes and their corresponding adjusted log10 p-values to highlight upregulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
It is established that short inverted repeats trigger base substitution mutagenesis in human cells. However, how the replication machinery deals with structured DNA is unknown. It has been previously reported that in human cell-free extracts, DNA primer extension using a structured single-stranded template is transiently blocked at DNA hairpins. Here, the proteomic analysis of proteins bound to the DNA template is reported and evidence that the DNA-PK complex (DNA-PKcs and the Ku heterodimer) recognizes, and is activated by, structured single-stranded DNA is provided. Hijacking the DNA-PK complex by double-stranded oligonucleotides results in a large removal of the pausing sites and an elevated DNA extension efficiency. Conversely, DNA-PKcs inhibition results in its stabilization on the template, along with other proteins acting downstream in the Non-Homologous End-Joining (NHEJ) pathway, especially the XRCC4-DNA ligase 4 complex and the cofactor PAXX. Retention of NHEJ factors to the DNA in the absence of DNA-PKcs activity correlates with additional halts of primer extension, suggesting that these proteins hinder the progression of the DNA synthesis at these sites. Overall these results raise the possibility that, upon binding to hairpins formed onto ssDNA during fork progression, the DNA-PK complex interferes with replication fork dynamics in vivo.

### Keywords
Dna replication, Short inverted repeats, Nhej

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Biotechnologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, Université de Strasbourg, UMR 7242, Illkirch 67412, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Régine Janel
Biotechnologie et Signalisation Cellulaire, Université de Strasbourg, UMR 7242, Illkirch 67412, France.


