### Accession
PXD014981

### Title
Dppa2/4 target chromatin bivalency enabling multi-lineage commitment

### Description
Epigenetic priming factors establish a permissive epigenetic landscape which is not required until a later developmental or physiological time point, temporally uncoupling the presence of these factors with their phenotypic effects. One classic example of epigenetic priming is in the context of bivalent chromatin, found in pluripotent stem cells and early embryos at key developmental gene promoters marked by both activating-associated H3K4me3 and repressive-associated H3K27me3 histone modifications. It is currently unknown how these bivalent domains are targeted, or precisely how they impact on lineage commitment. Here we show that the small heterodimerising non-enzymatic DNA binding proteins Developmental Pluripotency Associated 2 (Dppa2) and 4 (Dppa4) act as epigenetic priming factors to establish bivalency at a subset of developmental genes. Dppa2/4 localise to the +1 nucleosome position of bivalent genes and while they are not required for pluripotency in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), double knockout cells fail to exit pluripotency and to differentiate efficiently, with delays in upregulating bivalently marked lineage genes. Proteomics reveal that Dppa2/4 interact on chromatin with members of the COMPASS and Polycomb complexes important for H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 deposition, respectively. Epigenetic profiling reveals a striking loss of H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and their associated enzymatic machinery at a significant subset of bivalent promoters in Dppa2/4 mutants, in addition to loss of H2A.Z and chromatin accessibility. In wild-type ESCs, these “Dppa2/4-dependent” bivalent promoters are characterised by low H3K4me3 enrichment and breadth, near-absent expression levels and initiating but not elongating RNA polymerase. Notably, Dppa2/4-dependent promoters are less evolutionarily conserved suggesting that they lack additional safeguard measures to maintain bivalency at these genes in the absence of Dppa2/4. Concomitantly with the loss of bivalency, Dppa2/4-dependent bivalent promoters gain DNA methylation and consequently are no longer able to be effectively activated upon ESC differentiation, leading to defects in cell fate acquisition. Our findings reveal a targeting principle for bivalency to developmental gene promoters poising them for future lineage specific gene activation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as described previously. In brief, after On bead tryptic digestion, C18 cleaned peptides were labelled with the TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) for 1 hour. Samples were mixed and fractionated with Reversed-Phase cartridges at high pH (Pierce #84868). Nine fractions were collected using different elution solutions in the range of 5–50% ACN. (Eva Papachristou et al., Nature communications, 2018).  Peptide fractions were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the nano-ESI Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Å trapping column with the ulPickUp injection method using the loading pump at 5 μL/min flow rate for 10 min. For the peptide separation the EASY-Spray analytical column 75 μm × 25 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Ȧ column was used for multi-step gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase (B) was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted using a gradient as follows: 0 - 10 min, 5 % mobile phase B; 10 – 90 min, 5 – 38% mobile phase B; 90 -100 min, 38% - 95% B; 100 - 105 min, 95% B; 105 – 110min, 95% - 5% B; 110 – 120 min, 5% B. Data-dependent acquisition began with a MS survey scan in the Orbitrap (380 – 1500 m/z, resolution 120,000 FWHM, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 50 ms, an isolation window at 0.7, and a dynamic exclusion duration of 45s. MS2–MS3 was conducted using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology with the top10 setting. HCD-MS3 analysis with MS2 isolation window 2.0 Th. The HCD collision energy was set at 65% and the detection was performed with Orbitrap resolution 50,000 FWHM and in the scan range 100–400 m/z. AGC target 1E5, with the maximum injection time of 105ms.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 2.1. (Thermo Scientific) was used for the processing of CID tandem mass spectra. The SequestHT search engine was used and all the spectra searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus FASTA database (taxon ID 10090 - Version November 2018). All searches were performed using as a static modification TMT6plex (+229.163 Da) at any N-terminus and on lysines and Methylthio at Cysteines (+45.988Da). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949Da) and Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine (+0.984) were included as dynamic modifications. Mass spectra were searched using precursor ion tolerance 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. For peptide confidence, 1% FDR was applied and peptides uniquely matched to a protein were used for quantification.   Data processing, normalisation and statistical analysis were carried out using qPLEXanalyzer (Eva Papachristou et al., Nature communications, 2018) package from Bioconductor. Peptide intensities were normalised using median scaling and protein level quantification was obtained by the summation of the normalized peptide intensities. A statistical analysis of differentially-regulated proteins was carried out using the limma method (PMID: 25605792). Multiple testing correction of p-values was applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2346101?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents) to control the false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
How the epigenetic landscape is established in development is still being elucidated. Here, we uncover developmental pluripotency associated 2 and 4 (DPPA2/4) as epigenetic priming factors that establish a permissive epigenetic landscape at a subset of developmentally important bivalent promoters characterized by low expression and poised RNA-polymerase. Differentiation assays reveal that Dppa2/4 double knockout mouse embryonic stem cells fail to exit pluripotency and differentiate efficiently. DPPA2/4 bind both H3K4me3-marked and bivalent gene promoters and associate with COMPASS- and Polycomb-bound chromatin. Comparing knockout and inducible knockdown systems, we find that acute depletion of DPPA2/4 results in rapid loss of H3K4me3 from key bivalent genes, while H3K27me3 is initially more stable but lost following extended culture. Consequently, upon DPPA2/4 depletion, these promoters gain DNA methylation and are unable to be activated upon differentiation. Our findings uncover a novel epigenetic priming mechanism at developmental promoters, poising them for future lineage-specific activation.

### Keywords
Qplex rime, Trithorax, Development, Epigenetic priming, Compass, Bivalency

### Affiliations
Research Assistant
Babraham Institute

### Submitter
Valar Nila Roamio Franklin

### Lab Head
Dr Aled Parry
Babraham Institute


