### Accession
PXD024945

### Title
LC-MS/MS of SCA3 knock-in mouse cortex, cerebellum, and axons

### Description
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3/MJD) has a polyQ etiology but, the current knowledge on molecular processes and proteins involved in pathogenesis is insufficient. Due to its proteolytic function, Ataxin-3 can influence other proteins, yet the global picture of crucial proteins and pathways in SCA3 was not investigated previously. Here, we explored molecular SCA3 mechanism by interdisciplinary research paradigm combining SCA3 knock-in model, behavior, MRI, brain proteomics, precise axonal proteomics, neuronal energy recordings, labeling of vesicles, and inclusions and focusing in axonal compartment. Using the global proteomics, we found dysregulation of protein homeostasis over the entire disease progression. The early SCA3 phase was associated with reduced body weight gain, the presence of the number of dysregulated proteins related to metabolism and mitochondria, and an altered profile of oxygen consumption rate in neurons. Moreover, the early phase presented alterations of protein metabolism, cytoskeletal architecture, axonal and synaptic proteins. Protein dysregulations indicated that the compartment involved in SCA3 pathogenesis next to the mitochondria are also neuronal processes and axons in particular. To confirm that the axon is one of the central compartments in SCA3 pathogenesis, we performed targeted proteomics on axons and somatodendritic compartments. We revealed highly increased axonal localization of protein synthesis machinery, including ribosomes, translation factors, and RNA binding proteins, while the level of proteins responsible for cellular transport and mitochondria was decreased. In summary, the SCA3 disease mechanism is based on the broad influence of mutant ataxin-3 on the neuronal proteome. Processes central in our SCA3 model include disturbed localization of proteins between axonal and somatodendritic compartment, early neuronal energy deficit, altered neuronal cytoskeletal structure, an overabundance of protein synthetic machinery in axons.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation  Mouse brain tissues were homogenized with a Mixer Mill MM400 (Retch, Haan, Germany), followed by a threefold cycle of freezing and thawing and bath sonication (3x3-minutes). Protein concentration was estimated using Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Chicago, Il, USA). Ten-microgram aliquots of proteins were diluted with 15 µl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced with 5.6 mM DTT for 5 min at 95°C. Samples were then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at RT. Subsequently, the proteins were digested with 0.2 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C.  Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) The analysis of the proteome was performed with the use of Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC system connected to the Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides derived from in-solution digestion were separated on a reverse-phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper C18 column (75µm × 25cm, 2µm granulation) using acetonitrile gradient (from 4 to 60%, in 0.1% formic acid) at 30°C and a flow rate of 300nL/min (for 230 min). The spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in MS mode and 17,500 at m/z 200 in MS2 mode. Spectra were recorded in the scanning range of 300–2000 m/z in the positive ion mode. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) ion fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energies set to 25. Swiss-Prot mouse database was used for protein identification with a precision tolerance set to 10ppm for peptide masses and 0.08 Da for fragment ion masses. Raw data obtained for each dataset were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 version for protein identification and quantification. Protein was considered as successfully identified if the Andromeda search engine found at least two peptides per protein, and a peptide score reached the significance threshold FDR=0.01.

### Data Protocol
Obtained data were exported to Perseus software ver. 1.6.1.3 (part of MaxQuant package; Munich, Germany). Numeric data were transformed to a logarithmic scale, and each sample was annotated with its group affiliation. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits, and contaminants were removed from the results. Next, data were filtered based on valid values for proteins. Proteins that contained valid values in 75% of samples in at least one group were included as valid hits. Before statistical analysis, normalization of data was performed by subtracting the median from each value in a row. A two-sample t-test was performed on analyzed sample data with p-value < 0.05 was considered as significant, and differentiating proteins were normalized using the Z-score algorithm for the hierarchical clustering of data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Brain, Cerebral cortex, Ataxin-3, Sca3, Neurodegenerative, Mjd, Cag, Axon, Proteome, Knockin, Knock-in, Spinocerebellar, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Ataxia, Polyq

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences in Poznan
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lukasz Marczak

### Lab Head
Dr Lukasz Marczak
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences in Poznan


