### Accession
PXD042352

### Title
Generation of host-directed and virus-specific antivirals using targeted protein degradation promoted by small molecules and viral RNA mimics

### Description
Targeted protein degradation (TPD), as exemplified by proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC), is a prominent paradigm in drug discovery. In this study, we applied conventional and novel PROTAC approaches to develop broad-spectrum antivirals (targeting key host factors for many different viruses) and virus-specific antivirals (targeting unique viral proteins). With respect to host-directed antivirals, we identified a small molecule degrader, FM-74-103, with pan-antiviral activities, as shown by inhibiting both RNA and DNA viruses. FM-74-103 elicits the selective degradation of human GSPT1, a translation termination factor, which further shuts down translation initiation. With respect to virus-specific antivirals, we developed viral RNA oligonucleotide-based bifunctional molecules (Destroyers). We provided proof-ofprinciple that RNA mimics of viral promoter sequences can be used as molecular glues to recruit viral polymerase (vPOL) and target it for degradation. Collectively, this study shows that TPD can be exploited to rationally design and develop the next generations of antivirals.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells or A549-ACE2 cells in 6-well plates were infected by WT PR8 virus or SARS-CoV- 2 (MOI = 1), respectively, and treated with DMSO or 1 μM 103 (0.1% DMSO) for 24 hours post infection, following the infection procedures as described above. Cell pellets were collected, washed by PBS, suspended in the lysis buffer (8M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitor), and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. Lysates were sonicated and protein concentrations were quantified by Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit. 50 μg of protein for each sample were treated with 4mM Tris-(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to reduce disulfide linkages for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to alkylate free cysteines and lysates were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. IAA was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and samples were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were then diluted with 5 sample volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the concentration of urea to < 2 M to where trypsin is active. Lysates were next digested with Trypsin Gold at a 1:100 (enzyme: protein) ratio and lysates were rotated for 16 hours at room temperature. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA. Samples were then desalted on a C18 column as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were eluted from these columns with 200 μL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80 °C until analysis. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. Immediately prior to analysis, lyophilized samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (30 cm x 75 μm (ID)) packed with ReprosilPur 1.9 μm particles). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 35% mobile phase B over 120 minutes followed by an increase to 100% B over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 3 μL of mobile phase A. To build a spectral library, replicate samples were pooled by infection and treatment conditions and analyzed by a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. DDA data was collected by acquiring a full scan over a m/z range of 375-1025 in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution resolving power (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 100%, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument-controlled ion injection time. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, with a 10-ppm exclusion width setting. Peptides with charge states 2-6 were selected for MS/MS interrogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%, with three seconds of MS/MS scans per cycle. All individual samples were analyzed by a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. DIA was performed on all individual samples. An MS scan was performed at 60,000 resolution (@200m/z) over a scan range of 390-1010 m/z, an instrument controlled AGC target, an RF lens setting of 30%, and an instrument controlled maximum injection time, followed by DIA scans using 8 m/z isolation windows over 400-1000 m/z at a normalized HCD collision energy of 28%. Spectral Libraries were built with Spectronaut factory settings from DDA pools and from DDA runs from a previous SARS-CoV-2 study (Higgins et al., 2021). Individual samples run with DIA methods were then analyzed against the before mentioned library with Spectronaut as previously described (Bruderer et al., 2017). False discovery rates were estimated using a decoy database strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). All data were filtered to achieve a false discovery rate of 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches, peptide identifications, and protein identifications. Search parameters included a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications for N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation. All other search parameters were defaults for the respective algorithms. Analysis of protein expression was conducted utilizing the MSstats statistical package in R. Output data from Spectronaut was annotated based on the human reference (SwissProt human reviewed sequences downloaded on 10/10/2019, SARS-CoV-2 (WA1 strain) sequences, and Influenza A virus (PR8 strain) sequences). Technical and biological replicates were integrated to estimate log2fold-changes, p-values, and adjusted p-values. All data were normalized by equalizing median intensities, the summary method was Tukey’s median polish, and the maximum quantile for deciding censored missing values was 0.999. Significantly dysregulated proteins were defined as those which had a fold change value >2 or <-2, with an adjusted p-value of <.0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted protein degradation (TPD), as exemplified by proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC), is an emerging drug discovery platform. PROTAC molecules, which typically contain a target protein ligand linked to an E3 ligase ligand, recruit a target protein to the E3 ligase to induce its ubiquitination and degradation. Here, we applied PROTAC approaches to develop broad-spectrum antivirals targeting key host factors for many viruses and virus-specific antivirals targeting unique viral proteins. For host-directed antivirals, we identified a small-molecule degrader, FM-74-103, that elicits selective degradation of human GSPT1, a translation termination factor. FM-74-103-mediated GSPT1 degradation inhibits both RNA and DNA viruses. Among virus-specific antivirals, we developed viral RNA oligonucleotide-based bifunctional molecules (Destroyers). As a proof of principle, RNA mimics of viral promoter sequences were used as heterobifunctional molecules to recruit and target influenza viral polymerase for degradation. This work highlights the broad utility of TPD to rationally design and develop next-generation antivirals.

### Keywords
Protac; influenza; sars-cov-2; cmv; gspt1; oligonucleotide; antiviral therapeutics

### Affiliations
Microbiology Department at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey R Johnson
Microbiology Department at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai


