### Accession
PXD038892

### Title
Quantitative proteomics to systematically assess protein changes after HUWE1 knockout in SW620 and A375 cell line

### Description
Quantitative proteomics to systematically assess protein changes after HUWE1 knockout in SW620 and A375 cell line

### Sample Protocol
To generate AAVS1- and HUWE1-KO cells, inducible Cas9 clones of SW620 and A375 cell lines were transduced with an sgRNA construct targeting the respective gene by lentiviral delivery. Cells were antibiotic selected for genomic integration and expanded. A375 samples were further FACS sorted for sgRNA+ cells to obtain purity of >99%. Cells were harvested 72 hours after Cas9 induction with Dox at final concentration of 0.2 µg/µl. A total number of 3 × 106 SW620 or 2.5 × 106 A375 cells were harvested, washed with PBS, pelleted, snap-frozen, and stored at -70 ºC. Protein concentrations were measured using standard BCA assay and normalized to 50 micrograms.  Sample preparation and tryptic digest were performed with the iST 96x kit (PO 00027, PreOmics) according to the manufacturer’s description. 2 µg of each sample was analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS.   nanoLC-MS/MS Analysis The nano HPLC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS pro interfaces and a Nanospray Flex ion source (all parts Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 25 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 minutes, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 30°C. Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min, starting with the mobile phases 98% A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and linearly increasing to 35% B over the next 180 minutes. The Eclipse was operated in data-dependent mode, performing a full scan (m/z range 350-1500, resolution 120,000, target value 1E6) at 4 different compensation voltages (CV-45, -55, -65, -75), followed each by MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions for a cycle time of 0.75 sec per CV. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an isolation width of 1.2 m/z, target value of 3E4 and intensity threshold of 5E4, maximum injection time 20 ms, HCD with a collision energy of 30, using the Iontrap for detection in the rapid scan mode. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (include charge state 2-6) were excluded for 60 s. The monoisotopic precursor selection filter and exclude isotopes feature were enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). All MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.16129 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance to ±400 mmu, the maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic enzymatic specificity without proline restriction. Peptide and protein identification was performed in two steps. For an initial search the RAW-files were searched against the database human_uniprot_reference_2021-06-30.fasta (20,531 sequences; 11,395,157 residues), supplemented with common contaminants, using the following search parameters:  Alkylation of cysteine by C6H11NO was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using the Percolator algorithm (Käll L. et al., Nat. Methods. 2007 Nov; 4(11):923-5) integrated in Proteome Discoverer. A sub-database of proteins identified in this search was generated for further processing. For the second search, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the same settings as above plus considering additional variable modifications: Phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and glutamine to pyro-glutamate conversion at peptide N-terminal glutamine, acetylation on protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Identifications were filtered again to 1 % FDR on protein and PSM level, additionally an Amanda score cut-off of at least 70 was applied. Peptides were subjected to label-free quantification using IMP-apQuant (Doblmann J. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2019, 18(1):535-541). Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides and applying intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ, Schwanhäusser B. et al., Nature 2011, 473(7347):337−42) with subsequent normalisation based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox J. et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014, 13(9):2513-26). Proteins were filtered to be identified by a minimum of 3 quantified in at least 1 sample. Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma (Smyth, G. K., Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol. 2004;3:Article3).

### Publication Abstract
Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a critical negative immune regulator. It binds AU-rich elements in the untranslated-regions of many mRNAs encoding pro-inflammatory mediators, thereby accelerating their decay. A key but poorly understood mechanism of TTP regulation is its timely proteolytic removal: TTP is degraded by the proteasome through yet unidentified phosphorylation-controlled drivers. In this study, we set out to identify factors controlling TTP stability. Cellular assays showed that TTP is strongly lysine-ubiquitinated, which is required for its turnover. A genetic screen identified the ubiquitin E3 ligase HUWE1 as a strong regulator of TTP proteasomal degradation, which we found to control TTP stability indirectly by regulating its phosphorylation. Pharmacological assessment of multiple kinases revealed that HUWE1-regulated TTP phosphorylation and stability was independent of the previously characterized effects of MAPK-mediated S52/S178 phosphorylation. HUWE1 function was dependent on phosphatase and E3 ligase binding sites identified in the TTP C-terminus. Our findings indicate that while phosphorylation of S52/S178 is critical for TTP stabilization at earlier times after pro-inflammatory stimulation, phosphorylation of the TTP C-terminus controls its stability at later stages.

### Keywords
Human, A7375, Sw620, Huwe1

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Gijs A. Versteeg
Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and Genetics, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria


