### Accession
PXD025169

### Title
Analysis of the nascent proteome during murine norovirus infection

### Description
SILAC- and AHA-labelling analysis of Raw264.7 cells infected with MNV-1 at MOI=10TCID50/cell and harvested at 6.5 and 10.5 hours post infection. AP-MS enrichment of AHA-labelled nascent polypeptides represents the first quantitative neoproteomics analysis of norovirus infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
RAW264.7 cells were maintained in SILAC media supplemented with Light (R0K0), Medium (R6K4) or Heavy (R10K8) Arginine and were either Mock-, MNV(UVi) or MNV-infected at MOI=10 TCID50/cell. Cells were labelled with SILAC media containing 1mM L-azidohomoalanine (AHA) and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C at 6 and 10 hours post infection prior to lysis. AHA-labelled polypeptides were conjugated to biotin-alkyne and combined altogether at a 1:1:1 ratio within one replicate. Three independent replicates were made with a different SILAC medium assigned to a given condition for each replicate. AHA-labelled biotinylated peptides were affinity enriched with streptavidin beads. Eluted fractions were run on an SDS-PAGE gel and each gel lane cut into 10 equal slices.  Each slice was subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Maxquant software v1.6.1.0 and searched against the Uniprot Mouse database (downloaded 18/03/30: 61314 entries) and MNV1 protein sequences (DQ285629.1). Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 20ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.5Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949), acetylation of protein N-termini (+42.0106), Triazole-PEG4-biotin of methionine (+452.238Da), AHA of methionine (-4.9863) and SILAC labels (+6.020Da and +10.008Da at arginine and +4.025Da and +8.014Da at lysine) as variable modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and the data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mnv, Raw264.7, Silac, Aha

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jia Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Goodfellow
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge


