### Accession
PXD040115

### Title
Proteomics coupled with AhR-reporter gene bioassay  for human and environmental safety assessment of sewage sludge and hydrochar

### Description
BACKGROUND: Sewage sludge (SL) and hydrochar (HC) agricultural applications are nowadays a common practice to soil conditioning and crop fertilization, however safety concerns for human and environmental health due to the presence of toxic compounds, have been recently increased.  OBJECTIVES: Our aim is to assess the safety for humans and the environment of SL and derived HC applications. METHODS: We applied proteomics and bioinformatics analyses to the cell cultures used for DR-CALUX® bioassay to identify differentially abundant proteins regulated upon exposure to SL and derived HC samples rather than only using the Bioanalytical Toxicity Equivalents (BEQs) obtained by the DR- CALUX® system itself.  RESULTS: DR-CALUX® cells exposed to SL or HC showed a differential protein pattern of abundance dependent on the SL and HC extracts. The modified proteins were involved in antioxidant pathways, unfolded protein response and DNA damage that have close correlations with dioxin effects on the biological system and with cancer and neurological disorder onset. Moreover, other evidence suggests the enrichment of heavy metals in extracts according to cellular response.  DISCUSSION: This work represents the next step of CALUX bioassay for screening polyhalogenated dibenzo-p-dioxins/furans and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls in HC and SL and confirm to be successful in screening proteins which abundance is dependent on the SL and HC extracts in addition to the occurrence and biological activity of legacy toxic compounds not only belonging to organohalogens but still detectable for their biological activity in both matrices.

### Sample Protocol
Detected spot differences were excised from MS-compatible silver staining gel and analyzed by Autoflex™ Speed mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) by the same protocol of Lanzafame et al (Lanzafame et al. 2021).

### Data Protocol
Search parameters for proteins identification on Mascot on-line-available search engine (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK, http://www.matrixscience.com), were as follows: Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL as databases, taxonomy limited to Rattus or Mus musculus, peptide mass fingerprint enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (Cys); variable modifications, oxidation of methionine; mass values, monoisotopic; ion charge state was set to +1; maximum miss cleavages was set to 1; mass tolerance of 50 ppm for PMF and 0.6–0.8 Da for MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Today application of sewage sludge (SL) and hydrochar (HC) in agriculture is a common practice for soil conditioning and crop fertilization, however safety concerns for human and environmental health due to the presence of toxic compounds have recently been expressed. Our aim was to test the suitability of proteomics coupled with bioanalytical tools for unravelling mixture effects of these applications in human and environmental safety assessment. We conducted proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of cell cultures used in the DR-CALUX&#xae; bioassay to identify proteins differentially abundant after exposure to SL and the corresponding HC, rather than only using the Bioanalytical Toxicity Equivalents (BEQs) obtained by DR-CALUX&#xae;. DR-CALUX&#xae; cells exposed to SL or HC showed a differential pattern of protein abundance depending on the type of SL and HC extract. The modified proteins are involved in antioxidant pathways, unfolded protein response and DNA damage that have close correlations with the effects of dioxin on biological systems and with onset of cancer and neurological disorders. Other cell response evidence suggested enrichment of heavy metals in the extracts. The present combined approach represents an advance in the application of bioanalytical tools for safety assessment of complex mixtures such as SL and HC. It proved successful in screening proteins, the abundance of which is determined by SL and HC and by the biological activity of legacy toxic compounds, including organohalogens.

### Keywords
Sludge; hydrochar; calux; unfolded protein response; dna damage; dioxin

### Affiliations
University of Siena
Functional Proteomics Lab, Department of Life Science, University of Siena, Siena, Italy

### Submitter
Enxhi Shaba

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Luca Bini
Functional Proteomics Lab, Department of Life Science, University of Siena, Siena, Italy


