### Accession
PXD018563

### Title
Mitochondrial dysfunction caused by bacterial outer membranes vesicles activates intrinsic apoptosis and inflammation

### Description
Sensing of microbes activates the immune system, depending on functional mitochondria. However, pathogenic bacteria inhibit mitochondria activity by delivering toxins via outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). How innate immune cells respond to pathogenic microbes that target mitochondria remains unclear. Here, we show that macrophages induce mitochondrial apoptosis and the NLRP3 inflammasome in response OMVs. Macrophages treated with OMVs and toxins that cause mitochondria dysfunction cease host protein translation which depletes pro-survival BCL-2 family member, MCL-1, and induces BAK-dependent mitochondrial apoptosis. Mitochondrial apoptosis and potassium ion efflux activate the NLRP3 inflammasome after OMV exposure. Importantly, mitochondrial apoptosis modulates IL-1 serum levels in response to OMVs. Our data highlight how innate immune cells sense infections by monitoring mitochondrial health.

### Sample Protocol
. The cells were treated with PBS and Neisseria OMVs at a concentration of 50 µg/mL in triplicates. The cells were harvested after 24 hours post-treatment and processed for mass spectrometry using sodium deoxycholate phase transfer. In brief, harvested cells were lysed using lysis buffer (1% w/v sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.1), heated at 95° C for 5 min and then sonicated 3 times for 10 sec each at an amplitude of 10 µm. The protein content of the lysed cells was estimated by BCA method. The lysed cells were then denatured and alkylated by adding 1 µL of freshly made 1 M TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and 8 µL of freshly made 0.5 M CAA (2-Chloroacetamide) at a final concentration of 10 mM and 40 mM of TCEP and CAA respectively. The mixture was then heated at 95°C for 5 min and sequencing grade trypsin was added at the enzyme to protein ration of 1:100 and incubated overnight at 37°C. Digestion of protein was stopped using 1% formic acid and sodium deoxycholate was removed using 100% water-saturated ethyl acetate which creates an interphase after centrifugation. Aqueous phase containing peptides were collected and concentrated using vacuum concentrator before analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The acquired DIA data have been evaluated in Spectronaut 11 Asimov (Biognosys) using an in-house generated, murine spectral library.

### Publication Abstract
Sensing of microbes activates the innate immune system, depending on functional mitochondria. However, pathogenic bacteria inhibit mitochondrial activity by delivering toxins via outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). How macrophages respond to pathogenic microbes that target mitochondria remains unclear. Here, we show that macrophages exposed to OMVs from Neisseria gonorrhoeae, uropathogenic Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa induce mitochondrial apoptosis and NLRP3 inflammasome activation. OMVs and toxins that cause mitochondrial dysfunction trigger inhibition of host protein synthesis, which depletes the unstable BCL-2 family member MCL-1 and induces BAK-dependent mitochondrial apoptosis. In parallel with caspase-11-mediated pyroptosis, mitochondrial apoptosis and potassium ion efflux activate the NLRP3 inflammasome after OMV exposure in vitro. Importantly, in the in vivo setting, the activation and release of interleukin-1&#x3b2; in response to N. gonorrhoeae OMVs is regulated by mitochondrial apoptosis. Our data highlight how innate immune cells sense infections by monitoring mitochondrial health.

### Keywords
Toxin, Mitochondria, Pyroptosis, Cell death, Neisseria, Omv, Bacteria, Inflammation, Macrophage, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Monash University
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Cheng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Naderer
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Australia


