### Accession
PXD012812

### Title
HDAC8 regulates escape from BRAF inhibitor therapy in Melanoma: Phosphotyrosine Profiling

### Description
Melanoma cells are highly plastic and have the ability to switch to a dedifferentiated, invasive phenotype in response to multiple stimuli.  Here, we show that exposure of melanoma cell lines and patient specimens to multiple stresses including BRAF-MEK inhibitor therapy, hypoxia and UV-irradiation leads to an increase in histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8) expression/activity, and in turn, the adoption of a drug-resistant, invasive phenotype. Systems level analyses using mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics implicated HDAC8 in the regulation of MAPK and AP-1 signaling pathways. Introduction of HDAC8 into drug-naïve melanoma cells conveyed resistance both in vitro and in in vivo xenograft models. HDAC8-mediated BRAF inhibitor resistance was mediated via receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activation leading to Ras/CRAF/MEK/ERK signaling. Although HDACs primarily function at the histone level, they also regulate signaling through the modulation of non-histone substrates. In line with this, HDAC8 introduction decreased the acetylation of c-Jun, increasing its transcriptional activity and enriching for an AP-1 gene signature. Mutation of the putative c-Jun acetylation site at lysine residue 273 reduced the transcriptional activation of c-Jun in melanoma cells and conveyed resistance to BRAF inhibition through increased RTK expression and enhanced MAPK pathway activity. In vivo xenograft studies confirmed the key role of HDAC8 in therapeutic adaptation, with both non-selective and  HDAC8-specific  inhibitors enhancing the durability of response to BRAF inhibitor therapy. Our studies demonstrate that HDAC8-specific inhibitors could represent an excellent strategy to limit the adaptation of melanoma cells to multiple stresses and therapeutic interventions, including BRAF-MEK inhibitor combinations.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to 80% confluence and were then washed with PBS containing 1 mM sodium orthovanadate on ice. Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer  and 10 mgs of protein were digested.  Tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides were immunoprecipitated with an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (pY1000, CST). The flow through from this IP was enriched for serine and threonine phosphorylated peptidesby immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC magnetic beads, CST) with no additional peptide fractionation. The phosphotyrosine, phosphoserine and phosphothreonine fractions were subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The resulting tandem mass spectra were searched using SEQUEST (Thermo) and MASCOT (www.matrixscience.com) against human entries in the UniProt database to identify phosphoproteins. To calculate relative signal intensities, label-free protein quantification of the mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5.

### Publication Abstract
Melanoma cells have the ability to switch to a dedifferentiated, invasive phenotype in response to multiple stimuli. Here, we show that exposure of melanomas to multiple stresses including BRAF-MEK inhibitor therapy, hypoxia, and UV irradiation leads to an increase in histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8) activity and the adoption of a drug-resistant phenotype. Mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics implicated HDAC8 in the regulation of MAPK and AP-1 signaling. Introduction of HDAC8 into drug-na&#xef;ve melanoma cells conveyed resistance both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>. HDAC8-mediated BRAF inhibitor resistance was mediated via receptor tyrosine kinase activation, leading to MAPK signaling. Although HDACs function at the histone level, they also regulate nonhistone substrates, and introduction of HDAC8 decreased the acetylation of c-Jun, increasing its transcriptional activity and enriching for an AP-1 gene signature. Mutation of the putative c-Jun acetylation site at lysine 273 increased transcriptional activation of c-Jun in melanoma cells and conveyed resistance to BRAF inhibition. <i>In vivo</i> xenograft studies confirmed the key role of HDAC8 in therapeutic adaptation, with both nonselective and HDAC8-specific inhibitors enhancing the durability of BRAF inhibitor therapy. Our studies demonstrate that HDAC8-specific inhibitors limit the adaptation of melanoma cells to multiple stresses including BRAF-MEK inhibition. SIGNIFICANCE: This study provides evidence that HDAC8 drives transcriptional plasticity in melanoma cells in response to a range of stresses through direct deacetylation of c-Jun.<b>Graphical Abstract:</b> http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/canres/79/11/2947/F1.large.jpg.

### Keywords
Melanoma, Braf, Hdac8

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Tumor Biology and Cutaneous Oncology Melanoma Center of Excellence Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Keiran Smalley, PhD
Tumor Biology and Cutaneous Oncology Melanoma Center of Excellence Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


