### Accession
PXD043252

### Title
Brown Fat Tissue from Nipsnap1 Flox and Nipsnap1 KO mice via LC MS/MS

### Description
Proteomic Analysis from the brown fat of Nipsnap1 Flox and KO mice that were exposed to cold or thermoneutrality for 10 days.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Processing: Brown adipose fat pads were isolated and lysed in 2% SDS solution supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Sample lysates were quantified by bicinchoninic protein assay and delivered to the Biotechnology Resource Center (BRC) at Cornell University for Tandem Mass-Tagged (TMT) shotgun-based quantitative proteomics. Briefly, proteins were denatured, reduced, cysteine blocked, and digested using the S-trap approach. The resulting trypic peptides were TMT-labeled, and pooled. The labeled peptides were then fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography by the Ultimate 3000 MDLC platform into 10 fractions. Then samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using a reverse phase HPLC separation and NanoLC RP coupled with an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano ion source.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing: Ion quantification and proteomic database searches were conducted using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software against the mouse database. All MS and MS/MS raw spectra were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4, Thermo) for reporter ion quantitation analysis. Statistics were calculated according to the N1-KO/N1-Flox mice in the N1-KO mice BAT tissue proteomics. Gene ontology was performed by EnrichR

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Nipsnap1, Cold, Thermoneutrality

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Qin Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Qin Fu
Cornell University


