### Accession
PXD008693

### Title
EMpire: Deep isoform level integration of the transcriptome, translatome, and proteome

### Description
In this study, we make used of mRNA-seq and its ability to reliably quantify isoforms, integrating this data with ribosome profiling and LC-MS/MS, to assign ribosome footprints and peptides at the isoform level.  We leverage the principle that most cell types, and even tissues, predominantly express a single principal isoform to set isoform-level mRNA-seq quantifications as priors to guide and improve allocation of footprints or peptides to isoforms.  Through tightly integrated mRNAseq, ribosome footprinting and/or LC-MS/MS proteomics we demonstrate that a principal isoform can be identified in over 80% of gene products in homogenous HEK293 cell culture and over 70% of proteins detected in complex human brain tissue.  Defining isoforms in experiments with matched RNA-seq and translatomic/proteomic data increases the functional relevance of such datasets and will further broaden our understanding of multi-level control of gene expression.     In this PRIDE submission you will find the raw files for the HEK293 cell proteomics.  Files for the human brain proteomics can be found at PXD005445.  We have also uploaded a zip file that contains the input files for our HEK293 cell analysis, and the isoform level output files – there is a separate folder within the zip files for these.  The data used to create the manuscript figures is in the Rdata file.  Code for assigning peptides and footprints to isoforms can be found on Github here: https://github.com/rkitchen/EMpire

### Sample Protocol
Mass-spectrometry (MS) proteomics Frozen pellets of HEK293-L10a cells were lysed by sonication in RIPA buffer plus protease inhibitors.  Protein was precipitated from the lysate to remove detergents by chloroform/methanol precipitation.  Protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate, reduced for 30 min at 37oC with 4 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated by incubating for 30 min with 8 mM iodoacetamide, before dilution to 2 M urea and addition of trypsin at a ratio of 1 μg:20 μg total protein.  Samples were digested overnight at 37oC, then acidified and desalted on a C18 Macro Spin Column (The Nest Group).  Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), then dried by Speedvac.  The dried pellet was resuspended in 10 mM potassium phosphate in 25% acetonitrile solution (pH 3.0) and separated in the first dimension by Strong Cation Exchange on a 2.1 x 200 mm PolySULFOETHYL ATM column (PolyLC Inc.) via an HP 1090 HPLC.  Separation was carried out over a linear 118 min gradient with increasing Buffer B (10 mM potassium phosphate, 25% acetonitrile pH 3.0, 1 M potassium chloride) at a flow rate of 200 μL/min.  Twenty fractions were collected, pooled into 10 tubes, and each tube desalted using a Ultra-Microspin C18 column (The Nest Group) prior to LC MS/MS.  Analysis was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Elite equipped with a Waters NanoACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system using a Waters Symmetry C18 180 µm by 20 mm trap and a 1.7 µm (75 µm-inner-diameter by 250 mm) NanoACQUITY UPLC column (at 35°C) for peptide separation.    RNA-seq read alignment and transcript quantification Due to our IP of ribosomes, and the decision not to deplete footprint samples of rRNA, we carried out an explicit alignment of the reads to known human rRNA before alignment to the genome.  TotalRNA- and raRNA-seq reads were mapped to the annotated 5S and 45S (chrUn_gl000220) rRNAs using STAR to remove any remaining rRNA contamination. Based on this alignment we observed that residual rRNA could explain on average ~20% of the sequence reads across all totalRNA and raRNA samples. We mapped the remaining ~80% of the RNA-seq reads to the human genome (hg38) and annotated transcriptome (gencode v21) again using the STAR aligner, following roughly the ENCODE alignment parameters (github.com/ENCODE-DCC/long-rna-seq-pipeline/blob/master/DAC/STAR_RSEM.sh).  Of the non-default options in STAR, the following are the most important to ensure compatibility with our method: ‘--outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate’ for visualisation in IGV ‘--quantMode TranscriptomeSAM’ for alignments in transcriptome coordinates for eXpress ‘--outFilterMismatchNoverLmax  0.05’ to ensure # mismatches to <5% of the # of mapped bases Transcript aligned reads were quantified using eXpress.  Ribosome footprint reads were clipped of their 3’ adapter and aligned, like the totalRNA- and raRNA-seq samples above, to the annotated 5S and 45S (chrUn_gl000220) ribosomal RNAs. Removal of rRNA reads was very important to reduce the effect of spurious alignments to the genome.  Non-rRNA reads were aligned to the human genome (hg38) and annotated transcriptome (gencode v21) again using the STAR aligner.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry spectra alignment The entire human transcriptome (as defined in gencode21) was in-silico translated, in three frames, to amino acid sequences using the transseq function within the EMBOSS42 software library.  Also included in this ‘target’ database were CRAPome43 sequences of likely contaminants (such as Bovine Albumin). Spectra obtained from the Orbitrap Elite, in proprietary ThermoFisher ‘.raw’ files, were processed using MaxQuant44 (v1.5.2.1).  Peptides were searched using “trypsin/P” as the digestion enzyme, with a tolerance for up to 2 missed cleavages.  This search included a fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and two variable modifications, N-acetylation and methionine oxidation.  MaxQuant default options were used for mass tolerance; 20 ppm for precursor ions, and 0.5 Da for fragment ions.  MaxQuant defaults of FDR corrected p of 0.01 was used for both peptide spectral match and protein identification. The standard peptides.txt output file from MaxQuant was used as input. Spectra were searched against these transcriptome-derived protein sequences, common contaminant sequences, and a library of reverse ‘decoy’ sequences45.   The distribution of expectation values for spectra with legitimate database hits was compared to the equivalent distribution for spectra assigned to the reverse ‘decoy’ database and a [maximum] expectation threshold was selected for each sample that limited the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%.  I.e. 1% of spectra below this expectation value mapped to the reverse database while 99% mapped to the real database. Peptides that mapped to more than one distinct genomic locus or to contaminant sequences were discarded from further analysis, however this is not to be confused with peptides assigned to multiple potential isoforms of the same gene which were retained. It is worth noting that many of the peptides identified using the SWISS-Prot reference could be assigned to multiple distinct genes and thus constituted much of the data loss attributed with the use of this reference (data not shown). The transcriptome-derived reference did not suffer as much from multi-mapping, due mainly to less ambiguous gene-isoform relationships. The analysis described below performs a second round of FDR correction based on decoy mappings and discards multi-locus mapping sequences. Software implementation and testing The code for the modified expectation-maximization algorithm is freely available and can be found at the Github repo: https://github.com/rkitchen/EMpire  Required inputs to the software are all in common data formats, examples are available in the GitHub repo: footprinting: gencode/ENSEMBL genome annotation (.gtf) footprint read -> transcript alignments (.bam) [optional] eXpress RNA-seq transcript quants (.xprs) mass-spec: gencode/ENSEMBL genome annotation (.gtf) translated amino-acid sequences for each transcript (.fasta) spectra -> either transcript X!Tandem output (.xml) or MaxQuant peptides file (.txt) [optional] spectra MS1 intensities for quantification (.mzXML) [optional] eXpress RNA-seq transcript quants (.xprs) [OR] footprint EM output (.exprs) Ribosome footprint frame analysis Here, we calculated the frame using the offset of the mid-point of the footprint read to the start of the middle-nucleotide of the closest codon triplet.  Using this metric and the resulting position-weight-matrix (PWM) of the footprint size vs. codon offset we can infer that the result of incomplete RNase digestion, which will likely differ between footprint preparations, tends to leave additional nucleotides at the 3’ end of the footprint (Figure S4a).  We can also use the PWM of read-mids to codon-offsets from single isoform genes to allow the reads to decide for themselves the optimal translation frame for each coding sequence and then ask, as a function of the number of reads mapped to a transcript, what fraction of transcripts are called in the correct frame.  Other bioinformatic & statistical analysis All RNA-seq statistical analyses, pre-processing, and normalization was performed within the R/Bioconductor scripting environment46.  Gene clustering for Figure 3/Figure S8 was performed using the dynamicTreeCut package, with default parameters except for the minimum module sizes which were adjusted for aesthetics (250 genes for footprints, and 200 genes for peptides).  Cluster profiles were computed from the median major isoform fractions of the genes within each cluster.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular control of gene expression is a complex process that is subject to multiple levels of regulation, but ultimately it is the protein produced that determines the biosynthetic state of the cell. One way that a cell can regulate the protein output from each gene is by expressing alternate isoforms with distinct amino acid sequences. These isoforms may exhibit differences in localization and binding interactions that can have profound functional implications. High-throughput liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry proteomics (LC-MS/MS) relies on enzymatic digestion and has lower coverage and sensitivity than transcriptomic profiling methods such as RNA-seq. Digestion results&#xa0;in predictable fragmentation of a protein, which can limit the generation of peptides capable of distinguishing between isoforms. Here we exploit transcript-level expression from RNA-seq to set prior likelihoods and enable protein isoform abundances to be directly estimated from LC-MS/MS, an approach derived from the principle that most genes appear to be expressed as a single dominant isoform in a given cell type or tissue. Through this deep integration of RNA-seq and LC-MS/MS data from the same sample, we show that a principal isoform can be identified in &gt;80% of gene products in homogeneous HEK293 cell culture and &gt;70% of proteins detected in complex human brain tissue. We demonstrate that the incorporation of translatome data from ribosome profiling further refines this process. Defining isoforms in experiments with matched RNA-seq/translatome and proteomic data increases the functional relevance of such data sets and will further broaden our understanding of multilevel control of gene expression.

### Keywords
Protien isoforms, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Mrna-seq

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale School of Medicine, PO Box 208114, New Haven, CT, 06520
Yale University

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Tan Lam
Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale School of Medicine, PO Box 208114, New Haven, CT, 06520


