### Accession
PXD005409

### Title
Crown-of-Thorns starfish excretory/secretory proteins under aggregation and alarm

### Description
The Crown-of-Thorns starfish (COTS), Acanthaster planci, is a highly fecund predator of reef-building corals distributed throughout the Indo-Pacific. COTS population outbreaks cause substantial loss of coral cover, diminishing the integrity and resilience of the reef ecosystems thus increasing their susceptibility to climate change. We sequenced genomes of A. planci from the Great Barrier Reef, Australia (GBR) and Okinawa, Japan (OKI) to guide identification of species-specific peptide communication with potential applications in mitigation strategies. The genome-encoded proteins excreted and secreted into the surrounding seawater by COTS forming aggregations and by those escaping the predatory giant triton snail, Charonia tritonis, were identified LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of samples for exoproteome identification For collection of COTS aggregation-conditioned seawater, three adult COTS (300-350 mm diameter) were kept in a single 60 L flow-through glass tank (780 mm x 380 mm) for 24 h. Water flow was stopped for 1 h before draining 51 L; the COTS remained in situ to minimise release of stress related chemistry. Conditioned water was acidified with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), then filtered through a 0.45 µm PVDF membrane and absorbed onto a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters, USA). To ensure sample integrity, filter cartridges were thoroughly washed with 100% methanol between samples to remove any carryover. Biomolecules were eluted from Sep-Pak cartridges with 70% acetonitrile:0.5% acetic acid, and then lyophilised. Lyophilised samples were stored at -20⁰C for subsequent analysis. For collection of COTS alarm-conditioned seawater, a single adult COTS (300-350 mm diameter) was kept in a single 60 L flow-through glass tank for 24 h. Then, water flow was stopped and a giant triton snail was placed into the tank, behind a divider mesh, for 1 h. The giant triton snail was removed and 51 L was drained; again the COTS remained in situ. Conditioned water was acidified, biomolecules purified and lyophilised as described above for the COTS aggregation-conditioned seawater. Procedures for collection of all samples were repeated three times (n = 3). In-solution trypsin digestion of exoproteins  Reconstitute samples containing about 1 mg exoproteins (evaluated by NanoDrop 2000C, ThermoScientific) in 100 μl extraction buffer (8M urea, 0.8M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0), followed by reduction in 5 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min at 37°C. The alkylation was carried out in 20 µl of 200 mM of iodoacetamide (IAA) prepared in 25 mM of ammonium bicarbonate for 60 min at room temperature, then 20 µl of 200 mM DTT was added and the mixture incubated at room temperature for 30‐60 min. The urea concentration was reduced with 775 µl MilliQ-H2O, and digestion was performed overnight with trypsin (1:50 ratio) at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by adjusting the pH of the solution to <3 by adding 10% formic acid, and the samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS. NanoHPLC-ESI-TripleTOF analysis The tryptic peptides were analysed on a Shimadzu Prominance Nano high pressure liquid chromatography system (HPLC, Japan) coupled to a Triple Time-Of-Flight 5600 mass spectrometer (Triple TOF-MS, AB SCIEX, Canada) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source (ESI; NanoLC-ESI-Triple-TOF-MS). Eight µL of each digested sample was injected onto a C18 trap column (50 mm x 300 μm, Agilent Technologies, Australia) at 30 µl/min. The samples were de-salted on the trap column for 5 min by flushing with solvent A (0.1% aqueous formic acid) at 30 µl/min. The trap column was then placed in-line with a 150 mm x 75 μm 300SBC18, 3.5 µm analytical nano HPLC column (Agilent Technologies, Australia). Linear gradients of 1-40% solvent B [90/10 acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (aq)] over 60 min at 300 nl/min flow rate, followed by a steeper gradient from 40-80% solvent B in 10 min were used for peptide elution. Solvent B was held at 80% for 5 min for washing the column and returned to 1% solvent B for equilibration prior to the next sample injection. The ion spray voltage was set to 2400V, declustering potential (DP) 100V, curtain gas flow 25, nebuliser gas 1 (GS1) 12 and interface heater at 150oC. The mass spectrometer acquired 500 ms full scan TOF-MS data followed by 20 x 50 ms full scan product ion data in an Information Dependant Acquisition (IDA) mode. Full scan TOFMS data was acquired over the mass range 350-1800 and for product ion ms/ms 100-1800. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 100 counts and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion, ms/ms spectra of the resultant 20 most intense ions. The data was acquired and processed using Analyst TF 1.5.1 software (ABSCIEX, Canada).

### Data Protocol
The protein database used for MS/MS data analysis was derived from the genomes (both GBR and OKI) of A. planci. A composite target−decoy database was built with the forward and reverse sequences for calculating the FDR. MS/MS data were imported to the PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, version 7.0) with the assistance of MS Data Converter (Beta 1.3, http://sciex.com/software-downloads-x2110). De novo sequencing of peptides, database search, characterising unspecific PTMs and detection of peptide mutations were used to analyse the MS/MS data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 1%, and (-10*lgP) was calculated accordingly where P is the probability that an observed match is a random event. The PEAKS Studio used the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.1 Da; fully tryptic enzyme specificity with two possible missed cleavage; monoisotopic precursor mass; a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; and variable modifications included methionine oxidation, conversion of glutamine and glutamic acid to pyroglutamic acid, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine. Proteins were grouped if they were supported by the same peptides, and the number of high-confidence supporting peptides that are uniquely mapped to the protein group was set to ≥1. Although a minimum of two peptides was commonly used to consider protein identifications statistically significant, identifications with one proteotypic peptide was allowed due to the high homology of proteins derived from two genomes. The protein confidence score (-10*lgP) was calculated based on confidence score of its supporting peptides. The quantitative analysis of proteins was carried out using the quantification module (PEAKS Q) with label-free method, which is based on the relative intensities of featured peptides detected in multiple samples. The mass shift between different runs was set to 50 ppm, and 1.0 min was used for evaluating the retention time shift tolerance. Featured peptides with FDR threshold 1% were included in the quantitative analysis. The result was validated sequentially with the charge of featured peptides between 2 and 5, fold change ≥1 and detected in more than one sample of the triplicate, while the FDR of protein ≤1%, the number of unique peptides and fold change of each protein were set to ≥1 and ≥2, respectively; peptide ratio versus quality-score and ratio versus average-area (MS signal intensity) were set to default value of 8.

### Publication Abstract
The crown-of-thorns starfish (COTS, the Acanthaster planci species group) is a highly fecund predator of reef-building corals throughout the Indo-Pacific region. COTS population outbreaks cause substantial loss of coral cover, diminishing the integrity and resilience of reef ecosystems. Here we sequenced genomes of COTS from the Great Barrier Reef, Australia and Okinawa, Japan to identify gene products that underlie species-specific communication and could potentially be used in biocontrol strategies. We focused on water-borne chemical plumes released from aggregating COTS, which make the normally sedentary starfish become highly active. Peptide sequences detected in these plumes by mass spectrometry are encoded in the COTS genome and expressed in external tissues. The exoproteome released by aggregating COTS consists largely of signalling factors and hydrolytic enzymes, and includes an expanded and rapidly evolving set of starfish-specific ependymin-related proteins. These secreted proteins may be detected by members of a large family of olfactory-receptor-like G-protein-coupled receptors that are expressed externally, sometimes in a sex-specific manner. This study provides insights into COTS-specific communication that may guide the generation of peptide mimetics for use on reefs with COTS outbreaks.

### Keywords
Crown-of-throns starfish, Triton snail, Lc-ms/ms, Excretory/secretory protein

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Centre for Genetics, Ecology and Physiology, Faculty of Science, Health, Education and Engineering, University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia.

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Centre for Genetics, Ecology and Physiology, Faculty of Science, Health, Education and Engineering, University of the Sunshine Coast, Australia.


