### Accession
PXD042335

### Title
KIF11 immunoprecipitates from control and RAB11 knockdown CACO2 cells

### Description
We want to determine the protein networks that are associated with KIF11 in the presenceor absence of Rab11 in Caco2 cells. We performed immunoprecipitation against KIF11 using an anti-KIF11 antibody in control and Rab11 knockdown Caco2 cells In addition, we included samples of no antibody control to assess background binding.

### Sample Protocol
G protein agarose beads were conjugated with anti-KIF11 antibody. Immunoprecipitation was performed using cell lysates from control and Rab11 knockdown Caco2 cells. No antibody control IP were performed using WT and Rab11 knockdown cell lysates. The resulting precipitated protein complexes were resolved by SDS-PAGE, stained by Sypro Ruby or Coomassie blue. The gel was cut amd pooled into the following samples: high molecular weight Caco2 Rab11KD (GaoNan_1 and 2), low molecular weight Caco2 Rab11KD (GaoNan_1 and 2), high molecular weight Caco2 WT(GaoNan_3 and 4), low molecular weight Caco2 WT(GaoNan_3 and 4). No antibody control samples were WT(NanGao_WT1) (no antibody) and Rab11KD(NanGAO_Rab11aKD1)(no antibody). We performed in-gel trypsin digestion. The resulted peptides were C18 desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive instrument.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra was searched against The MS/MS spectra were searched against Uniprot human database using Sequest search engines on Proteome Discoverer (V2.1) platform. The protein false discovery rate is less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kif11

### Affiliations
Rutgers University, Newark, USA
Rutgers University

### Submitter
Ivor Joseph

### Lab Head
Dr Nan Gao
Rutgers University, Newark, USA


