### Accession
PXD011981

### Title
Proteomics analysis of behavioral adaptation in zebrafish larvae

### Description
In this work we investigated how the brain proteome of the larval zebrafish is modified by behavioral adaptation to the environmental challenge of a water vortex. We monitored the behavior of larvae and observed that they behaviorally adapted to the presence of a water vortex. We obtained the larval zebrafish brain proteome by extracting brains from zebrafish larvae and analyzing them using and LFQ-based LC-MS/MS-approach. In total we identified 5929 proteins in the larval brain. Within this proteome, we identified 57 proteins that were significantly regulated following experience of the water vortex: 41 proteins were up regulated and 16 were down regulated. Of these, 29 proteins are known to have neuronal functions, 17 proteins are known to have other cellular functions, and 11 proteins are still uncharacterized.

### Sample Protocol
Naïve and pre-exposed (collected 24 hours after the 9 hours pre-exposure onset) larvae were anesthetized in cold water and snap frozen in a dry ice ethanol bath. Larvae were subsequently hand thawed and the brain dissected out in ice cold PBS  (0.137 M NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 4.3 mM Na2HPO4*7H2O, and 1.4 mM KH2PO4). The brains were collected in non-stick eppendorf tubes and snap frozen. Pools of 20 larval brains were homogenized in lysis buffer using mini douncers, the lysate was then centrifuged at 2000 g to clear it of debris. The supernatant was immobilized on filter membranes. The membranes were washed three times using ABC buffer (50mM NH4HC03, pH 8.5 with 0.3 M KCl). Proteins were subsequently denatured using 6 M urea (5 min), reduced using TCEP (5 mM, 30 min, RT; Sigma Aldrich, Germany) and alkylated using Iodoacetamide (20 mM, 30 min, RT; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The samples were then incubated with the Protease Lys-C (0.2 µg / 50 µl; Roche Pharmaceuticals, Germany) overnight at room temperature. After 1:1 dilution and addition of CaCl2 to a final concentration of 1mM, the samples were incubated with Trypsin (0.5 µg / 50 µl; Serva, Germany) at room temperature overnight. Subsequently, the proteolytic peptides were eluted using ABC buffer and purified using c18-ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Merck, Germany). The elution fractions were dried using a Speed-Vac and stored at -20 °C until further use. Proteolytic digests were dissolved in 5 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid, and subsequently loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) on reverse phase columns (trapping column: particle size 3µm, C18, L=20mm; analytical column: particle size <2µm, C18, L=50cm; PepMap, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptides were eluted in gradients of water (buffer A: water with 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 20 % (v/v) water and 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid). All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Typically, gradients were ramped from 5 % to 70 % B in 200 minutes at flow rates of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionized online using a Thermo nanoFlex ESI-source and analyzed either in a Thermo “Orbitrap Elite” mass spectrometer or in a Thermo “Q Exactive Plus” mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 250-1650 m/z, and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode using collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data sets were processed using the MaxQuant software package and protein abundances were calculated using Label-Free Quantitation. For protein identification, spectra were matched against a custom database containing all sequenced Danio rerio strains and known contaminating proteins (downloaded from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). In general, a mass tolerance of 2 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment spectra, two missed cleavages, oxidation of Met and fixed carbamidomethyl-cystein modification were selected as matching parameters in the search program. All proteomics data associated with this paper have been uploaded to the PRIDE online repository. Anonymous reviewer access is available upon request. The dataset was subsequently analyzed using the Perseus software package. After removal of contaminating proteins, the LFQ values calculated by MaxQuant were averaged over technical replicates and grouped over biological experiments. After removal of proteins with a Coefficient of variation > 0.4 (4309 proteins remaining), a two-sided T test was performed to identify significantly differentially regulated proteins (FDR = 0.05, s0 = 0.15).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Behavioral adaptation, Zebrafish larvae, Proteomics

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian David Langer
MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


