### Accession
PXD026606

### Title
Fecal Transplant from Roux-Y-Gastric-Bypass rat model into a diet induced obesity rat model

### Description
Investigating alterations the intestinal microbiome in a diet induced obesity (DIO) rat model after fecal transplant from rats, which underwent Roux-Y-Gastric-Bypass surgery (RYGB). The microbiomes of the RYGB-donor rats, the DIO rats, and DIO rats after receiving the fecal transplant from the RYGB rats. As controls lean rats as well as lean, RYGB and DIO rats after antibiotics treatment were used.

### Sample Protocol
0.5 g cecal content was resuspended in 1 mL Lysis-buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 0.4% SDS, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, pH= 8) and disrupted with a Fastprep (FastPrep -24, MP Biomedicals). Then samples were shaken in a Thermomixer (Thermomixer comfort 5355, Eppendorf) at 1400 rpm, at 60 °C for 15 min. This was followed by sonication using an ultrasound probe (UP50H, Hielscher) and samples were spun at 10,000 rcf at 4°C for 10 min. Supernatants, containing the protein content, were kept and frozen at -20°C for storage. For the proteolytic cleavage of proteins, protein extract where thawed and 100 µg of protein was precipitated from each bacterial protein extract, separated by SDS-PAGE and further processed by in-gel reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues followed by cleavage of proteins with trypsin, eluting of resulting proteolytic peptides and desalting peptides as previously described [1]. Peptides were reconstituted in 15 µL 0.1% formic acid and 5 µL were injected for separation into nano-HPLC system (UltiMate 3000, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) coupled online for analysis with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Peptides were trapped on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap ® 100, 75 µm x 2 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher) and washed for 5 min with 0.1% formic acid with a 5 µL/min solvent flow. Then peptides were eluted using a 90 min linear gradient from 4% B to 25% B (A: 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water; B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in MS-grade water) followed by a 30 min gradient from 25% B to 50% B and a 3 min gradient to 99% B with 5 min isocratic flow, then 2 min gradient to 4% B and finally an isocratic flow for 5 min at 4% B. After trapping, during the entire analytical run the solvent flow rate was set to 300 nL/min and the eluting peptides were separated on a downstream analytical column (Acclaim PepMap ® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher) kept at 35°C before being ionized by a Triversa Nanomate (Advion) ion source and entering the Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer: Q Exactive mass spectrometer settings were as noted in Haange et al. [2]  1. Haange, S.B.; Jehmlich, N.; Hoffmann, M.; Weber, K.; Lehmann, J.; von Bergen, M.; Slanina, U. Disease Development Is Accompanied by Changes in Bacterial Protein Abundance and Functions in a Refined Model of Dextran Sulfate Sodium (DSS)-Induced Colitis. J Proteome Res 2019, 18, 1774-1786, doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00974.  2. Haange, S.-B.; Jehmlich, N.; Krügel, U.; Hintschich, C.; Wehrmann, D.; Hankir, M.; Seyfried, F.; Froment, J.; Hübschmann, T.; Müller, S., et al. Gastric bypass surgery in a rat model alters the community structure and functional composition of the intestinal microbiota independently of weight loss. Microbiome 2020, 8, 13, doi:10.1186/s40168-020-0788-1.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, v2.2, San Jose, CA, USA). Spectra searches were performed by the tandem mass ion search algorithms Sequest HT. The database for spectral searches was constructed by downloading and combining protein sequences from Uniprot repository (www.uniprot.org, September 2020) of all the bacteria genera identified by 16S rRNA gene profiling om the samples with protein sequences from the taxa Rattus norvegicus. Additional search parameters were tryptic cleavage, maximum of two missed cleavage sites, a precursor mass tolerance threshold of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance threshold of 0.02 Da. Also, carbamidomethylation at cysteines was selected as a static and oxidation of methionine selected as a variable modification. Data were filtered with a peptide FDR set at 1% and only “rank one” peptides were considered for later analysis. Protein grouping was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Metaproteomics, Rat, Roux-y-gastric bypass surgery, Anti-biotics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biologie, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Microbiome biology Group, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Sven Haange

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Microbiome biology Group, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


