### Accession
PXD037509

### Title
Complete integration of carbene-transfer chemistry into biosynthesis

### Description
Biosynthesis is an environmentally friendly and renewable way to synthesize a broad range of natural and some new-to-nature products; however, it lacks many of the reactions and flexibility of synthetic chemistry, an example being carbene mediated reactions. While it was recently shown that these reactions can be imported into the cell, carbene donors and unnatural cofactors needed to be added exogenously to the cells, precluding cost-effective scale-up of the reaction. Here we identified a biosynthetic gene cluster that when expressed in Streptomyces albus will produce the diazo compound azaserine, which we also demonstrated can serve as a carbene donor across a carbon-carbon double bond in another intracellularly produced molecule, styrene, thereby producing a cyclopropanated product. The reaction was catalyzed with P450 mutants harboring a native cofactor with excellent diastereoselectivity and moderate yield. This work establishes a platform for introducing carbene mediated reactions into microbes for bio-manufacture and contributes to sustainable green chemistry.

### Sample Protocol
Streptomyces albus cell pellets were resuspended in Qiagen P2 Lysis Buffer (Qiagen, Cat.#19052) to promote cell lysis. Proteins were precipitated with addition of 1 mM NaCl and 4 x vol acetone, followed by two additional wash with 80% acetone in water. The recovered protein pellet was homogenized by pipetting mixing with 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate in 20% Methanol. Protein concentration was determined by the DC protein assay (BioRad). Protein reduction was accomplished using 5 mM tris 2-(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Overnight digestion with trypsin was accomplished with a 1:50 trypsin:total protein ratio.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw data files were analyzed by an integrated software suite DIA-NN. DIA-NN determines mass tolerances automatically based on first pass analysis of the samples with automated determination of optimal mass accuracies. The retention time extraction window was determined individually for all MS runs analyzed via the automated optimization procedure implemented in DIA-NN. Protein inference was enabled, and the quantification strategy was set to Robust LC = High Accuracy. Output main DIA-NN reports were filtered with a global FDR = 0.01 on both the precursor level and protein group level

### Publication Abstract
Biosynthesis is an environmentally benign and renewable approach that can be used to produce a broad range of natural and, in some cases, new-to-nature products. However, biology lacks many of the reactions that are available to synthetic chemists, resulting in a narrower scope of accessible products when using biosynthesis rather than synthetic chemistry. A prime example of such chemistry is carbene-transfer reactions<sup>1</sup>. Although it was recently shown that carbene-transfer reactions can be performed in a cell and used for biosynthesis<sup>2,3</sup>, carbene donors and unnatural cofactors needed to be added exogenously and transported into cells to effect the desired reactions, precluding cost-effective scale-up of the biosynthesis process with these reactions. Here we report the access to a diazo ester carbene precursor by cellular metabolism and a microbial platform for introducing unnatural carbene-transfer reactions into biosynthesis. The &#x3b1;-diazoester azaserine was produced by expressing a biosynthetic gene cluster in Streptomyces albus. The intracellularly produced azaserine was used as a carbene donor to cyclopropanate another intracellularly produced molecule-styrene. The reaction was catalysed by engineered P450 mutants containing a native cofactor with excellent diastereoselectivity and a moderate yield. Our study establishes a scalable, microbial platform for conducting intracellular abiological carbene-transfer reactions to functionalize a range of natural and new-to-nature products and expands the scope of organic products that can be produced by cellular metabolism.

### Keywords
Carbene meidated reaction, P450, Biosynthesis, Streptomyces albus

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


