### Accession
PXD006568

### Title
Comparative proteomics of reduced protein phosphatase inhibitor-2 expression in the loss of function mutant Arabidopsis

### Description
Protein phosphatase inhibitor-2 (PPI-2) is a conserved eukaryotic effector protein that inhibits type one protein phosphatases (TOPP). A transfer-DNA knockdown of AtPPI-2 resulted in stunted growth in both vegetative and reproductive phases of Arabidopsis development. At the cellular level, AtPPI-2 knockdown had 35 to 40% smaller cells in developing roots and leaves.  This developmental phenotype was rescued by transgenic expression of the AtPPI-2 cDNA behind a constitutive promoter. Comparative proteomics of developing leaf proteins of wild type (WT) and AtPPI-2 mutant revealed reduced levels of proteins associated with chloroplast development, ribosome biogenesis, transport, and cell cycle regulation processes. Down-regulation of several ribosomal proteins, a DEAD box RNA helicase family protein (AtRH3), Clp protease (ClpP3) and proteins associated with cell division suggests a bottleneck in chloroplast ribosomal biogenesis and cell cycle regulation in AtPPI-2 mutant plants. In contrast, eight out of nine Arabidopsis TOPP isoforms were up-regulated at the transcript level in AtPPI-2 leaves compared to WT. A protein-protein interaction network revealed that more than 75% of the differentially expressed proteins have at least secondary and/or tertiary connections with AtPPI-2. Collectively, these data reveal a potential basis for the growth defects of AtPPI-2 and support the presumed role of AtPPI-2 as a master regulator for TOPPs, which regulate diverse growth and developmental processes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from WT and AtPPI-2 mutant leaves Leaves from wild type and AtPPI-2 mutant plants were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground in a mortar to obtain a fine powder.  Aliquots (500 mg) of the powder were subjected to phenol protein extraction as described by [13]. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA Protein Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Houston, TX) using BSA as a standard.  Protein extracts were prepared in three biological replicates.  Gel electrophoresis was performed under denaturing conditions in 13% polyacrylamide gels using 20 mA per gel.  Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie blue stain under standard conditions.  Protein digestion and mass spectrometry analyses Before protein digestion, gel lanes for each biological replicate were sliced into 10 equal-sized segments, diced into approximately 1 mm cubes with a scalpel, and transferred into a 96 well filtration plate (Multi Screen Solvinert Plates, Millipore).  Tryptic digestion was carried out according to [14].  Each trypsin-digested and dried sample was reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analyzed by nanospray-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry  (nESI-LC-MS/MS) performed with a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose) as described previously [9]. For in-solution trypsin digestion, total proteins (100 µg) were digested with trypsin (1:50, w/v) for 20 h as described previously [15]. Prior to MS analysis, freeze dried-peptides were dissolved by adding 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Five μL of each sample were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system attached to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). The chromatographic system was composed of ProteoPer II PicoFrit (150 μm id., 30 μm tip) analytical column (15 cm, New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with of 5 μm, 300 Å Magic C18AQ media (MichromBioresources). The gradient was performed at a 1.2 μL min−1 flow rate using an acetonitrile gradient (1%–35% solvent B for 85 min; solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in mass spectrometry-grade water, solvent B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Precursor masses were scanned with the analyzer set to FTMS; mass range, normal; resolution, 60,000; scan type, positive mode; data type, centroid; and a scan range of 400-2000 m/z. The 15 most abundant ions from the precursor scan were selected for subsequent fragmentation using the ion trap-analyzer, normal mass range, normal scan rate, and centroid data type. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for a duration of 25 sec.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Arabidopsis protein sequences obtained from TAIR database (TAIR10) and concatenated to a randomized version of TAIR10 (i.e. decoy) were generated using an in-house developed program (DecoyDB Creator, available at www.oilseedproteomics.missouri.edu).  Acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using ProLuCID[16] against the concatenated protein database and peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) validation was performed by using the Search Engine Processor tool [17]. Database searches were conducted as follows: precursor mass tolerance: 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 600 ppm; number of precursor isotopic peaks: 5; variable modification: methionine oxidation and static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation.  Spectrum, peptide and protein cutoffs were adjusted to achieve a false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level for each biological replicate as described previously [13]. Relative protein quantification Spectral counts were used to estimate individual protein amounts in each complex protein sample. Proteins containing common peptides were grouped and relative quantification was performed considering the number of spectral counts per protein group. In this way, shared spectra were counted only once within each protein group. Pattern Lab [18] was used to compare wild type and AtPPI-2 mutant. Spectral counts were first normalized using Row Sigma Normalization [18] within Pattern Lab. Pairwise comparisons were then performed using the T-Fold test module [19] to detect differential proteins between samples. Proteins that were detected in at least two biological replicates were considered for T-Fold test with a BH-q value set to 0.05. Also, the F-stringency parameter was optimized to maximize low abundance protein detection [19].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphatase inhibitor, Ribosome biogenesis, Protein-protein interaction, Arabidopsis, Ppi-2, Comparative proteomics, Type-1 phosphatase

### Affiliations
Brown University
Professor, University of Missouri-Columbia, Department of Biochemistry, 271G Life Sciences Center, Columbia, MO 65211, USA

### Submitter
Nagib Ahsan

### Lab Head
Dr Jay J. Thelen
Professor, University of Missouri-Columbia, Department of Biochemistry, 271G Life Sciences Center, Columbia, MO 65211, USA


