### Accession
PXD001157

### Title
Oligosaccharide Substrate Preferences of Human Extracellular Sulfatase Sulf2

### Description
In this study, we characterized the substrate preferences of human HSulf2 using HS oligosaccharides with various lengths and sulfation degrees from several naturally occurring HS sources by applying liquid chromatography mass spectrometry based glycomics methods.

### Sample Protocol
Partialy digestion of porcine intestinal mucosa heparan sulfate was fractionated by off-line SEC column. The fraction corresponding to DP4 (DP: degree of polymerization), DP6 and DP8 oligosaccharides were collected for HSulf2 treatment and HILIC LC-MS analysis on an Agilent 6520 QTOF MS with chip cube interface.

### Data Protocol
The HILIC LC-MS spectra were decovoluted using the combination of customized Decon2Ls/DeconTools Autoprocessor from Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and Progenesis (Nonlinear Dynamic Limited). The profiling of the HS compositions was achieved using in-house fitting programs. The composition coding of the HS and heparin is presented as [ΔHexA, HexA, GlcN, Ac, SO3] (ΔHexA: ∆4,5-unsaturated hexuronic acid; HexA: hexuronic acid; GlcN: glucosamine; Ac: acetyl group; SO3: sulfate).

### Publication Abstract
Sulfs are extracellular endosulfatases that selectively remove the 6-O-sulfate groups from cell surface heparan sulfate (HS) chain. By altering the sulfation at these particular sites, Sulfs function to remodel HS chains. As a result of the remodeling activity, HSulf2 regulates a multitude of cell-signaling events that depend on interactions between proteins and HS. Previous efforts to characterize the substrate specificity of human Sulfs (HSulfs) focused on the analysis of HS disaccharides and synthetic repeating units. In this study, we characterized the substrate preferences of human HSulf2 using HS oligosaccharides with various lengths and sulfation degrees from several naturally occurring HS sources by applying liquid chromatography mass spectrometry based glycomics methods. The results showed that HSulf2 preferentially digests highly sulfated HS oligosaccharides with zero acetyl groups and this preference is length dependent. In terms of length of oligosaccharides, HSulf2 digestion induced more sulfation decrease on DP6 (DP: degree of polymerization) compared to DP2, DP4 and DP8. In addition, the HSulf2 preferentially digests the oligosaccharide domain located at the non-reducing end (NRE) of the HS and heparin chain. In addition, the HSulf2 digestion products were altered only for specific isomers. HSulf2 treated NRE oligosaccharides also showed greater decrease in cell proliferation than those from internal domains of the HS chain. After further chromatographic separation, we identified the three most preferred unsaturated hexasaccharide for HSulf2.

### Keywords
Glycomics, Substrate preference, Sulf2

### Affiliations
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine
Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yu Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine


