### Accession
PXD020340

### Title
Chemical genetics and proteome-wide site mapping reveal cysteine MARylation by PARP-7 on immune-relevant protein targets

### Description
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 7 (PARP7) has emerged as a critically important member of a large enzyme family that catalyze mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation) in mammalian cells. Unlike other PARPs, PARP7 is expressed in many different cell types and is upregulated by diverse stimuli, such as toxins, growth factors, steroid hormones, and immunomodulatory ligands. Recent evidence by several independent studies show that PARP7 is a critical regulator of the innate immune response. What remains unclear is the mechanism by which PARP7 regulates this process as well as other cellular processes. This is because the protein targets, and the specific amino acid sites, of PARP7 MARylation are largely unknown. Here, we combine chemical genetics, proximity labeling, and proteome-wide amino acid ADP-ribosylation (ADPr) site profiling for identifying the direct targets and sites of PARP7-mediated MARylation. We found that the inactive PARP family member, PARP13—a critical regulator of the innate antiviral immune response—is a major target of PARP7, and is preferentially MARylated on cysteine residues in its RNA binding zinc finger domain. Proteome-wide MARylation analysis reveals cysteine as a major ADPr acceptor of PARP7. These studies not only provide insight into PARP7 targeting and MARylation site preference, but also serve as an important resource for further understanding PARP7 function in the innate immune response and other pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in guanidinium (6 M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM TRIS, pH 8.5) by alternating vigorous vortexing and vigorous shaking of the samples, after which lysates were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Lysates were thawed at room temperature, reduced and alkylated by incubation with 5 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min, followed by sonication for 15 seconds at an amplitude of 90%. Proteins were digested for 3 hours at room temperature using Lys-C (1:100 w/w; Wako Chemicals), diluted with three volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested using modified sequencing grade Trypsin (1:100 w/w; Sigma Aldrich) overnight at room temperature. Protease digestion was terminated by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v), and cleared from precipitates by cebtrifugation. Peptides were purified by reversed-phase C18 cartridges (SepPak, Waters), and eluted using 4 ml of 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were frozen at −80°C overnight, after which they were dried to completion by lyophilization. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in AP buffer (50 mM TRIS pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 250 μM DTT), and cleared by centrifugation in a swing-out centrifuge at room temperature, for 30 min at 4,250g. Poly-ADP-ribosylation was reduced to mono-ADP-ribosylation by incubation of samples with recombinant PARG at a concentration of 1:10,000 (w/w), at room temperature, overnight and with gentle sample agitation. In-house prepared sepharose beads with GST-tagged Af1521 were added to the samples, in a ratio of 50 µl dry beads per 5 mg sample. Samples were incubated in a head-over-tail mixer, at 4°C for 3 h. Afterwards beads were washed twice in ice-cold AP Buffer, twice in ice-cold PBS, and twice with ice-cold MQ water. After washing, ADP-ribosylated peptides were eluted off the beads using two bead volumes of ice-cold elution buffer (0.15% TFA). Beads were gently pelleted, and the elutions were transferred to 0.45 μm column filters (Ultrafree-MC, Millipore). Next, ADP-ribosylated peptides were transferred to pre-washed 100 kDa cut-off filters, and centrifuged for 10 min at 8,000g. Samples were basified by addition of ammonium hydroxide to a final concentration of 20 mM. All StageTips were prepared essentially as described previously (Rappsilber et al., 2003), but were assembled using four layers of C18 disc material (punch-outs from 47mm C18 3M™ extraction discs, Empore). StageTips were activated with methanol, and equilibrated using 50 mM ammonium hydroxide, after which samples were loaded. Samples were eluted of the StageTips using 80 μl of 30% of ACN in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide Dried purified ADP-ribosylated peptides were dissolved by addition of 10 μL 0.1% formic acid.  All MS samples were measured using a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were analyzed on 15 cm long analytical column, packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch), with an internal diameter of 75 μm. On-line reversed-phase liquid chromatography to separate peptides was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo). The analytical column was heated to 40°C using a column oven, and peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). For the main samples (F1), the gradient ranged from 3% buffer B to 40% buffer B over 62 minutes, followed by a washing block of 18 minutes. For the flowthrough samples (F0), the gradient ranged from 5% buffer B to 30% buffer B over 35 minutes, followed by a washing block of 15 minutes. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C, and RF level to 30%. For F1 samples, full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 600,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 200,000 charges, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using electron transfer disassociation with supplemental higher-collisional disassociation (EThcD) with a supplemental activation energy of 20. Precursors with charge state 3-5 were isolated for MS/MS analysis, and prioritized from charge 3 (highest) to charge 5 (lowest), using the decision tree algorithm. Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with a loop count setting of 5, a maximum precursor injection time of 120 ms, and a scan resolution of 60,000. The F0 samples were measured as described above with the following exceptions. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 120,000, with a maximum injection time of 250 ms, and MS/MS spectra were measured at a resolution of 60,000, with a maximum precursor injection time of 500 ms.

### Data Protocol
EThCD Data analysis  All raw data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) supported by the Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). Default MaxQuant settings were used, with the following exceptions. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and ADP-ribosylation on C, D, E, H, K, R, S, T, and Y, were included as variable modifications. Up to 6 missed cleavages were allowed, and a maximum allowance of 4 variable modifications per peptide was used. Second peptide search was enabled (default), and matching between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Mass tolerance for precursors was set to 20 ppm in the first MS/MS search and 4.5 ppm in the main MS/MS search after mass recalibration. For fragment ion masses, a tolerance of 20 ppm was used. Modified peptides were filtered to have an Andromeda score of >40 (default), and a delta score of >20. Data was automatically filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at the peptide-spectrum match, the protein assignment, and the site-specific levels.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 7 (PARP-7) has emerged as a critically important member of a large enzyme family that catalyzes ADP-ribosylation in mammalian cells. PARP-7 is a critical regulator of the innate immune response. What remains unclear is the mechanism by which PARP-7 regulates this process, namely because the protein targets of PARP-7 mono-ADP-ribosylation (MARylation) are largely unknown. Here, we combine chemical genetics, proximity labeling, and proteome-wide amino acid ADP-ribosylation site profiling for identifying the direct targets and sites of PARP-7-mediated MARylation in a cellular context. We found that the inactive PARP family member, PARP-13-a critical regulator of the antiviral innate immune response-is a major target of PARP-7. PARP-13 is preferentially MARylated on cysteine residues in its RNA binding zinc finger domain. Proteome-wide ADP-ribosylation analysis reveals cysteine as a major MARylation acceptor of PARP-7. This study provides insight into PARP-7 targeting and MARylation site preference.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Adp-ribosylation, Ptm, Adpr, Parp7

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Sara Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


