### Accession
PXD031082

### Title
A small-molecule inhibitor targeting AKR1C1 suppresses cell proliferation and metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer

### Description
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths, characterized by highly invasion and metastasis. Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C1 (AKR1C1) plays an important role in cancer cell proliferation and metastasis and has gained attention as an anticancer drug target. Here we report that the natural sesquiterpene lactone alantolactone (ALA) was shown to bind directly to AKR1C1 through the Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) analysis, a label-free target identification approach based on thermal proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
NCI-H460 cells (5 × 106) were seeded into 10 cm culture dishes and allowed for attachment overnight. The attached cells were treated in biological triplicates with DMSO (0.5%) and ALA (30 µM), respectively, for 2 h. Then, cells were harvested and washed twice with pre-chilled PBS followed a re-suspension using 500 µl of PBS. The cell suspensions were then aliquoted to ten PCR tubes and were heated at ten different temperatures (48 °C, 49.2 °C, 50.4 °C, 51.6 °C, 52.8 °C, 54.0 °C, 55.2 °C, 56.4 °C, 57.6 °C, 58.8 °C) respectively for three minutes followed by cooling for another three minutes. The cells were then lysed by three cycles of freeze-thaw using liquid nitrogen. The ten aliquots from the same group were then combined to one sample and the soluble protein fractions were collected by a centrifugation at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and transferred into new ultracentrifuge micro-tubes. The protein concentrations were measured using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (PierceTM, ThermoFisher). An aliquot of equal amount protein from each group was then subjected to reduction and alkylation using dithiothreitol solution (DTT, final concentration 20 mM) and iodoacetamide solution (IAA, final concentration 50 mM), respectively. The protein samples were then precipitated using the methanol-chloroform mixture solution (methanol: chloroform=4:1, v/v) and the obtained protein pellet was air-dried for 5 min at room temperature followed to re-dissolve by 8M urea buffer (dissolved in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.5, freshly prepared). By a dilution of urea concentration to 4M by the 20 mM HEPES buffer, the protein was digested by the Lys-C Protease (PierceTM, MS grade, 90051, ThermoFisher) in a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at room temperature overnight. The mixture was further digested by the Trypsin Protease (PierceTM, MS grade, 90057, ThermoFisher) in a ratio of 1:75 (w/w) for 6 h at 37 °C after diluting the urea concentration to 1M. The acetonitrile was added to digested protein samples to a final concentration of 20% for the TMT labelling.

### Data Protocol
NCI-H460 cells (5 × 106) were seeded into 10 cm culture dishes and allowed for attachment overnight. The attached cells were treated in biological triplicates with DMSO (0.5%) and ALA (30 µM), respectively, for 2 h. Then, cells were harvested and washed twice with pre-chilled PBS followed a re-suspension using 500 µl of PBS. The cell suspensions were then aliquoted to ten PCR tubes and were heated at ten different temperatures (48 °C, 49.2 °C, 50.4 °C, 51.6 °C, 52.8 °C, 54.0 °C, 55.2 °C, 56.4 °C, 57.6 °C, 58.8 °C) respectively for three minutes followed by cooling for another three minutes. The cells were then lysed by three cycles of freeze-thaw using liquid nitrogen. The ten aliquots from the same group were then combined to one sample and the soluble protein fractions were collected by a centrifugation at 100,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C and transferred into new ultracentrifuge micro-tubes. The protein concentrations were measured using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (PierceTM, ThermoFisher). An aliquot of equal amount protein from each group was then subjected to reduction and alkylation using dithiothreitol solution (DTT, final concentration 20 mM) and iodoacetamide solution (IAA, final concentration 50 mM), respectively. The protein samples were then precipitated using the methanol-chloroform mixture solution (methanol: chloroform=4:1, v/v) and the obtained protein pellet was air-dried for 5 min at room temperature followed to re-dissolve by 8M urea buffer (dissolved in 20 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.5, freshly prepared). By a dilution of urea concentration to 4M by the 20 mM HEPES buffer, the protein was digested by the Lys-C Protease (PierceTM, MS grade, 90051, ThermoFisher) in a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at room temperature overnight. The mixture was further digested by the Trypsin Protease (PierceTM, MS grade, 90057, ThermoFisher) in a ratio of 1:75 (w/w) for 6 h at 37 °C after diluting the urea concentration to 1M. The acetonitrile was added to digested protein samples to a final concentration of 20% for the TMT labelling.

### Publication Abstract
Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths, characterized by high invasion and metastasis. Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C1 (AKR1C1) plays an important role in cancer cell proliferation and metastasis, and has gained attention as an anticancer drug target. Here, we report that the natural sesquiterpene lactone alantolactone (ALA) was shown to bind directly to AKR1C1 through the Proteome Integral Solubility Alteration (PISA) analysis, a label-free target identification approach based on thermal proteome profiling. Acting as a specific inhibitor of AKR1C1, ALA selectively inhibits the activity of AKR1C1 and ALA treatment in human non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell results in a reduction in cell proliferation and metastasis, inhibition of AKR1C1 expression, and deactivation of STAT3. Moreover, ALA inhibited tumor growth <i>in vivo</i>, and the inhibition of AKR1C1 and STAT3 activation were also found in the murine xenograft model. Collectively, our work not only gives mechanistic insights to explain the bioactivity of ALA in anticancer but also provides opportunities of developing novel sesquiterpene lactone-based AKR1C1 inhibitors for the treatment of NSCLC.

### Keywords
Alantolactone; akr1c1; anticancer; target identification; non-small cell lung cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Department of Pharmacy, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China;

### Submitter
Zhiwen FU

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiwen Fu
Department of Pharmacy, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


