### Accession
PXD041614

### Title
Restoration of CPEB4 Prevents Muscle Stem Cell Senescence during Aging

### Description
Muscle stem cells (MuSCs) are required for muscle regeneration. In resting muscles, MuSCs are kept in quiescence. After injury, MuSCs undergo rapid activation, proliferation and differentiation to repair damaged muscles. Age-associated impairments in stem cell functions correlate with a decline in somatic tissue regeneration capacity during aging. However, the mechanisms underlying the molecular regulation of adult stem cell aging remain elusive. Here, we obtained quisecent MuSCs from young, old, geriatric mice for high resolution mass spectrometry Bruker timsTOF Pro. By comparison of young proteome to old MuSCs proteome or geriatric MuSC proteome, we identified the pathways that are differentially during aging.

### Sample Protocol
Quiescent MuSCs were isolated from 0.5%PFA perfused mice. These cells are harvested by RIPA buffer. To decrosslink the pre-fixed quiescent MuSCs, the protein lysis was heated at 70 degree for 2 hours. Afterwards, the proteins were precipitated by adding 4 fold of volome of pre-cold acetone. Then protein pellets were washed by pre-cold acetone, pre-cold 70% ethanol and pre-cold acetone. Protein pellet was resuspended in UA buffer, followed by the addition of DTT (final concentration was 2mM). Put it at 30°C for 1.5 hours. Then, add IAA for a final concentration 10mM and protect it from light for 40 minutes. Afterwards, add trypsin (final concentration 0.25ug/ul) into the suspension for overnight digestion. Stop the digestion by adding TFA (final concentration 0.4%). After salt depletion by C18 spin tips (Thermo), the material was loaded into the Bruker timsTOF Pro instrument following the instruction of Bruker.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from Bruker timsTOF Pro instrument were transfer to the PEAKS software. Then search the raw data by PEAKS with Unitprot database. Afterwards, the PEAKS provided all the information including peptides, peaks, proteins, and spectral counting in a specific protein. Then, we used spectral counting for label-free quantification of proteome following normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) method. Simply, we first obtained the spectral abundance factor by normalizing the spectral number of proteins with the length of the protein. Then, we normalized the spectral abundance factor between samples by dividing over the sum of all the spectral abundance factor. Since the NSAF was very small, we multiplied the NSAF with 1000000 and plus 1. Then the Student’s t-test was performed to calculate the differential express proteins between samples.

### Publication Abstract
Age-associated impairments in adult stem cell functions correlate with a decline in somatic tissue regeneration capacity. However, the mechanisms underlying the molecular regulation of adult stem cell aging remain elusive. Here, we provide a proteomic analysis of physiologically aged murine muscle stem cells (MuSCs), illustrating a pre-senescent proteomic signature. During aging, the mitochondrial proteome and activity are impaired in MuSCs. In addition, the inhibition of mitochondrial function results in cellular senescence. We identified an RNA-binding protein, CPEB4, downregulated in various aged tissues, which is required for MuSC functions. CPEB4 regulates the mitochondrial proteome and activity through mitochondrial translational control. MuSCs devoid of CPEB4 induced cellular senescence. Importantly, restoring CPEB4 expression rescued impaired mitochondrial metabolism, improved geriatric MuSC functions, and prevented cellular senescence in various human cell lines. Our findings provide the basis for the possibility that CPEB4 regulates mitochondrial metabolism to govern cellular senescence, with an implication of therapeutic intervention for age-related senescence.

### Keywords
Mouse, Aging, Proteome, Cpeb4, Muscle stem cells

### Affiliations
S H Ho Associate Professor of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, CHINA
HKUST

### Submitter
Wenxin ZHANG

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Hiu Tung CHEUNG
S H Ho Associate Professor of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, CHINA


