### Accession
PXD024294

### Title
miR-146 modulation in ALS astrocytes

### Description
Regarding astrocytes and microglia, we are looking for pathways related with inflammatory activation, phagocytosis and vesicular/exosome trafficking. Regarding motor neurons, we are searching for pathways related with mitochondrial dynamics, Endoplasmic Reticulum stress, cell death, axonal transport, synaptic vesicles transport and oxidative stress. The general aim is to identify putative hits in ALS that relates with miR-146a expression.

### Sample Protocol
The following cellular pellets were collected for proteomic analysis: (i) mSOD1 astrocytes, transfected or not with pre-miR-146a; (ii) naïve microglia; and (iii) WT motor neurons after incubation with mSOD1 astrocytic secretome (± pre-miR-146a). The cellular pellets were collected by trypsinization for 5 min, washed with PBS and immediately stored at -80ºC.  Each sample resulted from a pool of three biological replicates (cells isolated from different mice that were pooled down and sent for analysis at EMBL Proteomics Core Facility in Heidelberg, Germany.  LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol (PMID: 25358341, PMID: 29565595). To this end, samples were added to Sera-Mag Beads (Thermo Scientific, #4515-2105-050250, 6515-2105-050250) in 10 µl 15% formic acid and 30 µl of ethanol. Binding of proteins was achieved by shaking for 15 min at room temperature. SDS was removed by 4 subsequent washes with 200 µl of 70% ethanol. Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature with 0.4 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, #V5111) in 40 µl Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.4 in the presence of 1.25 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #C0267). Beads were separated, washed with 10 µl of an aqueous solution of 2% DMSO and the combined eluates were dried down. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of H2O and reacted for 1 h at room temperature with 80 µg of TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific, #90111) (PMID: 24579773) label reagent dissolved in 4 µl of acetonitrile.  Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4 µl of an aqueous 5% hydroxylamine solution (Sigma, 438227). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid, mixed to achieve a 1:1 ratio across all TMT-channels and purified by a reverse phase clean-up step (OASIS HLB 96-well µElution Plate, Waters #186001828BA). Peptides were subjected to an off-line fractionation under high pH conditions (PMID: 25358341). The resulting 12 fractions were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scentific) as previously described (PMID:30858367). To this end, peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system (Dionex) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn C18 PepMap100, 5 mm, 300 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100. 75 × 50 cm C18, 3 mm, 100 Å) connected to a nanospray-Flex ion source. The peptides were loaded onto the trap column at 30 µl per min using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted using a gradient from 2 to 40% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 2 h at 0.3 µl per min (all solvents were of LC-MS grade). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2.4 kV and capillary temperature of 275 °C. Full scan MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 120,000 (maximum fill time of 50 ms or a maximum of 4e5 ions (AGC) and a RF lens setting of 30%. Fragmentation was triggered for 3 s cycle time for peptide like features with charge states of 2–7 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition). Precursors were isolated using the quadrupole with a window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 38. Fragment mass spectra were acquired in profile mode and a resolution of 30,000 in profile mode. Maximum fill time was set to 64 ms or an AGC target of 1e5 ions). The dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. Acquired data were analyzed using IsobarQuant (PMID: 26379230) and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix Science) using a reverse UniProt FASTA Homo sapiens (UP000005640) or Mus musculus (UP000000589) database including common contaminants. The following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), TMT10plex (K, fixed), Acetyl (N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and TMT10plex (N-term, variable). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.02 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level (PMID: 25987413).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using IsobarQuant (Franken et al., 2015), Mascot V2.4 (Matrix Science) and a reverse UniProt FASTA Mus musculus (UP000000589) database, including common contaminants. The following modifications were considered: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), TMT10plex (K, fixed), Acetyl (N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and TMT10plex (N-term, variable). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.02 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 was required on the peptide and protein level (Savitski et al., 2015). 9083 proteins were identified, from which 6748 proteins were quantified. The raw output files of IsobarQuant were processed using the R programming language (Team, 2020). As a quality filter, we only considered proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides. Raw TMT reporter ion intensities [Average expression (signal_sum)] were normalized using variance stabilization normalization (Huber et al., 2002).  Differential expression was evaluated by computing the respective ratio of normalized TMT signals.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Als; mir-146a; astrcoyte; motor neuron; microglia

### Affiliations
EMBL
Neuron Glia Biology in Health and Disease Group, iMed.Ulisboa, Faculty of pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Dora Brites
Neuron Glia Biology in Health and Disease Group, iMed.Ulisboa, Faculty of pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal


