### Accession
PXD048677

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of the kinetoplastid kinetochore protein KKT14 phosphorylated by the Aurora B kinase

### Description
We performed mass spectrometry of a recombinant KKT14 N-terminal fragment that was phosphorylated by AUK1 (Aurora B homolog in Trypanosoma brucei) in vitro to identify phosphorylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
To identify AUK1-dependent phosphorylation sites on KKT14, an in vitro kinase assay was carried out using a recombinant KKT14 N-terminal fragment (2–357) incubated with either wild-type or kinase-dead AUK1 that is bound to CPC1 (INCENP homolog in Trypanosoma brucei). The gel was stained using SimplyBlue (Invitrogen) and bands corresponding to the KKT14 N-terminal fragment were cut out and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (PMID: 25278616). Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sonication for 15 minutes, followed by centrifugation and supernatant collection. A solution of 50:50 water: acetonitrile, 1% formic acid (2x the volume of the gel pieces) was added for a second extraction and the samples were again sonicated for 15 minutes, centrifuged and the supernatant pooled with the first extract. The pooled supernatants were processed using speed vacuum centrifugation. The samples were dissolved in 10 µL of reconstitution buffer (96:4 water: acetonitrile, 1% formic acid) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) at the proteomics core facility at EMBL Heidelberg.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by searching tandem mass spectrometry spectra against the T. brucei protein database with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1) with carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification and oxidization (Met) and phosphorylation (Ser, Thr), set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The first peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm (protein FDR 1%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Kinetochore, Kkt14, Kinetoplastid, Trypanosome

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Bungo Akiyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Bungo Akiyoshi
University of Edinburgh


