### Accession
PXD016653

### Title
Adaptation mechanism of roots to low nitrogen and high nitrogen revealed by proteomic analysis

### Description
To better understand the molecular mechanism underlying the rice root response to low nitrogen and high nitrogen, comparative proteomic analysis was performed using tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomics, and related proteins were further characterized.

### Sample Protocol
Rice varieties were selected from Shen Nong 265 (Oryza sativa subsp. Keng), and the seeds were incubated with 10% H2O2. After growing to the three-leaf heart stage, seedlings with the same growth were selected and supplied with low nitrogen (13.33 ppm, Low-N), control nitrogen (40 ppm, Control-N), or high nitrogen (120 ppm, High-N) nutrient solution; each group included 30 seedlings. The nutrient solution was formulated using the conventional nutrient solution formulation of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) with a slight improvement. The pH of the nutrient solution was maintained between 5.45 and 5.55. The pH was adjusted once a day with 1 M NaOH and 1 M HCl. The nutrient solution was changed every three days. Three samples of rice roots under low-, control, and high-N treatment were measured for 30 days; three biological replicates per treatment were used for subsequent TMT-based proteomic analysis. the relevant indicators were determined.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Mascot Distiller version 2.6. Then the mass spectrometry datawere transformed into MGF files with Proteome Discovery 1.2 (Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA, USA)and analyzed using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.2). Protein identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Root system morphology, Proteomics, Nitrogen, Rice

### Affiliations
Rice Research Institute of Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang Agricultural University
Shenyang Agricultural University

### Submitter
Wei Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Xin
Rice Research Institute of Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang Agricultural University


