### Accession
PXD029232

### Title
L-Lysine treated rats' kidney shotgun proteome

### Description
Hypertension and kidney disease, two related, common, and severe disease entities have been repeatedly associated with genomic variants and metabolic alterations of lysine metabolism. Here, we developed a stable isotope labeling strategy compatible with untargeted metabolomics acquisition to investigate the physiology and molecular spectrum of lysine’s metabolic fate in vivo.  Mice received 13C6 labeled lysine through the diet over two months to track more than 100 lysine metabolites across various organs and body fluids. Globally, lysine reacts rapidly with molecules of the central carbon metabolism, as opposed to slow or incorporation into proteins and metabolization into acylcarnitines. Lysine metabolism is accelerated in the rat model of the Dahl salt-sensitive hypertension and kidney damage, chiefly through N-alpha-mediated degradation. Here, lysine administration completely diminished the development of salt-sensitive hypertension and kidney injury. Administration of lysine leads to diuresis, even further acceleration of 13C6 lysine conjugate formation, and inhibition of albumin uptake, thereby protecting from nephron injury and metabolic stress. Lysine conjugates with malonyl-CoA to form a novel metabolite N-malonyl-lysine, to deplete malonyl-CoA from fatty acid synthesis. This process occurs at the expense of protein malonylation. In hypertensive rats with kidney damage, lysine molecules were excreted as fructoselysine, saccharopine and Nε-acetyllysine, via the urine, leading to an overall depletion of central carbon metabolites from the organism and kidney. Consistent with findings in the salt-sensitive rat, lysine challenge of patients with mild kidney damage inhibited tubular albumin uptake, increased lysine conjugate formation in the urine, and reduced TCA cycle metabolites, in contrast to kidney-healthy volunteers. In conclusion, comprehensive lysine isotope tracing mapped an accelerated lysine metabolism in hypertension, and further, lysine administration induced kidney protection in kidney disease.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney samples were homogenized using stainless steel beads in a Bullet Blender STORM Pro device (Next Advance) with 6M guanidine hydrochloride, 0.1M HEPES pH 7.4, 5 mM EDTA buffer, complemented with protease inhitor cocktail (Roche). Protein homogenates were treated with Benzonase (Millipore) at 37 °C (15 min) to degrade nucleic acids and subsequently carbamidomethylated with 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM CAA at 95 °C (5 min). The concentration of proteins was determined using the BCA assay (Thermo) and 50µg aliquots were purified with paramagnetic, mixed 1:1 hydrophobic:hydrophilic SP3 beads (Weng, Demir et al., MCP, 2019). Purified proteins were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4 and digested over night at 37 °C with trypsin (Serva) in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. Samples were acidified with 2% formic acid and peptides were purified using in-house made stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
Raw FAIMS data was converted into MzXML files with the FAIMS_MzXML_Generator tool (v1.0.7639, Hebert et al., Anal Chem 2018) and queried with MaxQuant v 1.6.7.0 (FDR = 1%, match between runs = on) using the UniProt reference proteome database for rat from may 2020 (canonical only, 21587 entries) and default settings for orbitraps. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification (+57.021464) and methionine oxidation (+15.994914) as well as protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) were set as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Perseus software suite.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hypertension, Rat, L-lysine, Kidney

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine
Markus Rinschen Lab
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine Høegh-Guldbergsgade 10 DK-8000 Aarhus C

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Matthias Rinschen
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine Høegh-Guldbergsgade 10 DK-8000 Aarhus C


