### Accession
PXD012431

### Title
High-throughput mass spectrometry and bioinformatics analysis of breast cancer proteomic data

### Description
The project contains raw and result files from a comparative proteomic analysis of malignant [primary breast tumor (PT) and axillary metastatic lymph nodes (LN)] and non-tumor [contralateral (NCT) and adjacent breast (ANT)] tissues of patients diagnosed with invasive ductal carcinoma. A label-free mass spectrometry was conducted using nano-liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionization–mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) followed by functional annotation to reveal differentially expressed proteins and their predicted impacts on pathways and cellular functions in breast cancer. A total of 462 proteins was observed as differentially expressed (DEPs) among the groups of samples analyzed. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software version 2.3 (QIAGEN Inc.) was employed to identify the most relevant signaling and metabolic pathways, diseases, biological functions and interaction networks affected by the deregulated proteins. Upstream regulator and biomarker analyses were also performed by IPA’s tools. Altogether, our findings revealed differential proteomic profiles that affected the associated and interconnected cancer signaling processes.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were lysed in 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT (100 μL buffer per 10 mg tissue), homogenized in TissueLyser II sample disruptor (Qiagen Corp. MD, USA) at an oscillation frequency of 25 Hz for 3 min and heated to 95ºC. Homogenization and heating were repeated three times followed by sonication and centrifugation to remove cellular debris. Samples (25 µg) were separated in 1D-PAGE 10% (v/v) acrylamide gels, reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 50 mM iodacetamide and digested overnight with 12.5 ng/µl trypsin solution in ABC at 37 °C. After that, the peptides were extracted twice with 30% acetonitrile (ACN), 3% TFA and twice with ACN, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and desalted with C18 Stage Tips. Peptide mixtures were analyzed in triplicate on EASY-nLC 1000 chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The MS2 analysis was performed in a DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were analyzed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3. Trypsin was set as the enzyme and the search was done against human UniProt protein database (UniProtKB 24 May 2017, 70,939 entries) for protein identification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. For peptide identification, at least seven amino acids were required. An FDR of 1% was independently applied for both peptide and protein identification. LFQ and match between runs options were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Data present here describe a comparative proteomic analysis among the malignant [primary breast tumor (PT) and axillary metastatic lymph nodes (LN)], and the non-tumor [contralateral (NCT) and adjacent (ANT)] breast tissues. Protein identification and quantification were performed through label-free mass spectrometry using a nano-liquid chromatography coupled to an electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (nLC-ESI-MS/MS). The mass spectrometry proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD012431. A total of 462 differentially expressed proteins was identified among these tissues and was analyzed in six groups' comparisons (named NCTxANT, PTxNCT, PTxANT, LNxNCT, LNxANT and PTxLN). Proteins at 1.5 log2 fold change were submitted to the Ingenuity<sup>&#xae;</sup> Pathway Analysis (IPA) software version 2.3 (QIAGEN Inc.) to identify biological pathways, disease and function annotation, and interaction networks related to cancer biology. The detailed data present here provides information about the proteome alterations and their role on breast tumorigenesis. This information can lead to novel biological insights on cancer research. For further interpretation of these data, please see our research article 'Quantitative label-free mass spectrometry using contralateral and adjacent breast tissues reveal differentially expressed proteins and their predicted impacts on pathways and cellular functions in breast cancer' [2].

### Keywords
Bioinformatics analysis, Contralateral breast tissue, Label-free mass spectrometry, Proteomics, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Genetics Department, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Michel Batista

### Lab Head
Dr Enilze Maria de Souza Fonseca Ribeiro
Genetics Department, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: axillary metastatic lymph nodes tissues, primary breast tumor tissues, adjacent breast tissues, non-tumor contralateral breast tissues
- disease: Breast cancer
- cell type: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- factor value[organism part: axillary metastatic lymph nodes tissues, primary breast tumor tissues, adjacent breast tissues, non-tumor contralateral breast tissues

