### Accession
PXD016850

### Title
Temporal proteomic analyses of the protein contents found in the insoluble fraction of the a-synuclein PFF-treated neurons

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is characterized by the accumulation of misfolded and aggregated alpha-synuclein (α-syn) into intraneuronal inclusions named Lewy bodies (LB). Although it is widely believed that α-syn plays a central role in the pathogenesis of PD, the processes that govern α-syn fibrillization and LB formation remain poorly understood. In this work, we sought to dissect the spatiotemporal events involved in the biogenesis of the LBs at the genetic, molecular, biochemical, structural, and cellular levels. Towards this goal, we further developed a seeding-based model of α-syn fibrillization to generate a neuronal model that reproduces all the key events leading to LB formation; including seeding, fibrillization, and the formation of inclusions that recapitulate many of the biochemical, structural, and organizational features of bona fide LBs. Using an integrative omics, biochemical and imaging approach, we dissected the molecular events associated with the different stages of LB formation and their contribution to neuronal dysfunction and degeneration. In addition, we demonstrate that LB formation involves a complex interplay between α-syn fibrillization, post-translational modifications, and interactions between α-syn aggregates and membranous organelles, including mitochondria, the autophagosome and endolysosome. Finally, we show that the process of LB formation, rather than simply fibril formation, is the major driver of neurodegeneration through disruption of cellular functions and inducing mitochondria damage and deficits, and synaptic dysfunctions. We believe that this model represents a powerful platform to further investigate the mechanisms of LB formation and clearance and to screen and evaluate novel therapeutics targeting α-syn aggregation and LB formation.

### Sample Protocol
Primary hippocampal neurons were treated with PBS or PFFs for 7, 14, or 21 days. Cells were lysed at the indicated time-points into the soluble and insoluble fractions as described above. Proteins from the insoluble fraction were then separated by SDS-PAGE on a 16% polyacrylamide gel, which was then stained with Coomassie Safestain (Life Technologies, Switzerland). Each gel lane was entirely sliced, and proteins were in-gel digested as previously described (16). Peptides were desalted on stageTips (17) and dried under a vacuum concentrator. For LC-MS/MS analysis, resuspended peptides were separated by reversed phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected in-line with an Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 (18) against the UniProt mouse database (UniProt release 2017_05). Perseus was used to highlight differentially quantified proteins (19). Reverse proteins, contaminants, and proteins only identified by sites were filtered out. Biological replicates were grouped together. Protein groups containing a minimum of two LFQ values in at least one group were conserved. Empty values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution (Width: 0.5 and Downshift: 1.7). Significant hits were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy, combining t-test p-values with ratio information (20). Significance curves in the volcano plot corresponding to a SO value of 0.4 (D7 and D21) or 0.5 (D14) and 0.05 FDR were determined by a permutation-based method. Further graphical displays were generated using a homemade program written in R (https://www.R-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse primary neurons

### Affiliations
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
LMNN, BMI, EPFL

### Submitter
Hilal Lashuel

### Lab Head
Dr Hilal Lashuel
LMNN, BMI, EPFL


