### Accession
PXD031146

### Title
MicroID: A Novel Biotin Ligase Enables Rapid Proximity Ligation Proteomics

### Description
Identifying protein-protein interactions is central to dissecting signaling and regulatory processes in cells. BioID is a proximity ligation method that uses a promiscuous biotin ligase to detect protein-protein interactions in cells in a highly reproducible manner. Recent advancements in proximity ligation tools have improved efficiency and timing of labeling, allowing for measurement of interactions on a cellular timescale. However, issues of size, stability, and background labeling of these constructs persist. Here we modified the structure of BioID2 to create a smaller, highly active, biotin ligase that we named MicroID. Truncation of the c-terminal of BioID2 and mutations to alleviate blockage of biotin/ATP binding at the active site of BioID2 resulted in a smaller, highly active construct with lower baseline labeling. Several additional point mutations improved the function of our modified MicroID construct compared to BioID2 and other biotin ligases, including TurboID and miniTurbo. MicroID is the smallest biotin ligase (180 AA for microID vs. 257 AA for miniTurbo and 338 AA for TurboID), yet it demonstrates only slightly less labeling activity than TurboID and outperforms miniTurboID. MicroID also had lower background labeling than TurboID. For experiments where precise temporal control of labeling is essential, we developed a MicroID mutant that has lower labeling efficiency, but significantly reduced biotin scavenging compared to BioID2. Finally, we demonstrate utility of MicroID in mass spectrometry experiments by localizing MicroID constructs to subcellular organelles and measuring protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
MicroID and TurboID constructs were cloned into the sleeping beauty backbone pSBbi-RB (Addgene #60522). SDM or restriction enzyme cloning was utilized to introduce localization sites: 3X nuclear localization sequence (NLS) [Addgene #98875], mitochondrial targeting sequence (MTS) [Addgene #98876] and the nuclear export sequence (NES) [Addgene #49386]. The final constructs were transfected into BEAS-2B and co-transfected with the sleeping beauty transposase (pCMV(CAT)T7-SB100; Addgene #34879) at a 1:5 ratio. At 4-5 days post-transfection, cells were selected by puromycin A1 treatment (2 µg/mL). Biotin 50 µM (D-Biotin; Fisher) treatment was initiated at 1-3 hours prior to harvest. At 15 minutes prior to harvest, we replaced the media with biotin-free media. Cells were lysed in Buffer A (0.5% Triton X-100, 0.2% SDS), sonicated, and clarified by centrifugation. We isolated biotinylated proteins via pulldown with Pierce Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Thermo). Beads containing proteins were either submitted for mass spectrometry experiments, or eluted with 2X SDS buffer + 1 mM biotin for western blotting. Streptavidin beads were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate three times and incubated with sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. The reaction was quenched the next morning by adding acetic acid for acidification. Supernatant was concentrated for LC/MSMS analysis. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray FAIMS Pro™ Sources operated in positive ion mode. Tryptic peptides (4.0 µL) were separated on an Easy-Spray nano column (PepmapTM RSLC, C18 3µ 100A, 75µm X150mm Thermo Scientific) with increasing organic over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Three FAIMS compensation voltages (cv = -50, -65 and -80v) were used for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot Daemon by Matrix Science version 2.7.0 (Boston, MA) via ProteomeDiscoverer (version 2.4 Thermo Scientific,). Mascot was set up to search the Common_Contamination_Proteins-cRAP_LZ.fasta and Uniprot Human database, (20210604, 20513 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme stricttrypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Four missed cleavages for the enzyme were permitted. Only Peptides with probability >=95% will be considered as valid identification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was also used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 96.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. For all protein identification a decoy database was searched to determine the false discovery rate (FDR) and proteins were filtered according at 1% FDR. Proteins identified with at least two unique peptides were considered as reliable identification. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Label free quantitation was performed using the spectral count approach, in which the relative protein quantitation is measured by comparing the number of MS/MS spectra identified from the same protein across samples.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying protein-protein and other proximal interactions is central to dissecting signaling and regulatory processes in cells. BioID is a proximity-dependent biotinylation method that uses an "abortive" biotin ligase to detect proximal interactions in cells in a highly reproducible manner. Recent advancements in proximity-dependent biotinylation tools have improved efficiency and timing of labeling, allowing for measurement of interactions on a cellular timescale. However, issues of size, stability, and background labeling of these constructs persist. Here we modified the structure of BioID2, derived from Aquifex aeolicus BirA, to create a smaller, highly active, biotin ligase that we named MicroID2. Truncation of the C terrminus of BioID2 and addition of mutations to alleviate blockage of biotin/ATP binding at the active site of BioID2 resulted in a smaller and highly active construct with lower background labeling. Several additional point mutations improved the function of our modified MicroID2 construct compared with BioID2 and other biotin ligases, including TurboID and miniTurbo. MicroID2 is the smallest biotin ligase reported so far (180 amino acids [AAs] for MicroID2 versus 257 AAs for miniTurbo and 338 AAs for TurboID), yet it demonstrates only slightly less labeling activity than TurboID and outperforms miniTurbo. MicroID2 also had lower background labeling than TurboID. For experiments where precise temporal control of labeling is essential, we in addition developed a MicroID2 mutant, termed lbMicroID2 (low background MicroID2), that has lower labeling efficiency but significantly reduced biotin scavenging compared with BioID2. Finally, we demonstrate utility of&#xa0;MicroID2 in mass spectrometry experiments by localizing MicroID2 constructs to subcellular organelles and measuring proximal interactions.

### Keywords
Proximity ligation; bioid; turboid; organelle; mass spectrometry; microid

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University
Department of Internal Medicine Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, 473 W. 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH. 43210

### Submitter
James Londino

### Lab Head
Dr James David Londino
Department of Internal Medicine Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, 473 W. 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH. 43210


