### Accession
PXD017914

### Title
EGFR N-Glycosylation Profile from Colorectal Cancer Cells

### Description
LC-MS/MS glycoproteomic analysis of EGFR N-glycosylation profile. EGFR immunoprecipitated from colorectal cancer cell lines SW48 (wild-type and ST6Gal1 overexpression) and Caco-2 (wild-type and ST6Gal1 knock-out)

### Sample Protocol
EGFR was immunoprecipitated from whole cell lysates, as described above, and separated by SDS-PAGE on NuPAG 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels. Protein gels were stained with the Colloidal Blue staining kit. A ~170 kDa band was excised for further protein identification and glycoproteomic analysis. Excised bands were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and in-gel digested with trypsin using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides were analyzed via on-line C18-nano-HPLC-MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 0% to 50% solvent B (100/0.1 water/formic acid FA v/v) in 20 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode (top-10) with a normalized collision energy of 32% and recording of the MS/MS spectrum in the Orbitrap. To increase the fragmentation of N-glycosylated peptides, the HexNAc oxonium ion at m/z = 204.087 was set as Product Ion Trigger, and three additional MS/MS scans of the corresponding precursor ion were performed with HCD normalized collision energies of 32, 37 and 41 %, respectively, and a collision-induced dissociation (CID) energy of 35 V.

### Data Protocol
In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Electron), and then submitted to the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (67911 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2.04 (29) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with a tolerance of 5 and 20 ppm for precursor and fragment ions, respectively, and trypsin was selected as enzyme. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The data was also analyzed using ByonicTM version 2.13.2 (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA, USA) using default settings (30). In addition to the settings for common modifications as described above, the “N-glycan 309 mammalian no sodium” database was used for the search and assignment of N-glycosylated peptides. Glycopeptide assignment was performed by manual spectra interpretation using the XcaliburTM software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Colorectal cancer cell lines, St6gal1, N-glycosylation, Egfr

### Affiliations
Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute for Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (lab head)
Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto (Ipatimup/i3S)

### Submitter
Henrique Duarte

### Lab Head
Dr Celso A. Reis
Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute for Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. (lab head)


