### Accession
PXD031047

### Title
Protein translation upon DNA damage

### Description
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed in vehicle- and camptothecin (CPT)-treated 293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin gold (#V5280, Promega, China). Liquid chromatography (LC) was used to fractionate each tryptic peptide mixture into 16 fractions. The components were analysed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for MS data searches. The common search parameters included: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), Gln → pyro-Glu (N-terminus), and acetyl (protein N-terminus); Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Criteria for confident identification with false discovery rate (FDR) filtering (1% at the peptide level and 1% at the protein level). Smith-Waterman analysis was conducted to rule out the new peptides which are similar to the RefSeq protein sequences (≤1 mismatch). To apply stringent quality control, only one unique peptide with at least 9 residues were used for new protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Sustaining DNA damage response (DDR) signalling via retention of DDR factors at damaged sites is important for transmitting damage-sensing and repair signals. Herein, we found that DNA damage provoked the association of ribosomes with IRES region in lncRNA CTBP1-DT, which overcame the negative effect of upstream open reading frames (uORFs), and elicited the novel microprotein DNA damage-upregulated protein (DDUP) translation via a cap-independent translation mechanism. Activated ATR kinase-mediated phosphorylation of DDUP induced a drastic 'dense-to-loose' conformational change, which sustained the RAD18/RAD51C and RAD18/PCNA complex at damaged sites and initiated RAD51C-mediated homologous recombination and PCNA-mediated post-replication repair mechanisms. Importantly, treatment with ATR inhibitor abolished the effect of DDUP on chromatin retention of RAD51C and PCNA, thereby leading to hypersensitivity of cancer cells to DNA-damaging chemotherapeutics. Taken together, our results uncover a plausible mechanism underlying the DDR sustaining and might represent an attractive therapeutic strategy in improvement of DNA damage-based anticancer therapies.

### Keywords
Translation, Cpt, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Department of biochemistry, Zhongshan school of medicine, Sun Yat-sen University,China
Sun yat-sen University

### Submitter
Ruyuan Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruyuan Yu
Department of biochemistry, Zhongshan school of medicine, Sun Yat-sen University,China


