### Accession
PXD024448

### Title
Novel potentially clinically valuable protein markers of androgen activity in humans

### Description
Background  Testosterone (T) is the main androgen playing a crucial role in regulating the function of both reproductive and non-reproductive organs. Current methods for assessing T levels in humans do not reflect the biological androgenic activity (BAA), which may be important for example in the diagnosis of hypogonadism and clarifying pathogenetic mechanisms linking androgen deficiency to various comorbidities. In this study, we aimed to identify new protein markers of BAA in humans and test their predictive value in relation to some androgen deficiency linked pathologies. Methods and Findings  Plasma samples (n=90) from 30 healthy chemically castrated young volunteer males (19-32 years) were collected at three different time points: baseline – prior to treatment with GnRH antagonist), three weeks after GnRH antagonist treatment, and  at the end of the study, two weeks thereafter. Following the second blood sampling, all men were supplemented with 1000 mg T undecanoate. The samples were analysed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. A total of 676 proteins were identified among which expression of 46 was statistically significantly associated with T concentration (p<0.05, ANOVA paired). Based on ROC-analysis, 3 candidate proteins were selected, 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (4HPPD), insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 6 (IGFBP6) and fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (ALDOB).  Together  with  a mathematically calculated variable (MMA: Multi-Marker Algorithm), based on the combination of 4HPPD and IGFBP6 values, their predictive value in relation to low T levels and cardio-metabolic risk factors was tested in  75 males suffering from infertility, 32-43 years of age. Of these males, four were diagnosed with type 2-diabetes and 14 with the metabolic syndrome. Clinical chemistry data regarding cardio-metabolic parameters, bone mineral density and androgen receptor CAG repeat lengths were assessed.  The three proteins significantly distinguished between low (< 8 nmol/L) and normal (> 12 nmol/L) morning fasting T (AUC: 0.70-0.77). The MMA had an even higher accuracy (AUC=0.80) in identifying subjects with low T. 4HPPD, ALDOB and MMA showed higher accuracy than T (AUC=0.85-0.92 vs. AUC=0.55; p<.001) in identifying infertile patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome (AUC=0.74-0.78 vs. AUC=0.56; p<0.05). These markers also showed  higher AUC than T in predicting adverse cardiovascular risk lipid profile and insulin resistance patients but the differences were not statistically significant. 4HPPD and MMA distinguished patients with low bone density (z-score in DEXA scan < -1), but no difference was observed when comparing with AUC for T,. The androgenic dependence of 4HPPD and ALDOB were confirmed by finding statistically significant lower levels of these markers in men with androgen CAG repeat lengths < 21 (p=0.002) and >22 (p=0.038) as compared to those with CAG of 21-22. No statistical significances were found for IGFBP6.  Conclusions  4HPPD and ALDOB were identified as potential biomarkers for diagnosis of male hypogonadism and in identifying subjects at high risk of some of its clinical sequelae. More extensive testing should be carried out in order to elucidate their usefulness in clinical assessment of androgenic activity, not only in adult males but also in women and in pre-pubertal boys.

### Sample Protocol
The plasma and serum samples from respective cohort (healthy men and infertile patients) were randomized regarding the order before starting sample preparation. Quantitation of total protein content in the samples was performed using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (16).  Following the instructions provided by the manufacturer, the top seven most-abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, antitrypsin and fibrinogen) were depleted from approximately 10 µL of each sample using a MARS7 column (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA).  The buffer was exchanged to 1.6% SDC, 50 mM NH4HCO3 with Amicon ultra-centrifugal filters (0.5 mL, 10 kDa cut-off, Millipore, Tullagreen, Ireland). The disulphide bonds were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated 1 h at 37 °C. The free thiol groups were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 25 mM, and the reaction proceeded for an additional 30 min at room temperature in darkness (reduction and alkylation occurred in the Amicon filter). The buffer was exchanged to 50 mM NH4HCO3 and the samples were resuspended in 100 µL 50mM NH4HCO3 (30 µg protein after BCA quantitation) and digested with trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio of 1:30 (w/w) for 16 h at 37°C. The remaining SDC was precipitated by adding 20% formic acid prior to filtering the samples through a polypropylene filter plate with a hydrophilic PVDF membrane (mean pore size 0.45 μm, Porvair Filtration Group, Fareham, UK). A Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) was used to analyse the samples for automated Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) methods. Peptides (2 µL, 1 µg on the column) were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (75 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and separated on an easy-Spray column (25 cm × 75 μm i.d., PepMap C18 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to create a nonlinear gradient to elute the peptides (90 min).  The MS1 spectra of the peptides were acquired in the orbitrap mass analyser from m/z 400–1600 and a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200). The target automated gain control (AGC) value and maximum injection time (IT) were 1e6 and 100 ms, respectively. The ten most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 26% normalised collision energy. Tandem mass spectra were acquired in the orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 35,000 (at m/z 200), a target AGC value of 5e4 and a maximum IT of 100 ms. The underfill ratio was 10% and dynamic exclusion was 45 s. The normalised collision energy was 26%.  For Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM), a TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray NG ion source and connected to an EASY n-LC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) was used to analyse the samples with the MRM method. Peptides (5 µL, 1 µg on the column) were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and separated on an easy-Spray column (15 cm × 75 μm i.d., PepMap C18 3 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to create a nonlinear gradient to elute the peptides (60 min). Internal references, isotopically labelled synthetic peptides (UVic-Genome BC Proteomics Centre, BC, Canada) were added in order to determine relative quantifications of proteins. Data was acquired in scheduled MRM mode with 5 min detection windows. SRM transitions were acquired in Q1 and Q3 operated at unit resolution (0.7 full witdth at half maximun, FWHM), the collision gas pressure in Q2 was 1.5 mTorr. The cycle time was 2 s, and calibrated radio frequency (RF) and S-lens values were used. At least three transition per precursor were monitored and in most cases the ratio is reported between the relative total intensities vs the references.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification it was used the Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (PD) software (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA). Peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) human database (Human 9606, Reviewed, 20 165) integrated into PD. The search was performed setting the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification, oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification, 10 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance. Up to one missed cleavage for tryptic peptides was allowed. According to the PD software, the filters applied were high- (FDR<0.01) and medium confidence (FDR<0.05) at peptide- and protein levels, respectively. The peptide and protein quantifications were based on the quantification of MS peptide signals (label-free quantification). Label-free quantification used the Minora Feature Detector node in the processing workflow, and the Precursor Ions Quantifier node and the Feature Mapper in the consensus workflow.  To analyse the MRM data, all MS files were imported into Skyline v3.5(17) (MacCoss Lab Software, Seattle, WA). The peak integration was performed automatically by the software, using Savitzky-Golay smoothing and to confirm the correct peak detection it was in addition, manually inspected. The relative total intensities vs the references (ratios), were reported as expression values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testosterone deficiency, Proteomics, Androgen activity, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
Professor at the Section for Clinical Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University. Sweden
Lund university

### Submitter
Indira Pla Parada

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malm
Professor at the Section for Clinical Chemistry, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University. Sweden


