### Accession
PXD029246

### Title
Identification of the cell cycle specific proximal interactors of PCDH7

### Description
We used proximity dependent biotin identification (BioID) method to determine cell cycle specific interaction partners of PCDH7.  HeLa S3 cells were synchronized to interphase and mitosis using  double tymidine block and double thymidine block followed by S-Trityl-L-cysteine (STC) treatment respectively. Candidate interactors were isolated using streptavidin affinity purification and identified using LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain cell cycle-specific proximal interactors, double thymidine/STC synchronization methods were modified for BioID protocol (Roux et al., 2012). Briefly, cells were transfected with BioID vector during the release after the first thymidine block (2 mM) and kept in the transfection media during the second thymidine block (2 mM). For interphase cells, cells were incubated with fresh media containing thymidine (2 mM) and 50 μM Biotin (Invitrogen, 424 B20656). For mitosis cells, thymidine was released, and cells were incubated with fresh media containing 10 μM and Biotin. Both groups were pelleted after 20 hours of incubation. After lysis, samples were incubated with streptavidin beads. Following the extensive washes, on-bead tryptic digest was perform and peptides were desalted using C18 STAGE Tips and analyzed by online C18 nanoflow reversed-phase HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000, 3500 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific) connected with an orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Orbitrap, Thermo Scientific).Samples were separated in an in-house packed 100 μm i.d. × 23 cm C18 column (Reprosil-Gold C18, 5 μm, 200 Å, Dr. Maisch) using 80-minutes linear gradients from 5-25%, 25-40%, 40-95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid with 300 nL/min flow in 100 minutes total run time. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 70,000; mass range 400–1,500 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 1e6; maximum injection time 32 ms). Up to 15 of the most intense ions per cycle were fragmented and analyzed in the orbitrap with Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA). MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)) (resolution 17,500; AGC 1e6; normalized collision energy (NCE) 26; maximum injection time 85 ms). The isolation window for MS/MS was 2.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) software. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was used as fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-termini) and oxidation of methionine residues were used as variable modifications. Maximal two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic peptides.The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01. The other parameters were used with default settings. The database search was performed against the human Uniprot database (release 2015) containing 21,039 entries using the SEQUEST HT search engine integrated into the Proteome Discoverer environment.

### Publication Abstract
Cell division requires dramatic reorganization of the cell cortex, which is primarily driven by the actomyosin network. We previously reported that protocadherin 7 (PCDH7) gets enriched at the cell surface during mitosis, which is required to build up the full mitotic rounding pressure. Here, we report that PCDH7 interacts with and is palmitoylated by the palmitoyltransferase, ZDHHC5. PCDH7 and ZDHHC5 colocalize at the mitotic cell surface and translocate to the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis. The localization of PCDH7 depends on the palmitoylation activity of ZDHHC5. Silencing PCDH7 increases the percentage of multinucleated cells and the duration of mitosis. Loss of PCDH7 expression correlates with reduced levels of active RhoA and phospho-myosin at the cleavage furrow. This work uncovers a palmitoylation-dependent translocation mechanism for PCDH7, which contributes to the reorganization of the cortical cytoskeleton during cell division.

### Keywords
Hela, Bioid, Pcdh7, Mitosis, Protocadherin, Cell cycle, Homo sapiens

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey School of Medicine, Koc University, 34450 Istanbul, Turkey Koc University Research Center for Translational Medicine (KUTTAM), 34450 Istanbul, Turkey
Koç University

### Submitter
Altuğ Kamacıoğlu

### Lab Head
Dr Nurhan Ozlu
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey School of Medicine, Koc University, 34450 Istanbul, Turkey Koc University Research Center for Translational Medicine (KUTTAM), 34450 Istanbul, Turkey


