### Accession
PXD014945

### Title
Cerebrospinal Fluid-Derived Microvesicles from Sleeping Sickness Patients Alter Protein Expression in Human Astrocytes

### Description
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) caused by the extracellular protozoon Trypanosoma brucei, is a neglected tropical disease affecting the poorest communities in sub-Saharan Africa. HAT progresses from a hemolymphatic first stage (S1) to a meningo-encephalitic late stage (S2) when parasites reach the central nervous system, although the existence of an intermediate stage (Int.) has also been proposed. The pathophysiological mechanisms associated with the development of S2 encephalopathy are yet to be fully elucidated. In the present study, we used data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) to investigate the potential pathogenic effects of microvesicles (MVs) derived from HAT patients’ cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). To assess potential biological properties of these MVs, immortalized human astrocytes were exposed, in vitro, to MVs enriched from S1, Int. or S2 CSF. DIA-MS analyses showed that S2 MVs induced, compared to Int. or S1 MVs, a stronger proteome modulation in astrocytes that resembled the one produced by IFN-γ, a key molecule in HAT pathogenesis. Our results indicate that HAT S2 CSF harbors MVs potentially involved in the mechanisms of pathology associated with HAT late stage. Such vesicles might thus represent a new player to consider in future functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were centrifuged 5 minutes at 2000g to remove possible large debris and MVs (0.1 - 1µm in diameter) were subsequently enriched and pelleted by repeated centrifugations at 18000g for 50 minutes with PBS washes between centrifugations. MVs were enriched from 2.4ml of S1 CSF (n=2), Int. CSF (n=2) or S2 CSF (n=3), obtained by pooling samples from gender and stage matched patients. Immortalized human astrocytes (fetal - SV40, Applied Biological Material Inc.) were seeded (10000 cells/well) in 96-well plates coated with 0.01 mg/ml collagen type I - rat tail (Merck KGaA) and maintained in Prigrow IV Medium (Applied Biological Material Inc.) supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin and grown until confluent at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Confluent cells were exposed to MVs in FBS-free medium for 24h at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells exposed to IFN-γ (0.5U/µl, n=3) for 24h were used as a pro-inflammatory control, while cells incubated with FBS-free medium only (n=3) as untreated control.  Astrocyte proteins were extracted with 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters) in 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), pH 8.0. Samples were sonicated, incubated for 10 min at 80°C, spun (14000g, 10 min) and finally the supernatant was recovered. The protein concentration was then determined using the Bradford protein assay. For each sample, 9 µg of proteins were reduced with 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide and digested with sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega, 1:50 protease to protein ratio). The peptide mixture was then desalted with C18 spin columns (Harvard apparatus), dried under vacuum, re-suspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (peptide final concentration of 0.5 µg/µL) and spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) 1:20.  The equivalent of 2 µg of peptides were analyzed using Liquid Chromatography–Electrospray Ionization–MS/MS (LC-ESI-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Thermo EASY-nLC, as reported elsewhere (Dozio V, et al. 2018). Briefly, peptides were trapped on a 2 cm x 75 µm i.d. PepMap C18 precolumn packed with 3 µm particles and 100 Å pore size. Separation was performed using a 50 cm x 75 µm i.d. PepMap C18 column packed with 2 µm, 100 Å particles and heated at 50°C. Peptides were separated using a 125 min segmented gradient of 0.1% FA (solvent A) and 80% ACN 0.1% FA (solvent B) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min.  For spectral library generation, the instrument was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Full-scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, scan range of 400–1250 m/z, AGC target of 4x105, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 20 most intense ions were quadrupole-isolated (isolation window 1.4 m/z), fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (collision energy 30%), and detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, AGC target 5x105, and a maximum injection time 50 ms. Full-scan MS were acquired in profile mode, whereas MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode.  For Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA), a full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, scan range of 400–1250 m/z, a maximum injection time 100 ms, and AGC target 106. Then, 40 DIA variable windows were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200, AGC target 5x105, and maximum injection time 50 ms. The sizes of variable windows were optimized using the swathTUNER software.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library was generated from full lysates from all samples together with 12 OFFgel fractionated samples first acquired in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA) and analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific) and the Mascot search engine. The search parameters included 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance and two miscleavages. Static modifications included carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, whereas dynamic modifications included oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionines. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were verified using the Percolator module (FDR<0.01). Spectronaut software was subsequently used to match raw DIA MS data against the spectral library, using the default settings with slight modifications (as reported by Dozio V et al., 2018). Data filtering was set to Qvalue complete. Cross Run Normalization was performed by using the Qvalue complete setting in Row Selection. Peptide intensities were exported and analysed using mapDIA. No further normalization was applied. The following parameters were used: min peptides=1, max peptides=5, min correl=-1, SDF=inf. min obs=1, Min_DE=0.01, max_DE=0.99, experimental_design=independent design. Proteins were considered to have significantly changed in abundance with an FDR < 0.05 and an absolute fold change (|FC|) > 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) caused by the extracellular protozoon <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i>, is a neglected tropical disease affecting the poorest communities in sub-Saharan Africa. HAT progresses from a hemolymphatic first stage (S1) to a meningo-encephalitic late stage (S2) when parasites reach the central nervous system (CNS), although the existence of an intermediate stage (Int.) has also been proposed. The pathophysiological mechanisms associated with the development of S2 encephalopathy are yet to be fully elucidated. Here we hypothesized that HAT progression toward S2 might be accompanied by an increased release of microvesicles (MVs), sub-micron elements (0.1-1 &#x3bc;m) involved in inflammatory processes and in the determination of the outcome of infections. We studied the morphology of MVs isolated from HAT cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and used flow cytometry to show that total-MVs and leukocyte derived-CD45<sup>+</sup> MVs are significantly increased in concentration in S2 patients' CSF compared to S1 and Int. samples (<i>n</i> = 12 per group). To assess potential biological properties of these MVs, immortalized human astrocytes were exposed, <i>in vitro</i>, to MVs enriched from S1, Int. or S2 CSF. Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry analyses showed that S2 MVs induced, compared to Int. or S1 MVs, a strong proteome modulation in astrocytes that resembled the one produced by IFN-&#x3b3;, a key molecule in HAT pathogenesis. Our results indicate that HAT S2 CSF harbors MVs potentially involved in the mechanisms of pathology associated with HAT late stage. Such vesicles might thus represent a new player to consider in future functional studies.

### Keywords
Astrocytes, Dia-ms, Microvesicles, Cerebrospinal fluid, Human african trypanosomiasis

### Affiliations
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Department of Infectious - Tropical Diseases and Microbiology, IRCCS Sacro Cuore Don Calabria Hospital, Negrar (VR)

### Submitter
Natalia Tiberti

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


