### Accession
PXD019913

### Title
Stochiometric Quantification of the Thiol Redox Proteome Reveals Subcellular Compartmentalization and Susceptibility to Oxidative Perturbations

### Description
Posttranslational modifications of protein cysteine thiols play a significant role in redox regulation and the pathogenesis of human diseases. However, the cellular redox landscape in terms of quantitative, site-specific occupancies of thiol modifications at the proteome level, especially under physiological conditions, is still largely uncharacterized. Herein, we report the site occupancies of both S-glutathionylation (SSG) and total reversible thiol oxidation (total oxidation) in RAW 264.7 macrophage cells under basal conditions. The occupancies of thiol modifications for ~4,000 cysteine sites were quantified, which revealed a mean site occupancy of 4.0% for SSG and 11.9% for total oxidation, respectively. Correlations between site occupancies and structural features such as pKa, relative residue surface accessibility, and hydrophobicity were observed.  Proteome-wide site occupancy analysis also revealed a strong subcellular compartmentalization in thiol redox status, where the average occupancies of SSG and total oxidation in distinct compartments correlate well with the redox potentials of respective organelles.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse macrophages (RAW 264.7, ATCC # TIB 71) were cultured in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. For lysis, cells were rinsed briefly twice with RPMI-1640 and harvested in lysis buffer (250 mM HEPES, 1% Triton X-100, pH 7.0). Freshly prepared 100 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) was included for the SSG and total oxidation samples, but not for total thiol samples. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm and the soluble protein fraction was retained. NEM-alkylation was carried out at 55 deg C in dark for 30 min, followed by acetone precipitation for overnight at -20 deg C. Protein pellets were re-suspended in 250 mM HEPES containing 8 M urea and 0.1% SDS, followed by buffer exchange to 25 mM HEPES containing 1 M urea by using 0.5 mL Amicon Ultra 10 K filter units. Protein concentration was determined by using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA).  Resin-assisted enrichment of protein thiols, on-resin tryptic digestion and isobaric labeling were performed. MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MS-GF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline. Peptides were identified from database searching results applying the following criteria: MSGF E-value < 1e-10, Q-value < 0.01, and mass measurement error < 10 ppm (+/-5 ppm). The decoy database searching methodology was used to confirm the final false discovery rate at the unique peptide level to be ~0.9%. Since NEM blocked original free Cys sites, all glutathionylated Cys residues were identified as un-modified Cys.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational modifications of protein cysteine thiols play a significant role in redox regulation and the pathogenesis of human diseases. Herein, we report the characterization of the cellular redox landscape in terms of quantitative, site-specific occupancies of both S-glutathionylation (SSG) and total reversible thiol oxidation (total oxidation) in RAW 264.7 macrophage cells under basal conditions. The occupancies of thiol modifications for ~4000 cysteine sites were quantified, revealing a mean site occupancy of 4.0% for SSG and 11.9% for total oxidation, respectively. Correlations between site occupancies and structural features such as pKa, relative residue surface accessibility, and hydrophobicity were observed. Proteome-wide site occupancy analysis revealed that the average occupancies of SSG and total oxidation in specific cellular compartments correlate well with the expected redox potentials of respective organelles in macrophages, consistent with the notion of redox compartmentalization. The lowest average occupancies were observed in more reducing organelles such as the mitochondria (non-membrane) and nucleus, while the highest average occupancies were found in more oxidizing organelles such as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and lysosome. Furthermore, a pattern of subcellular susceptibility to redox changes was observed under oxidative stress induced by exposure to engineered metal oxide nanoparticles. Peroxisome, ER, and mitochondria (membrane) are the organelles which exhibit the most significant redox changes; while mitochondria (non-membrane) and Golgi were observed as the organelles being most resistant to oxidative stress. Finally, it was observed that Cys residues at enzymatic active sites generally had a higher level of occupancy compared to non-active Cys residues within the same proteins, suggesting site occupancy as a potential indicator of protein functional sites. The raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD019913.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Redox proteomics, Site-occupancy, Redox modification, S-glutathionylation, Protein thiols, Macrophage, Resin-assisted enrichment

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Wei-Jun Qian
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA


