### Accession
PXD022459

### Title
Proteome changes in pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) leaves induced by the green peach aphid

### Description
Aphid attack induces defense responses in plants activating several signaling cascades that led to the production of toxic, repellent or antinutritive compounds and the consequent reorganization of the plant primary metabolism. Pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) leaf proteomic response against Myzus persicae (Sulzer) has been investigated and analyzed by LC-MS/MS coupled with bioinformatics tools. Infestation with an initially low density (20 aphids/plant) of aphids restricted to a single leaf taking advantage of clip cages resulted in 6 differentially expressed proteins relative to control leaves (3 proteins at 2 days post-infestation and 3 proteins at 4 days post-infestation). Conversely, when plants were infested with a high density of infestation (200 aphids/plant) 140 proteins resulted differentially expressed relative to control leaves (97 proteins at 2 days post-infestation, 112 proteins at 4 days post-infestation and 105 proteins at 7 days post-infestation). The majority of proteins altered by aphid attack were involved in photosynthesis and photorespiration, oxidative stress, translation, protein folding and degradation and amino acid metabolism. Other proteins identified were involved in lipid, carbohydrate and hormone metabolism, transcription, transport, energy production and cell organization. However proteins directly involved in defense were scarce and were mostly downregulated in response to aphids.  The unexpectedly very low number of regulated proteins found in the experiment with a low aphid density suggests an active mitigation of plant defensive response by aphids or alternatively an aphid strategy to remain undetected by the plant. Under a high density of aphids, pepper leaf proteome however changed significantly revealing nearly all routes of plant primary metabolism being altered. Photosynthesis was so far the process with the highest number of proteins being regulated by the presence of aphids. In general, at short times of infestation (2 days) most of the altered proteins were upregulated. However, at longer times of infestation (7 days) the protein downregulation prevailed. Proteins involved in plant defense and in hormone signaling were scarce and mostly downregulated.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and quantification  Total protein extracts were prepared according to the TCA (trichloroacetic acid)–acetone–phenol method [98]. Dried pellet was dissolved in 6 M urea and the protein concentration was assayed using an RC/DC assay (BioRad, USA). Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used to create a standard curve. Tryptic in-solution digestion Tryptic in-solution digestion, fifty micrograms of protein sample were reduced with 5 μL of 0.2 M dithiothreitol followed by incubation for 1 h at 37°C and S-alkylation with 20 μL of 0.2 M iodoacetamide followed by incubation for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. Then, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to reduce the concentration of urea to 0.6 M. For in-solution digestion, trypsin was added to the protein mixture at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:30 (w/w). After incubation at 37°C for 16 h, additional trypsin (1:60, w/w) was added to the sample and incubation was continued for 5 h to ensure complete digestion. Tryptic peptides were dried down in a Speed-Vacbenchtop centrifuge and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting peptides were desalted with PepClean C-18 Spin Columns (Agilent Technologies) in batches of 30 μg of protein according to manufacturer recommendations. Eventually, eluted peptides were dried down in a Speed-Vacbenchtop centrifuge and resuspended in 10 µL of first LC mobile phase (5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). LC-MS/MS analysis To perform label-free relative quantitation, the samples of treated and untreated groups were analyzed over four technical replicates. Peptide separation was performed using an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC system coupled to the 6550 Accurate-Mass QTOF (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with electrospray interface (Jet Stream Technology) operating in positive-ion mode (3,500 V) and in high sensitivity mode. The best conditions for the electrospray interface were: gas temperature 250°C, drying gas 14 L/min, nebulizer 35 psi, sheath gas temperature 250°C, sheath gas flow 11 L/min. Samples were injected (10 μL) on an Agilent Advance Bio Peptide mapping column (2.1 × 250 mm, 2.7 μm) (Agilent Technologies) with a 3–40% gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) for 140 min operating at 50°C and a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. The data were acquired with Agilent Mass Hunter Workstation Software, LC/MS Data Acquisition B.08.00 (Build 8.00.8058.0) operating in Auto MS/MS mode whereby the 20 most intense ions (charge states, 2–5) within 300–1,700 m/z mass range above a threshold of 1,000 counts were selected for MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra (50–1,700 m/z) were collected with the quadrupole set to “narrow” resolution and were acquired until 25,000 total counts were collected or for a maximum accumulation time of 333 ms. To assure the desired mass accuracy of recorded ions, continuous internal calibration was performed during analyses with the use of signals m/z 322.0481 (detected m/z [C6H18N3O6P3 − H]+) and m/z 1221.9906 (detected m/z [C24H18O6N3P3F36 -H]+).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis Protein identification  Each MS/MS spectra data set was processed to determine monoisotopic masses and charge states, to merge MS/MS spectra with the same precursor (Δm/z < 1.4 Da and chromatographic Δt < 60 s) and to select high quality spectra with the Extraction tool of Spectrum Mill Proteomics Workbench Rev. B.04.01.141 (Agilent Technologies). The reduced data set was searched against the Capsicum annuum NCBInr database in the identity mode with the MS/MS search tool of Spectrum Mill Proteomics Workbench Rev. B.04.01.141 (Agilent Technologies) and with the following settings: trypsin, up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable, mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm for precursor and ± 50 ppm for product ions. The precursor mass shift was set between -18 Da to 177 Da to take into consideration variable modifications such as the presence of sodium and potassium adducts. Peptide hits were validated in the peptide mode to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1.2% and then in the protein mode according to the score settings recommended by the manufacturer. Positive identifications were considered only when two or more peptides were matched, and their summed score was >20.  Statistical analysis  For label-free relative quantitation, differentially expressed proteins were assessed based on the regulation of the peptides. Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8) using Perseus software [99]. Protein lists were exported to the Mass Profiler Professional (MPP) software v. 14.9.1 (Agilent Technologies) for statistical data analysis. Data analysis was carried out based on the total spectra intensity of the proteins which were considered as entities in MPP. The entities were filtered based on their frequency, selecting those consistently present in all replicates of at least one treatment.  In the case of the experiment with clip cages, comparison of protein expression levels from various samples involved moderated T-tests (p≤0.05) between control and aphid-infested leaves, with each time point (3 hpi, 2 dpi and 4 dpi) being analyzed separately. On the other hand, in the case of the experiment with a high density of aphids freely moving by the plant, an ANOVA followed by Tukey HSD posthoc test (p≤0.05) was performed to compare protein expression levels between the different treatments (control vs 2 dpi vs 4 dpi vs 7 dpi). In all the cases, Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was employed to overcome the problem of multiple test analysis (false discovery). Proteins with ≥ 2.0 fold change respect the controls, positive or negative, were defined as upregulated or downregulated, respectively.  Functional classification The Blast2GO v2.4.0 (BioBam, Valencia, Spain) application has been used to automatically assign protein description and take-up annotations from homologous sequences of public databases, which have then been manually reviewed and enriched, if possible. A file of the FASTA format sequences of the identified protein set was batch-retrieved from the NCBI website. Blast2GO was fed with the FASTA file and was run to: first incorporate the sequence description by performing a BLASTp search against NCBInr (e-value cutoff of 1 × 10-50, 20 for the retrieved number of BLAST hits, 33 for the HSP (Highest Scoring Pair) length cutoff and 0 for HSP Hit coverage cutoff); second to map the GO, EC and Interpro terms; then to annotate the sequences (E-Value Hit-Filter of 1 × 10-6, a Hsp-Hit Coverage Cutoff of 0, an Annotation Cutoff of 55, and a GO Weight of 5). Finally, annotation was augmented by the Annotation Expander (ANNEX), which uses an additional Gene Ontology structure to suggest new biological process and cellular component annotations.  Annotations for biological process (P), molecular function (F) and cellular component (C) performed by Blast2GO were write down and manually revised to guarantee accurate assignment. Then, proteins were manually assigned to one of the following 14 functional categories: photosynthesis, amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, lipid metabolism, protein folding and degradation, transcription-related, translation-related, energy production, stress and defense, cell organization, transport-related, hormone metabolism, miscellaneous and unknown function.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Biotic stress, Plant defense, Plant-aphid interaction

### Affiliations
Unidad Asociada CSIC-UA IPAB. Instituto Universitario de Investigación CIBIO (Centro Iberoamericano de la Biodiversidad), University of Alicante.
I. U. CIBIO. Universty of Alicante.

### Submitter
Victoria Florencio Ortiz

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Luis Casas
Unidad Asociada CSIC-UA IPAB. Instituto Universitario de Investigación CIBIO (Centro Iberoamericano de la Biodiversidad), University of Alicante.


