### Accession
PXD038900

### Title
Repeat length of the C9orf72-associated glycine-alanine polypeptides affects their toxicity

### Description
G4C2 hexanucleotide repeat expansions in a non-coding region of the C9orf72 gene are the most common cause of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). G4C2 insertion length is variable, and patients can carry up to several thousand repeats. Dipeptide repeat proteins (DPR) translated from G4C2 transcripts are thought to be a main driver of toxicity. Experiments in model organisms with relatively short DPR have shown that arginine-rich DPR are most toxic, while polyGlycine-Alanine (GA) DPRs cause only mild toxicity. However, GA is the most abundant DPR in patient brains, and experimental work in animals has generally relied on the use of low numbers of repeats, with DPRs often tagged for in vivo tracking. Whether repeat length, or tagging, affect the toxicity of GA has not been systematically assessed. Therefore, we generated Drosophila fly lines expressing GA100, GA200 or GA400 specifically in adult neurons. Consistent with previous studies, expression of GA100 and GA200 caused only mild toxicity. In contrast, neuronal expression of GA400 drastically reduced climbing ability and survival of the flies, indicating that long GA DPRs can be highly toxic in vivo. This toxicity could be abolished by tagging GA400. Proteomics analysis of fly brains showed a repeat-length-dependent modulation of the brain proteome, with GA400 causing earlier and stronger changes than shorter GA proteins. PolyGA expression up-regulated proteins involved in ER to Golgi trafficking, and down-regulated proteins involved in insulin signalling. Experimental down-regulation of Tango1, a highly conserved regulator of ER-to Golgi transport, partially rescued GA400 toxicity, suggesting that misregulation of this process contributes to polyGA toxicity. Experimentally increasing insulin signaling also rescued GA toxicity. In summary, our data show that long polyGA proteins can be highly toxic in vivo, and that they may therefore contribute to ALS/FTD pathogenesis in humans patients.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Three or four biological replicates of 25 dissected adult brains from young (day 5), middle-aged (day 15) and old (day 40) female flies were processed as detailed elsewhere (Li et al, 2021). Briefly, brain samples were denatured for 10 min at 95°C in lysis buffer containing 6 M guanidinium chloride, 2.5 mM TCEP, 10 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris-HCl. 25 adult brains were pooled per replicate and four replicates were used per treatment. Lysate samples were further sonicated by using a Bioruptor plus (Diagenode) with 30 s sonication and 30 s break for 10 cycles. Following 20,000g centrifugation for 20 min, protein supernatants were transferred to new tubes, diluted 10-fold with 20 mM Tris and trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, #V5280, 1:200 w/w) and digested overnight at 37°C. Formic acid to a final concentration of 1% was then added to stop the reaction. Peptides were cleaned by using custom-made C18-SD (Empore) StageTips. These were wetted with methanol and 40% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA) and finally equilibrated with 0.1% FA. StageTips were washed twice with 0.1% FA and peptides were eluted with 40% ACN/0.1% FA and then dried in a Speed-Vac (Eppendorf) at 45°C for 45 min. Samples from day 5 and day 15 were processed together, while day 40 samples were processed separately.  TMT labelling and fractionation. 4 µg of eluted peptides were resuspended in 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). TMTpro 16plex (ThermoFisher, #A44522) labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the following changes: 0.5 mg of TMT reagent was re-suspended with 33 µL of anhydrous ACN. 7 µL of TMT reagent in ACN was added to 9 µL of clean peptide in 0.1M TEAB. The final ACN concentration was 43.75% and the ratio of peptides to TMTpro reagent was 1:20. All 16 samples from day 5, 15 and 40 were TMT-labelled in one batch per time point. Following incubation for 60 min, the reaction was quenched with 2 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, re-suspended in 0.1% FA, split into two equal parts, and desalted using home-made STAGE tips. Samples were fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm, 130Å, 1.7 µm ACQUITY UPLC Peptide CSH C18 Column (Waters, #186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with a 88 min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 3 min; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10 mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, and fractions were pooled in two passes (1 + 17, 2 + 18, etc.) and dried in a Speed-Vac (Eppendorf). LC-MS/MS analysis and protein identification. Dried fractions were re-suspended in 0.1% FA and separated on a 50 cm, 0.075mm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 HPLC column (ThermoFisher, #164942) and analysed on a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) equipped with a FAIMS device (ThermoFisher) that was operated in two compensation voltages, -50 V and -70 V. Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for TMT reporter ion signal measurements. Peptides were separated by EASYnLC1200 using a 90 min linear gradient from 6% to 31% buffer; buffer A was 0.1% FA, buffer B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN. The analytical column was operated at 50°C. Fly brain proteomics data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15). Isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis of proteomic data. Contaminants were removed by keeping proteins that were identified by more than one unique peptide. Raw peptide intensity values were log2-transformed log2- and z-transformed. The results were rescaled by multiplying the z-intensity of each individual peptide with the global standard deviation of the log2-transformed data and adding back the global mean of the log2- transformed data. Only proteins that were detected in at least three out of the four replicates for each treatment were considered for downstream analyses. Proteins that were expressed in three out of the four replicates were imputed by using the mean of the other replicates. Differential expression analysis was performed using the limma package (version 3.46) in R. Batch effects from different dissection timepoints were removed from the normalized data using the limma package. PCA analysis was done using R package factoextra (1.0.7). Gene ontology enrichment. Gene ontology (GO) information was retrieved from org.Dm.eg.db package (version 3.13.0) in R. GO enrichment was done with R package Clusterprofiler (3.18.1) using biological process (BP) ontologies. All proteins expressed in the dataset were used as background. GO term redundancy was reduced using R package rrvgo (1.2.0) using a threshold of “0.7”. The statistical significance of enrichment analysis was tested using a hypergeometric test and P values were corrected with Bonferroni’s.

### Publication Abstract
G<sub>4</sub>C<sub>2</sub> hexanucleotide repeat expansions in a non-coding region of the C9orf72 gene are the most common cause of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). G<sub>4</sub>C<sub>2</sub> insertion length is variable, and patients can carry up to several thousand repeats. Dipeptide repeat proteins (DPRs) translated from G<sub>4</sub>C<sub>2</sub> transcripts are thought to be a main driver of toxicity. Experiments in model organisms with relatively short DPRs have shown that arginine-rich DPRs are most toxic, while polyGlycine-Alanine (GA) DPRs cause only mild toxicity. However, GA is the most abundant DPR in patient brains, and experimental work in animals has generally relied on the use of low numbers of repeats, with DPRs often tagged for in vivo tracking. Whether repeat length or tagging affect the toxicity of GA has not been systematically assessed. Therefore, we generated Drosophila fly lines expressing GA100, GA200 or GA400 specifically in adult neurons. Consistent with previous studies, expression of GA100 and GA200 caused only mild toxicity. In contrast, neuronal expression of GA400 drastically reduced climbing ability and survival of flies, indicating that long GA DPRs can be highly toxic in vivo. This toxicity could be abolished by tagging GA400. Proteomics analysis of fly brains showed a repeat-length-dependent modulation of the brain proteome, with GA400 causing earlier and stronger changes than shorter GA proteins. PolyGA expression up-regulated proteins involved in ER to Golgi trafficking, and down-regulated proteins involved in insulin signalling. Experimental down-regulation of Tango1, a highly conserved regulator of ER-to Golgi transport, partially rescued GA400 toxicity, suggesting that misregulation of this process contributes to polyGA toxicity. Experimentally increasing insulin signaling also rescued GA toxicity. In summary, our data show that long polyGA proteins can be highly toxic in vivo, and that they may therefore contribute to ALS/FTD pathogenesis in patients.

### Keywords
Glycine-alanine, Toxicity, Drosophila, Repeat length, C9orf72

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Partridge
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne, Germany


