### Accession
PXD023735

### Title
A  proteomic analysis of livers from RagAGTP mice

### Description
A proteomic analysis of livers from RagAGTP/ TSC-KO mice

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from liver with 5% SDS. S-TRAP aided trypsin digestion, isobaric peptide labeling (TMT-pro16). HpH prefractionation of peptides. LC-MS/MS analysis (Q-Exactive).

### Data Protocol
RAW data processed with MaxQuant. Statistical analysis with Prostar using Limma.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) integrates cellular nutrient signaling and hormonal cues to control metabolism. We have previously shown that constitutive nutrient signaling to mTORC1 by means of genetic activation of RagA (expression of GTP-locked RagA, or&#xa0;RagA<sup>GTP</sup>) in mice resulted in a fatal energetic crisis at birth. Herein, we rescue neonatal lethality in RagA<sup>GTP</sup> mice and find morphometric and metabolic alterations that span glucose, lipid, ketone, bile acid and amino acid homeostasis in adults, and a median lifespan of nine months. Proteomic and metabolomic analyses of livers from RagA<sup>GTP</sup> mice reveal a failed metabolic adaptation to fasting due to a global impairment in PPAR&#x3b1; transcriptional program. These metabolic defects are partially recapitulated by restricting activation of RagA to hepatocytes, and revert by pharmacological inhibition of mTORC1. Constitutive hepatic nutrient signaling does not cause hepatocellular damage and carcinomas, unlike genetic activation of growth factor signaling upstream of mTORC1. In summary, RagA signaling dictates dynamic responses to feeding-fasting cycles to tune metabolism so as to match the nutritional state.

### Keywords
Mtorc1, Mouse, Raga gtpases, Metabolism, Nutrient signaling.

### Affiliations
Fernando García Martínez, Ph.D. Proteomics Unit, Spanish National cancer Research Center, CNIO, MADRID, SPAIN
Javier Muñoz, PhD - Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110

### Submitter
Fernando Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Javier Muñoz, PhD - Head of Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO) Address: Melchor Fernández Almagro, 3. 28029 Madrid. SPAIN Phone: +34 917 328 000 Ext. 3110


