### Accession
PXD034413

### Title
Spatially-targeted optical microproteomics timecourse of rat myocardial infarction

### Description
Myocardial infarction (MI) results from occlusion of blood supply to the heart muscle causing death of cardiac muscle cells. Following myocardial infarction (MI), scar formation acts to mechanically stabilise the injured heart to prevent rupture and death. While fibroblasts and macrophages are implicated in post-MI scar formation and maturation, their exact contributions to this process are poorly characterised, especially in the long-term (i.e., beyond 1-week post-MI). Here, we employ state-of-the-art spatially-targetted optical micro-proteomics (STOMP) to isolate proteomes of tissue fractions enriched for fibroblasts (sma+) and macrophages (cd68+) over a 6-week post-MI timecourse and compare them to whole-scar proteome. We illustrate dynamic, specific changes in sma- and cd68-enriched fraction protein composition over 1-6 weeks post-MI with some of these changes reflected in whole-infarct preparations. These results link specific cell populations to specific protein changes in whole infarct.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was performed as described in Yin et al (2021) . Briefly, photo-crosslinked tissue sections were washed to remove unconjugated biotin-BP; three times with 1:1 (v/v) water:DMSO and three times with water, before being stored at -80 °C. Insoluble extracellular matrix was partially digested and solubilised in (1 M NH2OH−HCl, 8 M urea, 0.2 M K2 CO3, pH = 9.0) at 45 °C for 17 h. Biotinylated proteins were precipitated via dilution 1:10 in TBS-0.1% SDS and incubation with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Pierce #88817) at room temperature for 1 h. Biotinylated proteins were then eluted from the bead by incubation in laemmli buffer at 96 °C for 5 min and resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) at 70 V for 12 min. For each sample, a 1 cm band consisting of all sample proteins was excised and submitted for mass spectrometry analysis at the University of Virginia Biomolecular Analysis Facility.  Gel pieces were transferred to a siliconized tube and washed in 200 µL 50% methanol.  The gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, rehydrated in 30 µL of 10 mM dithiolthreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and reduced at room temperature for 0.5 h.  The DTT solution was removed and the sample alkylated in 30 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h.  The reagent was removed and the gel pieces dehydrated in 100 µL acetonitrile.  The acetonitrile was removed and the gel pieces rehydrated in 100 µL 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate.  The pieces were dehydrated in 100 µL acetonitrile, the acetonitrile removed and the pieces completely dried by vacuum centrifugation.  The gel pieces were rehydrated in 20 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate on ice for 30 min.  Any excess enzyme solution was removed and 20 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate added.  The sample was digested overnight at 37 oC and the peptides formed extracted from the polyacrylamide in a 100 µL aliquot of 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid.  This extract was evaporated to 10 µL for MS analysis. The samples were run on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer system with an Easy Spray ion source connected to a Thermo 75 μm × 15 cm C18 Easy Spray column (trap column first). Six microliters of the extract was injected, and the peptides were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1 M formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min over 2.0 h. The nanospray ion source was operated at 1.9 kV. The digest was analyzed using the rapid switching capability of the instrument acquiring a full scan mass spectrum to determine peptide molecular weights followed by product ion spectra (Top10 HCD) to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using PEAKS Studio X+ (version 10.5; Bioinformatic Solutions Inc.). Briefly, raw data were filtered to retain only features with a charge between +1 and +4. Peptide identification was performed using PEAKS’ build-in DB (standard database search), de novo, SPIDER (mutation and homology search) and PTM (unconstrained variable modification search) search engines with a parent mass error tolerance of 10.0 ppm, a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.01 Da, with specific cleavage by trypsin + NH2OH specified (cleavage after K/R but not before P and after N if before A/R/D/E/G/L/K/T/P/V; Barrett et al 2017 ) and up to 3 missed cleavages. Features were searched against the SwissProt Rattus norveigicus database which contains all reviewed proteins with common contaminants added. Carboxymethylation (mass change = +58.01) of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Common sample handling artefacts and artefacts potentially induced by NH2OH treatment were included as variable modifications. Namely, oxidation of methionine, proline, tyrosine, asparagine, lysine, aspartate, glutamine (+15.99), acetylation of protein N-terminus (+42.01) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.98), cysteine to dehydroalanine conversion (-33.99) and cysteine oxidation to cysteic acid (+47.98). Results from all search engines were compiled and peptide identities were assigned according to their strongest match across search engine results. Peptide identifications were filtered to retain those with an identification FDR < 0.01. For label-free quantification (LFQ), mass error tolerance was set to 20.0 ppm with a retention time window of 15 minutes for alignment (matching features between runs). Peptide lists from LFQ (providing peptide intensities and FDR-filtered identities) and each of the different search engines (providing post-translational modification details) were exported from PEAKS as .csv files. Only peptides present in at least 50 % of experimental (i.e. not dark controls) samples were retained for analysis. Exported peptide list were used to calculate protein-level fold changes between fractions using BayesENproteomics (Mallikarjun et al. 2020) fitting model (1).  y_pgb  = β_0 + X_p*β_p  + X_g*β_g + X_b*β_b + X_p*X_g*β_(p:g) + ε_g. (1)  Samples were normalised by median centering. In equation (1), y_pgb corresponds to the logged intensity of peptide p, obtained from fraction g in batch b. The βs correspond to the fitted coefficients for each predictor variable with β_g represents the protein abundance in fraction g. The interactions coefficient β_(p:g) in (1), denotes variability in individual peptide intensities, p, in fraction g. ε corresponds to a Gaussian error term centred on 0 with a protein-specific variance. X consists of categorical variables encoded as binary variables denoting the fraction/peptide from which an intensity value was obtained. BayesENproteomics uses empirical Bayes variance adjustment to correct standard error estimates using information shared across proteins (Smyth 2004). P-values were calculated via Student’s t-tests using fold changes and Empirical Bayes-adjusted standard errors and subsequently corrected for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Myocardial infarction, Microproteomics, Rat, Cardiac, Sma, Cd68, Fibroblast, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Assistant Professor of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology Associate Director for Diversity, Equity, and Inclusio at the Carter Immunology Center University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Ewald
Assistant Professor of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology Associate Director for Diversity, Equity, and Inclusio at the Carter Immunology Center University of Virginia Charlottesville, VA


