### Accession
PXD024400

### Title
Blood leukocytes recapitulate diabetogenic peptide-MHC-II complexes displayed in the pancreatic islets

### Description
Assessing the self-peptides presented by susceptible major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules is crucial for evaluating the pathogenesis and therapeutics of tissue-specific autoimmune diseases. However, direct examination of such MHC-bound peptides displayed in the target organ remains largely impractical. Here, we demonstrate that the blood leukocytes from non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice presented peptide epitopes to autoreactive CD4 T cells. These peptides were bound to the autoimmune class II MHC molecule, I-Ag7, and originated from insulin B-chain and C-peptide. The presentation required a glucose challenge, which stimulated the release of insulin peptides from pancreatic islets. The circulating leukocytes, especially the B cells, promptly captured and presented these peptides. Although canonical intracellular processing of insulin was involved in the presentation, extracellular binding of catabolized insulin products to I-Ag7 gave rise to a unique pathogenic epitope. Administration of monoclonal antibodies recognizing insulin B-chain abolished the presentation and diminished diabetes incidence. Mass spectrometry analysis of the leukocyte MHC-II peptidomes revealed a series of beta cell derived peptides, with identical sequences to those previously in the islet MHC-II peptidome. Thus, the WBC peptidome echoes that found in islets and serves to identify immunogenic peptides in an otherwise inaccessible tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry. A Dionex UltiMate 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) through an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (20 µL), loaded (19 µL, 15 µL/min, 3 min) onto a trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 50 ºC), eluted (0.200 µL/min) onto an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, 50 ºC, Thermo Scientific) and separated with the following gradient, all % Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN): 0–110 min, 2%–22%; 110–120 min, 22%–35%; 120–130 min, 35–95%; 130–150 min, isocratic at 95%; 151–153 min, 95%–2%, 153–171 min, isocratic at 2%. Spray voltage was 1900V, ion transfer tube temperature was 275°C, and RF lens was 30%. MS scans were acquired in profile mode and MS/MS scans in centroid mode, for ions with charge states 2–5, with a cycle time of 3 sec. MS spectra were recorded from 375–1500 Da at 120K resolution (at m/z 200), and HCD MS/MS was triggered above a threshold of 2.0e4, with quadrupole isolation (0.7 Da) at 30K resolution, and collision energy (CE) of 30%. Dynamic exclusion was used (+/- 5 ppm, 60 s), and monoisotopic precursor selection was on.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis. Data files were uploaded to PEAKS X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions) for processing, de novo sequencing and database searching. Resulting sequences were searched against the UniProt Mouse database (downloaded 1/12/2019; 17,000 entries) appended with the Common Repository for Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) contaminant database, with mass error tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for parent and fragment, respectively, no enzyme specificity and methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, and oxidation of cysteine to cysteic acid as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was enabled, and filters were adjusted to give a 1% FDR at the peptide level.  Quantification. To measure peptide abundances, data files were imported into Skyline (64-bit, version 20.1.0.155 (a0e7323e3), MacCoss Lab, University of Washington). The resulting abundances were exported, log2 transformed, and summed to obtain abundances for peptide families.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nod mouse, Blood leukocytes, Mhc-ii peptidome

### Affiliations
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Pathology & Immunology 425 S. Euclid, Campus Box 8118 St. Louis, MO 63110
Washington University

### Submitter
Cheryl Lichti

### Lab Head
Dr Cheryl Lichti
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Pathology & Immunology 425 S. Euclid, Campus Box 8118 St. Louis, MO 63110


