### Accession
PXD002440

### Title
Non-targeted LC-MS approach for identifying ancient proteins

### Description
Proteins identified from zooarchaeological turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), rabbit (Lagomorpha), and squirrel (Sciuridae) remains using non-targeted LC-MS/MS.  Development of potential extraction and characterization method for the improvement of LC-MS analysis of protein residues  from prehistoric cooking pottery.

### Sample Protocol
Bone samples were pulverized and solubilized in 2% SDS before being subjected to high pressure and temperature.  Samples were concentrated and processed for LC-MS by filter-aided sample processing (FASP) and digested using Trypsin/Lys-C overnight.  Peptides were desalted using C18 SPE columns and dried in a speed vac before being resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using Mascot (version 2.2.2, Matrix Science) against SwissProt database (v2013_07) with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da, parent mass tolerance of 2.5 Da, and maximum of 1 missed cleavage.  Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification.  Oxidation of proline and methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were specified as variable modifications.  Resulting MS/MS spectra were interpreted using Scaffold (version 4.3.2, Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ancient proteins, Method development, Archaeoproteomics, Bone

### Affiliations
University of Noth Texas, Geography
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Dale Chaput

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Wolverton
University of Noth Texas, Geography


