### Accession
PXD008588

### Title
Genomic and Proteomic characterization of Aspergillus niger isolated from the International Space Station

### Description
Genomic and proteomic characterization of the Aspergillus niger isolate, JSC-093350089, collected from U.S. segment surfaces of the International Space Station (ISS) is reported, along with a comparison to the experimentally established strain ATCC 1015. Whole-genome sequencing of JSC-093350089 revealed enhanced genetic variance when compared to publicly available sequences of A. niger strains. Analysis of the isolate’s proteome revealed significant differences in the molecular phenotype of JSC-093350089, including increased abundance of proteins involved in the A. niger starvation response, oxidative stress resistance, cell wall integrity and modulation, and nutrient acquisition. Together, these data reveal the existence of a distinct strain of A. niger onboard the ISS and provide insight into the molecular phenotype that is selected for by melanized fungal species inhabiting spacecraft environments.

### Sample Protocol
JSC-093350089 and ATCC 1015 were cultivated on glucose minimal medium (GMM) agar plates and incubated at 30oC for 5 days. Mycelia from GMM agar plates were collected and lysed in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate with Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride using a Precellys 24 homogenizer. 200 µg proteins from each sample were TCA precipitated, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin/LysC. The digested peptides were labeled with isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTsixplex), fractionated, and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. The samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph, a75 μm x 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trapping column, and a 75 μm x 25 cm PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column, and an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were searched using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific) with the Sequest-HT searching engines against an Aspergillus niger CBS513.88 database from NCBI containing 10549 sequences.

### Publication Abstract
The initial characterization of the Aspergillus niger isolate JSC-093350089, collected from U.S. segment surfaces of the International Space Station (ISS), is reported, along with a comparison to the extensively studied strain ATCC 1015. Whole-genome sequencing of the ISS isolate enabled its phylogenetic placement within the A. niger/<i>welwitschiae</i>/<i>lacticoffeatus</i> clade and revealed that the genome of JSC-093350089 is within the observed genetic variance of other sequenced A. niger strains. The ISS isolate exhibited an increased rate of growth and pigment distribution compared to a terrestrial strain. Analysis of the isolate's proteome revealed significant differences in the molecular phenotype of JSC-093350089, including increased abundance of proteins involved in the A. niger starvation response, oxidative stress resistance, cell wall modulation, and nutrient acquisition. Together, these data reveal the existence of a distinct strain of A. niger on board the ISS and provide insight into the characteristics of melanized fungal species inhabiting spacecraft environments. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> A thorough understanding of how fungi respond and adapt to the various stimuli encountered during spaceflight presents many economic benefits and is imperative for the health of crew. As A. niger is a predominant ISS isolate frequently detected in built environments, studies of A. niger strains inhabiting closed systems may reveal information fundamental to the success of long-duration space missions. This investigation provides valuable insights into the adaptive mechanisms of fungi in extreme environments as well as countermeasures to eradicate unfavorable microbes. Further, it enhances understanding of host-microbe interactions in closed systems, which can help NASA's Human Research Program maintain a habitat healthy for crew during long-term manned space missions.

### Keywords
International space station, Aspergillus niger, Proteomic

### Affiliations
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope
City of Hope

### Submitter
Abby Chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Kalkum
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope


