### Accession
PXD002119

### Title
Fat BodFat Body, Hungry Brain: Nutriproteomics in the Hypothalamus from a Mouse Model with Obesity and Anorexiay, Hungry Brain: Nutriproteomics in the Hypothalamus from a Mouse Model with Obesity and Anorexia

### Description
Systemic acute inflammatory signals can cause profound anorexia by disrupting the physiological appetite regulation in the hypothalamic milieu. Conversely, obesity related chronic inflammation of the hypothalamus can disturb anorexigenic signals and promote abnormal body weight control. The aim of the present study was to compare the global hypothalamic endophenotype in C57/Bl6 mice exposed to a high-fat diet or with acute illness mediated by LPS.   Ten-week old male C57/Bl6 mice (n=18) were randomly divided into four groups; the control 1 group (n =3) was fed a normal diet whereas the high-fat diet (HFD) group (n =6) was fed a high-fat diet for eight weeks. The control 2 group (n=3) received an intraperitoneal injection of saline whereas the LPS group (n=6) received an intraperitoneal injection of LPS. Mice were sacrificed 18-hr post-injection. Both control 2 and LPS groups were fed a normal diet for eight weeks before the injection. The hypothalamic regions were removed and analysed using a 2D LC-MS methodology.   The proteomic analysis profiled 9,235 proteins (q<0.05) across all biological states, of which 522 proteins were found modulated in the HFD group and another 579 in the LPS group. The proteomic profiles demonstrated that the systemic acute inflammation linked with anorexia induced a negative feedback loop of appetite control in the hypothalamus, suggesting an effort to re-establish homeostasis. By contrast, the chronic inflammation associated with obesity initiated a “perpetual cycle” of positive feedback enhancement of appetite regulation further exacerbating positive energy balance.

### Sample Protocol
Ten-week old male C57/Bl6 mice (n = 18) were individually housed in a temperature-controlled room (22 °C), under a 12 h light/dark cycle and free access to rodent chow and water. Mice were randomly divided into four groups; the control 1 (C1) group (n =3), the high-fat diet (HFD) group (n =6), the control 2 (C2) group (n=3) and the LPS group (n=6). Mice in the C1 group were fed a normal diet (10 % kcal fat, 70 % kcal carbohydrate, and 20% kcal protein; Special Diet Services, UK) whereas the HFD group was fed a high-fat diet (45 % kcal fat, 35 % kcal carbohydrate, and 20 % kcal protein; Special Diet Services, UK) for eight weeks after which they were anesthetized and perfused intracardially with phosphate buffered saline. Mice in the C2 and LPS groups were fed a control diet for eight weeks. After this period, mice in the C2 group received an intraperitoneal injection of 0.3mL saline whereas the LPS group received an intraperitoneal injection of LPS (Escherichia coli O111:B4 [Sigma No. L-2630]) at a dose of 120 μg/mouse dissolved in 0.3 mL saline. Mice in the C2 and LPS groups were sacrificed 18 hours after the injection as described above (Figure 1A).   The hypothalamic regions were removed and snap frozen at -80 °C. Experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the Centre of Basic Research, Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens.  Specimens were dissolved in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate and homogenized using the FastPrep system (Savant Bio, Cedex, Fr) followed by pulsed probe sonication (Misonix, Farmingdale, NY, USA). Lysates were centrifuged (16,000 g, 10 min, 4oC) and supernatants measured for protein content using Infrared Spectroscopy (Millipore, Billerica, Massachussets, USA) per manufacturer’s instructions. Three individual protein extracts were pooled (33.3 μg from each lysate giving 100 μg final protein content) to form one replicate for the C1 and C2 groups and two biological replicates for the HFD and LPS groups and subjected to reduction, alkylation, trypsin proteolysis and isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling per supplier’s specifications (ABSciex, San Hose, CA, USA). Only biological replicates were included in the study design, as the technical reproducibility of the iTRAQ proteomics method used has been reported by the authors8. Labelled peptides were pooled and fractionated with high-PH reverse phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters, XBridge C8 column (150 x 3 mm, 3.5 μm particle) with the LC-20AD HPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan)8, 9. Each resulting fraction was LC-MS analysed with low-pH RP capillary chromatography (PepMap C18, 50μm ID x 50cm L, 100 Å pore, 3.5μm particle) and nanospray ionization FT-MS8, 9 (Ultimate 3000 UHPLC - LTQ-Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, DE).

### Data Protocol
Unprocessed raw files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for target decoy searching with SequestHT for tryptic peptides, as reported previously. Quantification ratios were median-normalized and log2 transformed. A protein was considered modulated in the HFD or LPS group relative to the respective control when its log2ratio was above or below ± 1 Standard Deviation across both biological replicates

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Anorexia, Chronic inflammation, Acute inflammation, Proteomics, Hypothalamus

### Affiliations
Cancer Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Harvey Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
Cancer Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK


