### Accession
PXD038138

### Title
SESAME-catalyzed H3T11 phosphorylation inhibits Dot1-catalyzed H3K79me3 to regulate autophagy and telomere silencing

### Description
The glycolytic enzyme, pyruvate kinase Pyk1 maintains telomere heterochromatin by phosphorylating histone H3T11 (H3pT11), which promotes SIR (silent information regulator) complex binding at telomeres and prevents autophagy-mediated Sir2 degradation. However, the exact action mechanism of H3pT11 is poorly understood. Here, we report that H3pT11 directly inhibits Dot1-catalyzed H3K79 tri-methylation (H3K79me3) and uncover how this histone crosstalk regulates autophagy and telomere silencing. Mechanistically, Pyk1-catalyzed H3pT11 directly reduces the binding of Dot1 to chromatin and inhibits Dot1-catalyzed H3K79me3, which leads to transcriptional repression of autophagy genes and reduced autophagy. Despite the antagonism between H3pT11 and H3K79me3, they work together to promote the binding of SIR complex at telomeres to maintain telomere silencing. Furthermore, we identify Reb1 as a telomere-associated factor that recruits Pyk1-containing SESAME (Serine-responsive SAM36 taining Metabolic Enzyme) complex to telomere regions to phosphorylate H3T11 and prevent the invasion of H3K79me3 from euchromatin into heterochromatin to maintain telomere silencing. Together, these results uncover a novel histone crosstalk and provide insights into dynamic regulation of silent heterochromatin and autophagy in response to cell metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains Reb1-Flag was harvested from 1 liter culture cultured in rich media overnight to an optical density at 600 (OD600) of 1.0 ,  washed and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Thawed cell pellets were ground with glass beads by using a Biospec bead beater [30 sec ON, 90 sec OFF] in cold room for ca. 45 min in IP buffer (40 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, 50mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4), The lysate was centrifuged at 18,400g at 4 °C for 1.5 hr and the supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG IP Resin (GenScript, L00425) beads at 4 °C for 4 hr. The purified histone H3 protein form bacterial were immunoprecipitated with Ni-NTA Agarose (Abcolnal, AS045) at 4 °C for 4 hr. The beads were washed extensively in IP buffer for on-bead trypsin digestion. Briefly, immunoprecipitated protein was disulphide-reduced by adding DTT to final concentration of 25mM and reacted in an incubator shaker at 37℃ for 40min. Cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final  concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min. Immunoprecipitated protein was digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme : substrate) ratio at 37℃ and the supernatant peptides ware then desalted using C18 columns (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid  and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (Thermo Fisher) utilizing a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher) connected to Thermo Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were eluted with a 5–20% gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. The MS1 scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 over a mass range of 380–1,560 m/z, with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1 × 106. The MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, with the normalized collision energy set to 24, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 2 × 105. Determination of phosphorylation sites using mass spectrometry refers to previous research [1]. The raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database from Uniport (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using Sequest HT, MS Amanda and ptmRS algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher). The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass was 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were set for methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine. Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two mis-cleavages and a false-detection rate of 1% using the percolator validator algorithms were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
The glycolytic enzyme, pyruvate kinase Pyk1 maintains telomere heterochromatin by phosphorylating histone H3T11 (H3pT11), which promotes SIR (silent information regulator) complex binding at telomeres and prevents autophagy-mediated Sir2 degradation. However, the exact mechanism of action for H3pT11 is poorly understood. Here, we report that H3pT11 directly inhibits Dot1-catalyzed H3K79 tri-methylation (H3K79me3) and uncover how this histone crosstalk regulates autophagy and telomere silencing. Mechanistically, Pyk1-catalyzed H3pT11 directly reduces the binding of Dot1 to chromatin and inhibits Dot1-catalyzed H3K79me3, which leads to transcriptional repression of autophagy genes and reduced autophagy. Despite the antagonism between H3pT11 and H3K79me3, they work together to promote the binding of SIR complex at telomeres to maintain telomere silencing. Furthermore, we identify Reb1 as a telomere-associated factor that recruits Pyk1-containing SESAME (Serine-responsive SAM-containing Metabolic Enzyme) complex to telomere regions to phosphorylate H3T11 and prevent the invasion of H3K79me3 from euchromatin into heterochromatin to maintain telomere silencing. Together, these results uncover a histone crosstalk and provide insights into dynamic regulation of silent heterochromatin and autophagy in response to cell metabolism.

### Keywords
H3k79me3 autophagy h3t11 phosphorylation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei 430062, China
hubei university

### Submitter
Yu Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yu qi
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan, Hubei 430062, China


