### Accession
PXD016618

### Title
O-glycan initiation directs distinct biological pathways and controls epithelial differentiation

### Description
Glycosylation is an abundant post-translational modification of both intracellular and extracellular proteins [1]. The majority of glycans are classified as N-linked chains, where the carbohydrate moiety is attached to asparagine residues, or O-linked chains, most commonly linked to a serine or threonine. N-linked glycosylation is initiated by the oligosaccharyltransferase complex with only two paralogs of the catalytic subunit, whereas O-glycan initiation is more complex. There are several types of O-linked glycosylation, but among the most diverse is the mucin or GalNAc type (hereafter referred to as O-glycosylation). O-glycosylation is initiated by 20 evolutionarily conserved polypeptide GalNAc-transferases (GalNAc-Ts), which catalyze the first step in the O-glycosylation of proteins by adding GalNAc residues to threonine, serine, and tyrosine amino acids (Fig 1A). Each of the GalNAc-Ts are differentially expressed in various tissues and have both distinct and overlapping peptide substrate specificities [2-12]. Thus, the repertoire of GalNAc-Ts expressed in a given cell determines the subset and O-glycosite pattern of glycosylated proteins [13]. Substantial efforts have been made to characterize and predict the substrate specificities of GalNAc-Ts in vitro, but understanding of the in vivo specificities of the individual GalNAc-Ts or their biological functions is limited [13-15]. This lack of insight prevents an understanding of how site-specific O-linked glycosylation affects diseases, such as metabolic disorders, cardiovascular disease, and various malignancies, that have been associated with GalNAc-Ts through genome-wide association studies and other linkage studies [16-26]. Therefore, it is imperative that we establish how O-glycosylation at specific sites in proteins affects protein function. A major task in achieving this goal is to identify the non-redundant biological functions of site-specific O-glycosylation.  We and others recently developed new strategies for identifying specific sites on proteins that undergo O-glycosylation in different cell types and tissues [27-31]. Characterization of the O-glycoproteomic landscape in isolated human cells and multiple human cell lines suggests that more than 80 % of all proteins that traffic through the secretory pathway are O-glycoproteins [28, 30]. Probing the non-redundant contributions of individual GalNAc-Ts in cells with and without specific GalNAc-Ts [32-34] has revealed broad substrate specificities for some of the individual isoforms, whereas others seem to have very restricted substrate specificities [33-35]. Assessing all of the mapped O-glycosylation sites to identify associations between O-glycosites and protein annotations, we recently found that O-glycans are over-represented close to tandem repeat regions, protease cleavage sites, within propeptides, and on a select group of protein domains [28, 30, 36]. Although such general associations between the location of O-glycans and protein functions may direct future investigations, the strategy does not define the function of site-specific glycosylation. Further progress in discovering and defining novel functions of site-specific glycosylation events requires direct quantitative analysis of potential biological responses induced by the loss of distinct GalNAc-T isoforms, and such biological responses are not easily observed in single cell culture systems. Instead, more complex model systems can be used to examine and dissect the molecular mechanisms underlying the important biological functions of site-specific glycosylation. We previously used an organotypic tissue model equipped with genetically engineered cells to decipher the function of elongated O-glycans [29]. In the present study, we use the model combined with quantitative O-glycoproteomics and phosphoproteomics to perform open-ended discovery of the biological functions of site-specific glycosylation governed by GalNAc-Ts (Fig 1B). With this combinatorial strategy, we demonstrate that loss of individual GalNAc-T isoforms has distinct phenotypic consequences through their effect on distinct biological pathways, suggesting specific roles during epithelial formation.

### Sample Protocol
TiO2 enrichment of phosphopeptides HaCaT T1, T2, T3 (two clones of each) and two biological replicates of WT grown in culture dishes were harvested by scraping in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40, 0.1 % Na deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with Complete Mini protease inhibitors and a mix of phosphatase inhibitors. Acetone-precipitated proteins were reconstituted in 0.1 % RapiGest (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced (1 mM DTT 1 h RT) and alkylated (5.5 mM CAA 1 h RT), and treated overnight with PNGase F, followed by digestion with trypsin at RT for 16 h. A total of 200 g of each digest was labeled using the TMT-10plex Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, mixed in equimolar ratio, and enriched using TiO2 beads [83]. Briefly, peptides were mixed with TiO2 beads (0.6 mg for 100 g peptides) in 1 M glycolic acid, 80 % ACN, and 5 % TFA, and vortexed vigorously for 15 min at RT. The procedure was repeated with half the amount of beads. The two batches of beads were washed with loading buffer, followed by 80 % ACN, 1 % TFA and 20 % ACN, 0.2 % TFA. The phosphopeptides were eluted with 1 % NH4OH. Peptides before enrichment and eluted phosphopeptides were orthogonally separated using high pH fractionation and analyzed by HCD MS.  LWAC isolation of Tn and T-O-glycopeptides LWAC isolation of Tn and T-O-glycopeptides was performed as described previously [27, 30]. Briefly, proteins were reduced (5 mM DTT 45 min 60 °C) and alkylated (10 mM IAA 30 min RT), digested with trypsin (Roche), and neuraminidase-treated to remove sialic acid residues. For experiments in COSMC KO (SC), these steps were followed by labeling with light or medium isotopomeric dimethyl labels [52]. The labeled digests were mixed in a 1:1 ratio in the following sets: HaCaTSC (light) and HaCaTSCT1 (medium), HaCaTSC (light) and HaCaTSCT2 (medium), HaCaTSC (light) and HaCaTSCT3 (medium). The mixed pairs of digests were enriched using agarose-bound VVA LWAC and eluted with GalNAc. For experiments in WT, digests of three clones of each T1, T2, T3, and one WT was labeled using the TMT-10plex Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled digests were mixed in an equimolar ratio and enriched using Jacalin LWAC, followed by elution with D-galactose. Isoelectric focusing was performed on VVA-enriched glycopeptides by a 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent) using pH 3–10 strips (GE Healthcare) [84]. High pH fractionation was performed on TMT-labeled Jacalin-enriched glycopeptides. All glycopeptide samples were desalted by self-made Stage Tips (C18 sorbent from Empore 3 M) and submitted to LC-MS and HCD/ETD-MS/MS.  Mass spectrometry EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) interfaced via a nanoSpray Flex ion source to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro or Orbitrap Fusion spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used for peptide, glycopeptide, and phosphopeptide analysis as described previously [27]. Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis Bioinformatics analysis was performed as described previously [32]. Briefly, aligned reads from the RNAseq analysis were analyzed using the DESeq [80] and EdgeR [81] packages for R and Bioconductor to identify differentially expressed transcripts. DESeq and EdgeR analyses were run using default parameters and following previously defined protocols [82]. Alternatively, single reads were aligned to the human genome hg19 reference sequence and analyzed using the CLC Genomics Workbench (Qiagen).

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) greatly expand the function and potential for regulation of protein activity, and O-glycosylation is among the most abundant and diverse PTMs. Initiation of O-GalNAc glycosylation is regulated by 20 distinct GalNAc-transferases (GalNAc-Ts), and deficiencies in individual GalNAc-Ts are associated with human disease, causing subtle but distinct phenotypes in model organisms. Here, we generate a set of isogenic keratinocyte cell lines lacking either of the three dominant and differentially expressed GalNAc-Ts. Through the ability of keratinocytes to form epithelia, we investigate the phenotypic consequences of the loss of individual GalNAc-Ts. Moreover, we probe the cellular responses through global transcriptomic, differential glycoproteomic, and differential phosphoproteomic analyses. We demonstrate that loss of individual GalNAc-T isoforms causes distinct epithelial phenotypes through their effect on specific biological pathways; GalNAc-T1 targets are associated with components of the endomembrane system, GalNAc-T2 targets with cell-ECM adhesion, and GalNAc-T3 targets with epithelial differentiation. Thus, GalNAc-T isoforms serve specific roles during human epithelial tissue formation.

### Keywords
Polyomics, Differential glycoproteomics, Polypeptide galnac-transferase, 3d skin, Tissue development

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Glyco MS Group Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine  University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Glyco MS Group Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine  University of Copenhagen


