### Accession
PXD007915

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics for Xenopus Embryos

### Description
Sample preparation, instrument analysis and maxquant data analysis of TMT MultiNotch MS3

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with LysC and labeled with TMT-10plex reagent

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6 using the outlined parameters in the paper

### Publication Abstract
The oocytes, embryos, and cell-free lysates of the frog Xenopus laevis have emerged as powerful models for quantitative proteomic experiments. In the accompanying paper (Chapter 13) we describe how to prepare samples and acquire multiplexed proteomics spectra from those. As an illustrative example we use a 10-stage developmental time series from the egg to stage 35 (just before hatching). Here, we outline how to convert the ~700,000 acquired mass spectra from this time series into protein expression dynamics for ~9000 proteins. We first outline a preliminary quality-control analysis&#xa0;to discover any errors that occurred during sample preparation. We discuss how peptide and protein identification error rates are controlled, and how peptide and protein species are quantified. Our analysis relies on the freely available MaxQuant proteomics pipeline. Finally, we demonstrate how to start interpreting this large dataset by clustering and gene-set enrichment analysis.

### Keywords
Xenopus laevis tmt multinotch ms3 sample preparation data analysis maxquant

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics and Dept. of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey, USA

### Submitter
Matthew Sonnett

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wuehr
Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics and Dept. of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey, USA


