### Accession
PXD004275

### Title
Combination of multi-enzyme digestions and C-TAILS approach for deep screening of C-terminome

### Description
Protein C-termini study is still a challenging task and far behind its counterpart N-termini study. The identification of C-termini is often hampered by low ionization response in MS and fewer efficient enrichment methods existing. We previously optimized the C-TAILS (C-terminal amine-based isotope labeling of substrates) method to achieve 75% more identification of protein C-terminal peptides. Although with the significant improvement, the performance of method is not comparable with a regular proteome study since the identification number is very limited. Herein we reported an optimized method by introduction of multiple-enzyme digestions in order to increase the capacity and application of C-TAILS in biological and clinical study. To allow the application of other enzymes than Arg-C in C-TAILS method, we evaluated the effect of the omission of prior amine protection at protein level and revealed the negligible effect caused by. Subsequently we applied five different enzymes in the C-TAILS and evaluated the different performances on the basis of identification and complementariness. As a result, 722 protein C-termini of E. coli were identified in a triplicate experiments using 50 μg each, and the favored enzyme and enzyme combination were discovered and discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Protection of primary amines by acetylation (ArgC treatment)  The acetylation derivation was performing as Staes et al.25 The sample solution was incubated twice with 20 mM Ac-NHS at 25°C for 2 h and then the reaction was quenched with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH=8.8) at 30 °C for 10 min. Finally 100 mM NH2OH was added and kept at 30 °C for 30 min to reverse the undesired partial acetylation on Ser and Thr residues.26  Protection of carboxyl group  FASP method was adapted for the following procedures as previously described.27 The samples were transferred to Microcon-10 filters and centrifuged at 13,800 g for three-time buffer displacement with carboxyl protection buffer containing 4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM MES and 2 M ethanolamine, pH 4.5. After buffer displacement, freshly prepared 50 mM NHS and 100 mM EDC were added to trigger the reaction at 25 °C. After 2 h reaction, an additional freshly prepared 100 mM EDC was added and the solution was incubated for another 2 h. Multiple enzyme digestion and protection of Nα-amine of digested peptides The samples were then submitted to another three-time buffer displacement with digestion buffer (pH 7.5, 2 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM HEPES). After buffer displacement, the samples were digested at 37 °C with corresponding enzymes at a ratio of enzyme: protein as 1:100. After 2 h incubation, the samples were diluted four times with 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) and the same amount of enzyme were added for another 12 h digestion. For the LysargiNase treatment, the LysargiNase was firstly activated by 16 h incubation in the buffer containing 50 mM HEPES and 10 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5at 20 °C. Since LysargiNase is less tolerant to guanidine hydrochloride, the LysargiNase digestion was carried out in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 at 37 °C for 14 h. After digestion, the Nα-amine and the amine of lysine was protected by dimethylation.23 After adding formaldehyde and NaCNBH3 to reach a final concentration of 20 mM, the sample solution was kept for 2 h at 25 °C; the procedure was repeated once with freshly prepared reagents to ensure the efficient protection. The pretreatment of polyallylamine The pretreatment of polyallylamine is processed as described previously.7 18.7 mg polyallylamine hydrochloride was dissolved in 400 l buffer containing 200 mM MES, 2 M guanidine hydrochloride and 20% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (pH 4.5). Prior to application, the polyallylamine solution was submitted to five-time buffer displacement using Microcon-10 to remove the unpolymerized monomer, and finally concentrated in 100 l buffer to achieve a primary amine concentration of ~2 M. Enrichment of C-terminal peptides  An equal volume of pretreated stock polyallylamine polymer solution was transferred to the sample containing Microcon-10 to achieve a primary amine concentration of ~1 M. After adjusting pH to 4.5 using 1 M HCl, freshly prepared 50 mM NHS and 100 mM EDC were added and the sample was kept in a Thermomixer (600 rpm, 25 °C) for 2 h. The EDC step was repeated twice and the last incubation time was 10 h to guarantee the protection efficiency. The pH was checked at each step and adjusted if needed. After coupling with polymer, the solution was filtrated out and then followed by twice wash with 10 % ACN. The filtrate fractions containing C-terminal peptides were pooled, vacuum-dried and then resuspended using 1 % formic acid for following analysis.  Sample desalting  The desalting was employed on a homemade Poros R3 microcolumn.28 After loading the sample onto the R3 microcolumn, the column was first washed with 10 μL of 1 % formic acid, and then the bound peptides were eluted with 20 μL of 30 % ACN followed by 20 μL of 70% ACN. The two eluates were pooled and dried in Speedvac. Nanoflow LC-ESI-MS/MS LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were firstly loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano Trap Column (5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA)) and then analyzed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 25 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA)). The mobile phases consisted of Solution A (0.1 % formic acid) and Solution B (0.1 % formic acid in ACN). The derivatized peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 2 – 28 % B in 150 min, 28–90 % B in 5 min and 90 % B for 5 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: the 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan were automatically selected and fragmented in CID mode. As for the SCII method, only unrecognized charged ions were excluded and the known background ions were input in Reject Mass List to avoid from MS/MS analysis.29 All experiments were carried out in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK).30 E.coli protein database (20140509, 4,303 sequences) was downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: Arg-C, trypsin, LysC, LysN and LysargiNase as the enzyme respectively; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine, protein N-acetylation, ethanolamine protection on aspartate and glutamate, dimethylation on peptide N-terminal as fixed modifications; ethanolamine protection on protein C-terminus, oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. As for the sample protected with acetylation at the protein level, acetylation on lysine was added in fixed modification category. For the analysis of protein neo-C-termini, the changes were applied: the enzyme was changed to the corresponding semi-enzyme, and ethanolamine protection was set for peptide C-terminus instead of protein C-terminus. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT p ≤ 0.01 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Protein C-termini study is still a challenging task and far behind its counterpart, N-termini study. MS based C-terminomics study is often hampered by the low ionization efficiency of C-terminal peptides and the lack of efficient enrichment methods. We previously optimized the C-terminal amine-based isotope labeling of substrates (C-TAILS) method and identified 369 genuine protein C-termini in Escherichia coli. A key limitation of C-TAILS is that the prior protection of amines and carboxylic groups at protein level makes Arg-C as the only specific enzyme in practice. Herein, we report an approach combining multi-enzyme digestion and C-TAILS, which significantly increases the identification rate of C-terminal peptides and consequently improves the applicability of C-TAILS in biological studies. We carry out a systematic study and confirm that the omission of the prior amine protection at protein level has a negligible influence and allows the application of multi-enzyme digestion. We successfully apply five different enzyme digestions to C-TAILS, including trypsin, Arg-C, Lys-C, Lys-N, and Lysarginase. As a result, we identify a total of 722 protein C-termini in E. coli, which is at least 66% more than the results using any single enzyme. Moreover, the favored enzyme and enzyme combination are discovered. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004275.

### Keywords
C-tails, Multi-enzyme, Scii, Protein c-termini

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China
Institute of Biochemistry and Center for Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria

### Submitter
yang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


