### Accession
PXD030942

### Title
Multi-omic analyses reveal interaction networks linking CIC to cell cycle regulation

### Description
CIC encodes a transcriptional repressor inactivated by loss-of-function mutations in several cancer types, indicating that it may function as a tumor suppressor. Recent data indicate that CIC may regulate cell cycle genes in humans; however, a thorough investigation of this proposed role has not yet been reported. Here, we used single-cell RNA sequencing technology to provide evidence that inactivation of CIC in human cell lines resulted in transcriptional dysregulation of genes involved in cell cycle control. We also mapped CIC’s protein-protein and genetic interaction networks, identifying interactions between CIC and members of the Switch/Sucrose Non-Fermenting (SWI/SNF) complex, as well as novel candidate interactions between CIC and cell cycle regulators. We further showed that CIC loss was associated with an increased frequency of mitotic defects in human cell lines and a mouse model. Overall, our study positions CIC as a cell cycle regulator and indicates that CIC loss can lead to mitotic errors, consistent with CIC’s emerging role as a tumor suppressor of relevance in several cancer contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Samples analyzed using the 4000QTrap were obtained using standard immunopurification protocols coupled to an in-gel digestion approach. Samples analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion were processed using SP3 clean-up and TMT labeling with standard desalting methods.

### Data Protocol
Data from the 4000 QTrap were processed using Mascot Software (v2.5.1). MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot-Swissprot database (v2020March) using the Homo sapiens taxonomy filter (20,366 total entries). Mascot parameters were specified as: trypsin enzyme, 1 missed cleavage allowed, peptide mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation at NQ were set as variable modifications. Carbamidometyhlation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. An ion score cut off of 34 and require bold red criteria were used to filter the protein hits. Data from the Orbitrap Fusion were processed using the Proteome Discoverer Software (v2.1.1.21). MS2 spectra were searched using Sequest HT against a combined UniProt human proteome database appended to a list of common contaminants (24,624 total sequences). Sequest HT parameters were specified as: trypsin enzyme, 2 missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6. Oxidation of methionine and TMT 6-plex at lysine and peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Peptide spectral match error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator modeling of positive and false matches (Käll et al. 2007; Spivak et al. 2009). Data were filtered at the peptide spectral match-level to control for false discoveries using an adjusted p-value cut off of 0.01 as determined by Percolator. Contaminant and decoy proteins were removed from all data sets prior to downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>CIC</i> encodes a transcriptional repressor and MAPK signalling effector that is inactivated by loss-of-function mutations in several cancer types, consistent with a role as a tumour suppressor. Here, we used bioinformatic, genomic, and proteomic approaches to investigate CIC's interaction networks. We observed both previously identified and novel candidate interactions between CIC and SWI/SNF complex members, as well as novel interactions between CIC and cell cycle regulators and RNA processing factors. We found that CIC loss is associated with an increased frequency of mitotic defects in human cell lines and an in vivo mouse model and with dysregulated expression of mitotic regulators. We also observed aberrant splicing in CIC-deficient cell lines, predominantly at 3' and 5' untranslated regions of genes, including genes involved in MAPK signalling, DNA repair, and cell cycle regulation. Our study thus characterises the complexity of CIC's functional network and describes the effect of its loss on cell cycle regulation, mitotic integrity, and transcriptional splicing, thereby expanding our understanding of CIC's potential roles in cancer. In addition, our work exemplifies how multi-omic, network-based analyses can be used to uncover novel insights into the interconnected functions of pleiotropic genes/proteins across cellular contexts.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Cell cycle, Genetic interaction network, Single-cell sequencing, Cic

### Affiliations
BC Cancer Agency
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Gregg Morin
Head of Proteomics


