### Accession
PXD017953

### Title
The Brassica Mature Pollen and Stigma Proteomes: Preparing to Meet

### Description
Successful pollination brings together the mature pollen grain and stigma papilla to initiate an intricate series of molecular processes meant to eventually enable sperm cell delivery for fertilization and reproduction.  At maturity, the pollen and stigma cells have acquired proteomes comprising the primary molecular effectors required upon their meeting.  In Brassica species, knowledge of the roles and global composition of these proteomes is largely lacking.  To address this gap, gel-free shotgun proteomics was performed on the mature pollen and stigma of Brassica carinata, a representative of the Brassica family and its many crop species (e.g. B. napus, B. oleracea, B. rapa), which holds considerable potential as a bio-industrial crop.  5608 and 7703 B. carinata mature pollen and stigma proteins were identified, respectively.  The pollen and stigma proteomes were found to reflect not only their many common functional and developmental objectives, but also important differences underlying their cellular specialization.  Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) was exploited in the first analysis of a developing Brassicaceae stigma, and uncovered 251 B. carinata proteins that were differentially abundant during stigma maturation, providing insight into proteins involved in the initial phases of pollination.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ Analysis- The iTRAQ analysis coincides with RAW Files 121, 122, and 123. iTRAQ analysis was performed on proteins extracted from B. carinata stigmas at the BCP (early) and TCP (late) stages.  Proteins (200 µg) from each stage within each of three biological replicates (A, B and C) were aliquoted, split into two equal technical replicates of 100 µg, air-dried and resuspended in a solution of 4.5 M urea and 1% sodium deoxycholate.  Equal amounts of protein, 20 µg for each replicate, were digested with trypsin according to manufactures instructions (Sequence Grade Modified, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA), and the resulting peptides were labelled according to manufactures instructions (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). iTRAQ was split into 3 separate experiments (121, 122, 123). Experiment 121 consisted of biological replicate A, technical replicate 1 (early and late), and biological replicate C, technical replicate 2 (early and late). Experiment 122 consisted of biological replicate B, technical replicate 1 (early and late), and biological replicate A, technical replicate 2 (early and late). Experiment 123 consisted of biological replicate C, technical replicate 1 (early and late), and biological replicate B, technical replicate 2 (early and late). See the supplemental material of the manuscript for an illustration of the experimental design. iTRAQ samples were fractionated into 24 fractions by high pH (pH10) reversed- phase (RP) HPLC using the Agilent Technologies Inc. 1200 HPLC system and pooled offline according to Yang, F.; Shen, Y.; Camp II, D. G., Smith, R. D. High pH reversed- phase chromatography with fraction concatenation as an alternative to strong- cation exchange chromatography for two-dimensional proteomic analysis. Expert Rev. Proteomics. 2012, 9, 129-134. Fractions were then injected and separated by online RP nanoscale capillary LC and analysed by ESI-MS/MS. The experiments were performed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany) connected to an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.    Global analysis- The global analysis coincides with the following RAW files. For Brassica stigma, 20728-20747 and 23330, and for Brassica pollen, 19959, 19960, and 20118-20135. Global analyses were performed on proteins extracted from mature B. carinata stigmas and pollen grain.  Approximately 1 mg of the mature pollen and stigma proteins were digested with trypsin according to manufacturer’s instructions (Promega Corporation).  The tryptic digests were adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium formate and 1 ml for each sample was injected individually and separated offline into 60 fractions via high pH (pH 10) RP-HPLC using a C18 Hypersil gold column (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The experiments were performed with the ÄKTA purifier (Amersham Biosciences, Little Chalfont, UK) and the peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 4-40% solvent B (A: water, 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10; B: acetonitrile (ACN), 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10), at a flow rate of 1 ml/min.  The fractions were then concatenated into 20 fractions and separated via inline low pH RP-HPLC MS/MS.  Peptide samples (1 µg) were injected and separated by online RP nanoLC and analyzed by ESI MS/MS. The experiments were performed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Dionex Softron GmbH, Germering, Germany) connected to an Orbitrap FusionTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.    A second global MS analysis was performed on mature stigma proteins only.  Aliquots (10 µg) from each of the 6 mature B. carinata stigma protein samples not used for the iTRAQ analysis, were washed 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer using an Amicon 3 kDa column.  After elution, the samples were vacuum-dried and re-solubilized in 25 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate and heated at 95°C for 5 min.  Two micrograms of each sample were digested with trypsin according to manufactures instructions (Sequence Grade Modified, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA). The peptide samples were combined, purified on a stage tip (C18) and vacuum-dried before MS injection.  Peptides were resuspended into 0.1% formic acid for analysis by MS.  Peptide samples (1 µg) were injected and separated by online RP nanoLC and analyzed by ESI MS/MS using the same instruments mentioned above. The first global analysis for stigma coincides with the RAW files 20728-20747, and the second global analysis coincides with the RAW file 23330.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ Analysis- MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  MGF samples were analyzed using Mascot version 2.5.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) to search the TAX_Brassiceae_981017 database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=brassiceae&sort=score) assuming trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages being allowed, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.025 Da, and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 4-plex of lysine, tyrosine and the N-terminus were specified as variable modifications.   Scaffold version 4.7.5 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local false discovery rate (FDR) algorithm.  Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 exclusive peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the protein prophet algorithm.  Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.  Scaffold Q+ version 4.7.5 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to quantitate iTRAQ protein identifications.  Only proteins identified (at the thresholds described above) across all replicates were used for quantification.  Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Oberg, A., Mahoney, D.W., Eckel-Passow, J.E., Malone, C.J., Wolfinger, R.D., Hill, E.G., Cooper, L. T., Onuma, O.K., Spiro, C., Therneau, T.M. and Bergen III, H.R. (2008) Statistical analysis of relative labeled mass spectrometry data from complex samples using ANOVA. J. Proteome Res. 7, 225-233. Medians were used for averaging.  Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins and those missing a reference value, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm.  Statistically significant differentially abundant proteins were determined by applying the Mann-Whitney test with unadjusted significance level p < 0.05 corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg to p < 0.03491.  Proteins showing a > 1.5 fold difference in abundance were considered differentially abundant.    Global Analysis- All MS/MS peak lists (MGF files) were generated as above and all global experiments were analyzed using Mascot version 2.5.1 and X! Tandem (The GPM, https://thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)) to search the TAX_Brassiceae_981017 database and the TAX_Viridiplantae_33090 database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=viridiplantae&sort=score) assuming trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages being allowed.  They were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, dehydration of the N-terminus- glutamic acid to pyro-glutamate of the N-terminus, and ammonia-loss of the N-terminus- glutamine to pyro-glutamate of the N terminus were specified as variable modifications.  Scaffold version 4.7.5 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications as described above.  Proteins with a single peptide match were validated as previously described (Nazemof, N., Couroux, P., Rampitsch, C., Xing, T. and Robert, L.S. (2014) Proteomic profiling reveals insights into Triticeae stigma development and function. J. Exp. Bot. 65, 6069-6080.). Proteins identified from the various searches were combined as follows.  The proteins identified from searches using the Brassiceae database were combined to non-Brassiceae proteins identified exclusively from searches using the Viridiplantae database.  For the stigma, proteins identified in at least one sample from the iTRAQ analysis were also combined with proteins identified from the global Brassiceae and Viridiplantae searches provided that their matching Arabidopsis orthologs were absent from the list of Arabidopsis orthologs of proteins from the initial Brassiceae and Viridiplantae searches.

### Publication Abstract
Successful pollination in Brassica brings together the mature pollen grain and stigma papilla, initiating an intricate series of molecular processes meant to eventually enable sperm cell delivery for fertilization and reproduction. At maturity, the pollen and stigma cells have acquired proteomes, comprising the primary molecular effectors required upon their meeting. Knowledge of the roles and global composition of these proteomes in Brassica species is largely lacking. To address this gap, gel-free shotgun proteomics was performed on the mature pollen and stigma of Brassica carinata, a representative of the Brassica family and its many crop species (e.g. Brassica napus, Brassica oleracea and Brassica rapa) that holds considerable potential as a bio-industrial crop. A total of 5608 and 7703 B.&#xa0;carinata mature pollen and stigma proteins were identified, respectively. The pollen and stigma proteomes were found to reflect not only their many common functional and developmental objectives, but also the important differences underlying their cellular specialization. Isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) was exploited in the first analysis of a developing Brassicaceae stigma, and revealed 251 B.&#xa0;carinata proteins that were differentially abundant during stigma maturation, providing insight into proteins involved in the initial phases of pollination. Corresponding pollen and stigma transcriptomes were also generated, highlighting functional divergences between the proteome and transcriptome during different stages of pollen-stigma interaction. This study illustrates the investigative potential of combining the most comprehensive Brassicaceae pollen and stigma proteomes to date with iTRAQ and transcriptome data to provide a unique global perspective of pollen and stigma development and interaction.

### Keywords
Pollen tube growth, Stigma, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Pollen, Brassica carinata, Pollen-stigma interactions, Itraq, Pollen germination, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Carleton University
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Canada

### Submitter
Renee Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Laurian Robert, Dr. Renee Robinson
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Canada


