### Accession
PXD044091

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of CLAMP-HA and CLAMPΔPRD-HA from the parasite T. gondii

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites discharge specialized organelles called rhoptries upon host cell contact to mediate invasion. The events that drive rhoptry discharge are poorly understood, yet essential to sustain the apicomplexan parasitic life cycle. Rhoptry discharge appears to depend on proteins secreted from another set of organelles called micronemes, which in Toxoplasma gondii includes MIC8 and the microneme-associated CRMP complex. Here, we examine the function of the microneme protein CLAMP, uncovering its essential role in rhoptry discharge. CLAMP forms a distinct complex with two other microneme proteins, the invasion-associated SPATR, and a previously uncharacterized protein we name CLAMP-linked invasion protein (CLIP). Deletion of CLAMP’s cytosolic region does not disrupt complex association, revealing this complex resides in micronemes or secreted to the surface of parasites. CLAMP-deficiency does not impact parasite adhesion or microneme protein secretion; however, knockdown of any member of the CLAMP complex affects rhoptry discharge. Phylogenetic analysis suggests orthologs of the essential complex components, CLAMP and CLIP, are ubiquitous across apicomplexans. Nevertheless, SPATR, which appears to act as an accessory factor in Toxoplasma, is essential for invasion during Plasmodium falciparum blood stages. Our results reveal a new protein complex that mediates rhoptry discharge following host-cell contact.

### Sample Protocol
For CLAMP-HA, CLAMPΔPRD, and parental strain anti-HA immunoprecipitations, approximately 3-5 x 108 parasites were lysed in lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1% Triton X-100, with 1X Halt protease inhibitors), then clarified by centrifugation. Pre-washed anti-HA beads were added to soluble fractions and incubated at room temperature for 30 min, followed by 3x washes with lysis buffer. Elution of bound proteins from beads were performed by incubation of beads in S-trap elution buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB, pH 7.55 using H3PO4) at 37°C for 10 min. The elution was transferred to a new tube, and the elution was repeated at 70°C. Elutions were pooled, samples were reduced with TCEP,alkylated with MMTS, and the standard S-trap micro workup protocol (Protifi) was used to prepare tryptic samples for MS analysis. Two biological replicates were run on a Thermo Fisher Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro Interface.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo FIsher Scientific). Sequence database search was performed using Sequest HT with the optional search modifications including Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N,Q), Phospho (S,T,Y), Myristoyl (K). Precursor ions-based quantification was used with low abundance resampling for missing value imputation.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites discharge specialized organelles called rhoptries upon host cell contact to mediate invasion. The events that drive rhoptry discharge are poorly understood, yet essential to sustain the apicomplexan parasitic life cycle. Rhoptry discharge appears to depend on proteins secreted from another set of organelles called micronemes, which vary in function from allowing host cell binding to facilitation of gliding motility. Here we examine the function of the microneme protein CLAMP, which we previously found to be necessary for Toxoplasma gondii host cell invasion, and demonstrate its essential role in rhoptry discharge. CLAMP forms a distinct complex with two other microneme proteins, the invasion-associated SPATR, and a previously uncharacterized protein we name CLAMP-linked invasion protein (CLIP). CLAMP deficiency does not impact parasite adhesion or microneme protein secretion; however, knockdown of any member of the CLAMP complex affects rhoptry discharge. Phylogenetic analysis suggests orthologs of the essential complex components, CLAMP and CLIP, are ubiquitous across apicomplexans. SPATR appears to act as an accessory factor in Toxoplasma, but despite incomplete conservation is also essential for invasion during Plasmodium falciparum blood stages. Together, our results reveal a new protein complex that mediates rhoptry discharge following host-cell contact.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Rhoptry secretion., Clamp

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Dylan Valleau

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA


