### Accession
PXD013423

### Title
Hepatocyte Deletion of Triglyceride-Synthesis Enzyme DGAT2 Reduces Steatosis without Increasing Inflammation or Fibrosis

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterized by excess lipid accumulation in hepatocytes and reprepresents a huge public health problem owing to its propensity to progress to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), fibrosis, and liver failure. The lipids stored in hepatic steatosis are primarily triglycerides (TGs) synthesized by two acyl CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT) enzymes. Either DGAT1 or DGAT2 catalyzes this reaction, and these enzymes have been suggested to differentially utilize exogenous or endogenously synthesized fatty acids, with DGAT2 being linked to storage of fatty acids from de novo lipogenesis, a process that is increased in NAFLD. However, whether DGAT2 is more responsible for lipid accumulation in NAFLD and the progression to fibrosis is currently unknown. Also, it is unresolved whether DGAT2 can be safely inhibited as a therapy for NAFLD. Here we induced NAFLD-like  disease in mice by feeding a diet rich in fructose, saturated fat, and cholesterol and found that hepatocyte-specfici Dgat2 deficiency reduced expression of de novo lipogenesis genes and lowered liver TGs by ~70%. Importantly, the reduction of steatosis was not accompanied by increased inflammation or fibrosis, and insulin and glucose metabolism were unchanged. Conclusion: This study suggests that hepatic DGAT2 deficiency successfully reduced diet-induced hepatic steatosis and supports the development of DGAT2 inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy for treating NAFLD and preventing downstream consequences.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from homogenized mouse liver were extracted performed using 200 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid) (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 4 % (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich), pH7.5, at 90°C for 1 h with shaking. Following protein extraction, reduced disulfide bonds of cysteine residues were alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldich) for 1 h in the dark. Excessive iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM dithiothreitol. Proteins were subsequently precipitated using 9:1 (v/v) ice-cold acetone and methanol for 2 h at -80°C. Precipitated proteins were pelleted at 4,000 x g for 1 h at 4°C and washed three times using ice-cold methanol. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 mM ice-cold sodium hydroxide. Dissolved proteins were neutralized using 0.2 M HEPES acid and digested for 16 h at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington). Digested peptides were desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (3M EmporeTM). Desalted peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and injected onto an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on self-packed analytical column using PicoTipTM emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) containing Reprosil Gold 120 C-18, 1.9 µm particle size resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Chromatography separation was carried out using increasing organic proportion of acetonitrile (5 – 40 % (v/v)) containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid over a 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometry analyzer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top ten method at a mass-over-charge (m/z) range of 300-2000 Da

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 using the following setting: oxidized methionine residues and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm. Protease specificity was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Only peptides longer than 6 amino acids were analyzed, and the minimal ratio count to quantify a protein is 2. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 5 % for peptide and protein identifications. Database searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the UniProt-mouse database containing 54,185 entries (December 2018). “Matching between runs” algorithm with a time window of 0.7 min was employed to transfer identifications between samples processed using the same nanospray conditions. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and also common contaminants. Filtered data was quantified and visualized using r-script developed in-house.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterized by excess lipid accumulation in hepatocytes and represents a huge public health problem owing to its propensity to progress to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, fibrosis, and liver failure. The lipids stored in hepatic steatosis (HS) are primarily triglycerides (TGs) synthesized by two acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT) enzymes. Either DGAT1 or DGAT2 catalyzes this reaction, and these enzymes have been suggested to differentially utilize exogenous or endogenously synthesized fatty acids, respectively. DGAT2 has been linked to storage of fatty acids from de novo lipogenesis, a process increased in NAFLD. However, whether DGAT2 is more responsible for lipid accumulation in NAFLD and progression to fibrosis is currently unknown. Also, it is unresolved whether DGAT2 can be safely inhibited as a therapy for NAFLD. Here, we induced NAFLD-like disease in mice by feeding a diet rich in fructose, saturated fat, and cholesterol and found that hepatocyte-specific Dgat2 deficiency reduced expression of de novo lipogenesis genes and lowered liver TGs by&#xa0;~70%. Importantly, the reduction in steatosis was not accompanied by increased inflammation or fibrosis, and insulin and glucose metabolism were unchanged. Conclusion: This study suggests that hepatic DGAT2 deficiency successfully reduces diet-induced HS and supports development of DGAT2 inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy for treating NAFLD and preventing downstream consequences.

### Keywords
Triacylglycerol, Liver, Steatohepatitis, Diacylglycerol, Dietary lipids, Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease

### Affiliations
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health


