### Accession
PXD038389

### Title
Differential modulation of the phosphoproteome by the MAP Kinases isoforms p38α and p38β

### Description
The stress-activated p38 mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPK) mediate responses to osmotic shock, radiation, immune stimuli, inflammatory cues, and many other stresses. These kinases are activated rapidly, within seconds of stress induction, yet, their continuous activation, as commonly happens in inflammations and cancer, induce different signaling cascades than transient activation. This study aimed to follow the specific signaling cascades induced by two of these p38 MAPKs activated by strong and rapid stress, or by continuous (chronic) activations. The analysis was based on large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses using SILAC labeling of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) deficient in each of these p38 kinases, expressing constitutively expressed wildtype p38α or p38β, or their intrinsically active variants. In addition, the effects of anisomycin, inducing strong and rapid stress response, were followed in wildtype MEF or in MEF knocked-out for these p38α or p38β. The signaling events, induced the each p38 during the chronic responses, indicated adaptations of the cells expressing the intrinsically active p38 mutants. The continuous activities of the individual p38 induced feedback loops that inactivated the other p38s. Furthermore, a number of new phosphorylation sites on proteins relevant to stress responses and cancer, such as p53 and p27, were revealed in this study.  

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extraction and phosphatase inhibition  The SILAC-labeled cells were grown in 15 cm plates, and 3 mg of each, light, medium, and heavy amino acids labeled proteins’ extracts were mixed for proteomics analysis and phosphopeptide enrichment. The proteins from the different cell lines were extracted from the plates with lysis buffer composed of 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 1 mM NaF, 50 mM Tris pH 8, 1 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 1 mM Na orthovanadate, 1 mM Na-pyrophosphate, protease inhibitor cocktail (1:200, Sigma-xx, St. Louis, MO) and 1 mM PMSF.  In-solution protein digestion Before tryptic digestion, disulfides were reduced by incubation with 2.8 mM DTT (Sigma) for 30 min at 60°C, and carbamidomethylated with 8.8 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min, at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin (sequencing grade, modified, Promega, Madison, WI) was added in a ratio of 1:50 to the proteins and incubated overnight at 37°C. A second dose of trypsin was added in the morning and incubated for four more hours. The samples were then acidified with 0.1% TFA and desalted with Sep-Pak C18 reversed-phase cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). Fractionation of peptides by strong cation exchange chromatography Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and loaded on a 1ml Resource S column (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) on a Jasco LC-Net II /ADC HPLC. Peptides were eluted with a KCl gradient from 0 to 350 mM, containing 7 mM KH2PO4 (pH 2.65) and 30% acetonitrile during 92 minutes, at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/sec. The elution was divided into 10 fractions, which were then affinity-enriched for phosphopeptides.  Phosphopeptides enrichment on titanium beads (MOAC)  Five mg of Titansphere chromatography material (TiO2) (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) was added to a 100 µL loading solution (30 mg/ml 2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid () in 80% acetonitrile, and 0.1% TFA) and incubated with shaking for 10 min at room temperature. Loading solution was added to the fractions in a ratio of 1:6. Then the TiO2 beads were transferred to the samples and shaken for 30 min at room temperature. The beads were washed with 1 ml washing solution #1 (30% acetonitrile, 3% TFA) and 1 ml washing solution #2 (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA). The beads were transferred to a C8 Stage-tip and the peptides were eluted with 100 µL elution buffer 1 (20% acetonitrile, 325 mM NH4OH) followed by 100 µL elution buffer #2 (40% acetonitrile, 325 mM NH4OH) combined onto one tube. The eluate was dried in a vacuum centrifuge (LABCONCO, Kansas City, MO) and desalted on C18 Stage-tips.  Peptides analysis by LC-MS/MS  For the proteome and phosphoproteome analyses, the tryptic peptides were resolved by reversed-phase chromatography on 0.075 ID pulled fused silica capillaries of about 20 centimeters long, packed with Reprosil-Aqua C18 reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 180 minutes gradients from 5% to 28% acetonitrile in the presence of 0.1% formic acid, followed by 15 min gradient of solvent B to 95% at a flow rate of 0.15 μl/min using an Easy-nLC-1000 HPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using the positive ion mode and full MS scan repetitively followed by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the full MS scans. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000, at 200 m/z, with a target value of 3x106 ions. Fragmented masses were accumulated to an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 105, with a maximum injection time of 100 msec. Fragmentation was performed for charge states of 2 to 7.  The peptide match option was set to Preferred. The normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded from further selection for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was interpreted by the MaxQuant software version 1.5.0.25 and database searched with the Andromeda search engines, searching against the mouse section of the UniProt database from July 2014 (Magrane and UniProt Consortium 2011) containing 51,547 entries, including the human p38 proteins and their mutated variants and human p53. Mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the precursor masses and 20 ppm for the fragments were accepted.  Proteins identification and phosphorylation sites were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), followed by statistical analysis with Perseus, version 1.5.6.0. Phosphorylation sites that were differentially modulated by the presence or absence of the p38s were selected by ANOVA multi-sample tests of all the time points, of each cell-line separately.

### Publication Abstract
The p38 members of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) family mediate various cellular responses to stress conditions, inflammatory signals, and differentiation factors. They are constitutively active in chronic inflammatory diseases and some cancers. The differences between their transient effects in response to signals and the chronic effect in diseases are not known. The family is composed of four isoforms, of which p38&#x3b1; seems to be abnormally activated in diseases. p38&#x3b1; and p38&#x3b2; are almost identical in sequence, structure, and biochemical and pharmacological properties, and the specific unique effects of each of them, if any, have not yet been revealed. This study aimed to reveal the specific effects induced by p38&#x3b1; and p38&#x3b2;, both when transiently activated in response to stress and when chronically active. This was achieved via large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses using stable isotope labeling of two experimental systems: one, mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) deficient in each of these p38 kinases and harboring either an empty vector or vectors expressing p38&#x3b1;<sup>WT</sup>, p38&#x3b2;<sup>WT</sup>, or intrinsically active variants of these MAPKs; second, induction of transient stress by exposure of MEFs, p38&#x3b1;<sup>-/-</sup>, and p38&#x3b2;<sup>-/-</sup> MEFs to anisomycin. Significant differences in the repertoire of the proteome and phosphoproteome between cells expressing active p38&#x3b1; and p38&#x3b2; suggest distinct roles for each kinase. Interestingly, in both cases, the constitutive activation induced adaptations of the cells to the chronic activity so that known substrates of p38 were downregulated. Within the dramatic effect of p38s on the proteome and phosphoproteome, some interesting affected phosphorylation sites were those found in cancer-associated p53 and Hspb1 (HSP27) proteins and in cytoskeleton-associated proteins. Among these, was the stronger direct phosphorylation by p38&#x3b1; of p53-Ser309, which was validated on the Ser315 in human p53. In summary, this study sheds new light on the differences between chronic and transient p38&#x3b1; and p38&#x3b2; signaling and on the specific targets of these two kinases.

### Keywords
Signaling, Phosphoproteome, Silac, P38 mapk, Stress response

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion Israel institute of technology, Haifa, Israel

### Submitter
Dganit Melamed Kadosh

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Faculty of Biology, Technion Israel institute of technology, Haifa, Israel


