### Accession
PXD041769

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of Ank2-mutant mice

### Description
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) represent neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by social deficits, repetitive behaviors, and various comorbidities, including epilepsy. ANK2, which encodes a neuronal scaffolding protein, is frequently mutated in ASD, but its in vivo functions and disease-related mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we report that mice with Ank2 knockout restricted to cortical and hippocampal excitatory neurons (Ank2-cKO mice) show ASD-related behavioral abnormalities and juvenile seizure-related death. Ank2-cKO cortical neurons show abnormally increased excitability and firing rate. These changes accompanied decreases in the total level and function of the Kv7.2/KCNQ2 and Kv7.3/KCNQ3 potassium channels and the density of these channels in the enlengthened axon initial segment. Importantly, the Kv7 agonist, retigabine, rescued neuronal excitability, juvenile seizure-related death, and hyperactivity in Ank2-cKO mice. These results suggest that Ank2 regulates neuronal excitability by regulating the length of and Kv7 density in the AIS and that Kv7 channelopathy is involved in Ank2-related brain dysfunctions.

### Sample Protocol
Changes in phosphorylation levels in proteins in the brain of Emx1-Cre;Ank2fl/fl mice were determined using Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography (IMAC) Service (Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, the cortex and hippocampus of a mouse were extracted in an ice-cold buffer containing protease/phosphatase inhibitor. Brain samples from three different mice were pooled together to make n number of one. Brain samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, protease-digested, and fractionated by solid-phase extraction. The fractionated peptides were incubated with designated immobilized PTM (post-translational modification)-motif antibodies, and the peptides containing the corresponding PTM-sequences were eluted and analyzed using LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were assigned to peptide sequences using Sorcerer program. Finally, the peptide sequence assignment was linked to parent ion peak intensities to measure approximate fold changes in validated peptides between paired samples.

### Publication Abstract
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) represent neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by social deficits, repetitive behaviors, and various comorbidities, including epilepsy. ANK2, which encodes a neuronal scaffolding protein, is frequently mutated in ASD, but its in vivo functions and disease-related mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we report that mice with Ank2 knockout restricted to cortical and hippocampal excitatory neurons (Ank2-cKO mice) show ASD-related behavioral abnormalities and juvenile seizure-related death. Ank2-cKO cortical neurons show abnormally increased excitability and firing rate. These changes accompanied decreases in the total level and function of the Kv7.2/KCNQ2 and Kv7.3/KCNQ3 potassium channels and the density of these channels in the enlengthened axon initial segment. Importantly, the Kv7 agonist, retigabine, rescued neuronal excitability, juvenile seizure-related death, and hyperactivity in Ank2-cKO mice. These results suggest that Ank2 regulates neuronal excitability by regulating the length of and Kv7 density in the AIS and that Kv7 channelopathy is involved in Ank2-related brain dysfunctions.

### Keywords
Autism spectrum disorders, Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Ank2

### Affiliations
Korea Basic Science Institute
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute for Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea

### Submitter
Yeji Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Eunjoon Kim
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute for Science and Technology (KAIST), Korea


