### Accession
PXD012739

### Title
Contribution of ShkA dysregulation to the cdG0 phenotype

### Description
The ShkA-ShpA-TacA phosphorelay regulates stalk biogenesis and G1-S phase transition in Caulobacter crescentus. Histidine kinase activity of ShkA is c-di-GMP dependent and a strain lacking c-di-GMP (cdG0) shows a number of phenotypic aberrations. In this project, we aim at disentangling the contribution of ShkA-ShpA-TacA pathway dysregulation to the cdG0 phenotype by profiling the proteomes of mutants that constitutively activate or deactivate TacA target gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
10E9 C. crescentus cells were collected, washed twice with PBS, dissolved in 50 µl lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate), reduced with 5mM TCEP for 15 min at 95°C and alkylated with 10mM chloroacetamide for 30min at 37°C. Samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight (protein to trypsin ratio: 50:1) and desalted on C18 reversed phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Microspin, Harvard Apparatus).  1 µg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 28% solvent B over 75min at a flow rate of 0.2μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300ms (MS) and 50ms (MS/MS). The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. For all LC-MS measurements, singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
To determine changes in protein expressions across samples, a MS1 based label-free quantification was carried out. Therefore, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database of the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from Caulobacter crescentus (strain NA1000 / CB15N) (Uniprot, download date: 08/09/2015, total of (8,234 entries) using MASCOT. The search criteria were set as following: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis QI and the final peptide measurement list containing the peak areas of all identified peptides, respectively, was exported. This list was further processed and statically analyzed using our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (SafeQuant, https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant, PubMed-ID: 27345528). The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset. All quantitative analyses were performed in biological triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria adapt their growth rate to their metabolic status and environmental conditions by modulating the length of their G1 period. Here we demonstrate that a gradual increase in the concentration of the second messenger c-di-GMP determines precise gene expression during G1/S transition in Caulobacter crescentus. We show that c-di-GMP stimulates the kinase ShkA by binding to its central pseudo-receiver domain, activates the TacA transcription factor, and initiates a G1/S-specific transcription program leading to cell morphogenesis and S-phase entry. Activation of the ShkA-dependent genetic program causes c-di-GMP to reach peak levels, which triggers S-phase entry and promotes proteolysis of ShkA and TacA. Thus, a gradual increase of c-di-GMP results in precise control of ShkA-TacA activity, enabling G1/S-specific gene expression that coordinates cell cycle and morphogenesis.

### Keywords
C. cresentus, Oribtrap, Lfq, Esi, Shka

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


