### Accession
PXD018577

### Title
Toxicoproteomic-based screening discloses pivotal downregulated mechanisms triggered by chronic pesticide exposure in breast cancer patients.

### Description
Pesticides are chemical compounds widely used in agriculture to control pests, since the 1960s. Regardless of its specific targets, such substances, unfortunately, can reach the human organism, and negative cumulative effects have been reported in people worldwide. Chronic exposure to pesticides has been discussed as a significant risk factor for the development of cancer, including breast tumors.  Breast cancer is the most common malignant neoplasia that affects women worldwide, whose origin is mostly connected to life habits and the environment, and to a lesser extent to inheritable genetic mechanisms. Therefore, the contribution of substances as pesticides, that are present in the environment continuously, may have a pivotal role in the genesis breast cancer, especially in geographic areas in which women are important players in the rural work and are in direct contact with these compounds.  In vitro and experimental studies have broadly reported the mechanisms triggered by pesticides that contribute to breast carcinogenesis, which fall essentially within DNA damage-based events in association with hormones deregulation and rising of metabolites that activate oncogenes (Alleva et al., 2018, BRADLOW et al., 1995). However, few is known about how these mechanisms are connected, as well as the manner that they can correlate with disease prognosis and clinicopathological features in human breast cancer as a result of the toxic consequences of pesticide exposure.  In the last years, aiming to expand the knowledge about beyond isolated biological findings, high throughput molecular approaches combined with bioinformatics designs raised as powerful tools to understand breast cancer behavior and biology. Thereby, it was possible to broadcast that breast cancer is a very complex disease, and that distinct mechanisms are activated depending on specific clinicopathological characteristics.  As far as we know, there are still no studies reporting the use of proteomics-based strategies to assess the impact of chronic pesticide exposure in women with breast cancer. To fill this gap, the present study proposes a toxicoproteomics perspective to investigate the systemic profile of differentially expressed proteins in the blood of breast cancer patients chronically exposed to pesticides, by using a high-throughput label-free proteomic strategy, and provide an integrative clinicopathological view based on bioinformatics approaches and validation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Design of the study, patient selection and sample collection This is a prospective study conducted between May 2015 and December 2018 that included a total of 242 patients diagnosed with breast cancer attended by the 8th Paraná Regional of Health at Francisco Beltrão Cancer Hospital, Paraná, Brazil, corresponding to a total of 27 municipalities. All participants signed consent forms and the research was approved by the Institutional Ethics Board under the number CAAE 35524814.4.0000.0107. All protocols followed the principles for medical research involving human subjects from the Declaration of Helsinki. The Reporting Recommendations for Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies (REMARK) criteria were followed regarding patient selection, assay performance, and data analysis throughout the study.  The study only included patients that reported to have chronic direct contact with pesticides (pesticide dilution and spraying without personal protection equipment – PPE and/or washing of contaminated clothes and PPE without gloves, at least once a month for the last 40 years). These data were collected by using a questionnaire that addresses both patient and her family exposures to pesticides lifelong, in the present or past time. It seeks to identify whether and how the patient had contact with pesticides: applying it directly or by indirect ways (having contact with it by clothes washing, application equipment, packs or merely living in areas where pesticides have been used). Other main questions were whether the patient or her family use or used personal protective equipment and if their neighbours use or used pesticides. Based on this, patients were categorized accordingly to their occupational status as exposed (n = 130) or non-occupationally exposed or unexposed (n = 112) to pesticides.   Heparinized blood samples were collected by peripheral venous puncture (5 mL), centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 minutes and plasma aliquots kept frozen until analysis. Clinical records were assessed to obtain clinicopathological information. Aiming to avoid any potential bias induced by chemotherapy, all patients included in the study were not under any treatment.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis All data were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software using human database UniProt (V. Nov 2018-https://www.uniprot.org/).  The parameters used were: full-tryptic search space, up to two missed cleavages allowed for trypsin, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were included as dynamic modifications in label-free quantification.  Spectra analyses used a target-decoy strategy considering maximum delta CN of 0.05, all available peptide-spectrum matches, and a target false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01 (strict). As described previously, Velásquez et al , 2017). Parameters in the peptide filter were set up for high confidence with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids. For protein filter, we considered the minimum number of peptide sequence as 1, counting only rank 1 peptide.. The confidence thresholds in FDR protein validator were 0.01 for target FDR (strict). The strategy for protein grouping was strict parsimony.  For label-free quantification, we used the Precursor Ion Area Detector Node from PD 2.1, the node also calculates protein areas for each sample group by calculating the area for each sample of the sample group as the average of a specified number of the most abundant distinct peptides identified for the protein and the sample. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus Computational Platform v 1.6.10.50 (TYANOVA et al., 2016). The strategy with both datasets was Log2 transformation followed by subtracting the median normalization Student t test (p-value < 0.05). Volcano plot distribution presented demonstrated the log p-value vs log2 fold differences values.  In silico Functional Analysis  Functional in silico analysis were carried out with FunRich: Functional Enrichment Analysis Tool (PATHAN et al., 2015, 2017) and MetaCore software using the integrated databases: Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD); Entrez Gene and Uniprot for biological pathways and biological process. For protein-protein interactions, the following databases were accessed: BioGRID; Intact e Human Proteinpedia. For localization, expression data and signaling pathway informations the databases: Human Protein Altas; Human Proteome Browser; Human Proteome Map, Proteomics DB, Reactome; NCI; Cell map; HumanCyc were used. The transcription factor consensus sequences prediction data were obtained with automated search in 29 mammals databases on the fly in the FunRich tool followed by Bonferroni statistical analysis. Interaction network analysis was evaluated with String functional protein association network database (https://string-db.org/) using network analysis based on evidence with a minimum required interaction score of 0.400. Venn Diagram the tool (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Deleterious effects have been widely associated with chronic pesticide exposure, including cancer development. In spite of several known consequences that pesticides can trigger in the human body, few is known regarding its impact on breast cancer women that are chronically exposed to such substances during agricultural work lifelong. In this context, the present study performed a high-throughput toxicoproteomic study in association with a bioinformatics-based design to explore new putative processes and pathways deregulated by chronic pesticide exposure in breast cancer patients. To reach this goal, we analyzed comparatively non-depleted plasma samples from exposed (<i>n</i> = 130) and non-occupationally exposed (<i>n</i> = 112) women diagnosed with breast cancer by using a label-free proteomic tool. The list of proteins differentially expressed was explored by bioinformatics and the main pathways and processes further investigated. The toxicoproteomic study revealed that women exposed to pesticides exhibited mainly downregulated events, linked to immune response, coagulation and estrogen-mediated events in relation to the unexposed ones. Further investigation shown that the identified deregulated processes and pathways correlated with significant distinct levels tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin 1 beta in the blood, and specific clinicopathological characteristics pointed out by bioinformatics analysis as adipose-trophic levels, menopause and intratumoral clots formation. Altogether, these findings reinforce pesticides as downregulators of several biological process and highlight that these compounds can be linked to poor prognosis in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Pesticide exposure, Toxicoproteomic, Lcms, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Proteômica - LABPROT, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro
Laboratory of Proteomics/LADETEC, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

### Submitter
Joseph Evaristo

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio C.S. Nogueira
Laboratory of Proteomics/LADETEC, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


