### Accession
PXD008916

### Title
Protein complexes from C.glutamicum

### Description
Isolation of protein complexes from C.glutamicum for Gfp-labeled protein baits mksb and smc.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis of interacting proteins  First, the magnetic beads were washed with 50 μl of 100 mM TRIS, pH 7.6. Subsequently, 50 ul of 100 mM TRIS, pH 7.6 containing 4M urea, 5mM dithiothreitol for reduction of disulfide bond and 0.2ug of LysC for predigestion of proteins were added to each sample. After incubation of 3h, 100 ul of 100 mM TRIS, pH 7.6, 10 mM iodoacetamide was added for blocking of free cysteine side chains and samples were incubated in the dark for 5min. Samples were diluted with 100 ul TRIS, pH 7.6 to reduce the urea concentration and 1 ug of trypsin was added to each sample. The samples were incubated for 14 h to complete protein digestion and subsequently trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 0.5 % to acidify the samples.  Peptide mixture were separated from the magnetic beads before the desalting step. The beads were washed 2x with 75 ul of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and the wash solvent was combined with the peptide mixtures. For sample desalting, 3 discs were stamped from C18 discs (Empore C18, 3M) and placed into a 200 ul pipette tip. Following binding of peptides, stage tips were washed 2x with 60 ul of 0.1% FA and peptides were eluted with 40% acetonitrile containing 30% methanol and 0.1% FA. Samples were dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 10 ul of 0.1% FA.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify and quantify proteins in all samples. First, peptides were separated by nano-reversed phase chromatography using a linear gradient from 2 to 35% acetonitrile over 50 min in 0.1% formic acid on an in house- packed chromatography column in a nano-electrospray emitter tip. Eluting peptides were directly infused into the mass spectrometer (QExactive, Thermo-Fisher) and detected in positive ionization mode. The operating cycle was programmed to detect peptides in the range from 300 to 1600 m/z and up to 10 precursors were selected for MSMS analysis by CID fragmentation. Precursor ions required a charge state between +2 and +6 and a minimal signal intensity of 6x10e4.

### Data Protocol
Protein mapping and quantitative analysis Raw LC-MS/MS data were searched against a C.glutamicum database retrieved from Uniprot (vs. 03/2017, 3093 protein entries) using a forward/reversed search by the Andromeda algorithm within the MaxQuant software suite. Peptides hits were searched with 17 ppm precursor mass deviation in the first search and 3 ppm for the main search. For MS/MS spectra, a mass accuracy of 25 ppm was set. As variable modifications, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, STY-phosphorylation, and methionine oxidation were selected. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was the only fixed modification. Peptide match results were sorted by their probability score and filtered for 2% reversed peptide hits and 5% reversed protein hits.   To calculate protein enrichments and significance values, reversed protein hits and proteins with less than 3 quantitative values in any of the three sample types (control, mksB IP and smc IP) were filtered out. The iBAQ-values were log2 transformed and median normalized. In case of one missing value in the triplicate measurements the values was imputed using a closest neighbormethod, for more missing datapoints a random value from a standard distribution downshifted by a factor of 1.8 from the sample distribution and width of 0.3 was selected. Samples were compared using a students t-test which was FDR rate controlled by sample permutation (250x).

### Publication Abstract
Higher-order chromosome folding and segregation are tightly regulated in all domains of life. In bacteria, details on nucleoid organization regulatory mechanisms and function remain poorly characterized, especially in non-model species. Here, we investigate the role of DNA-partitioning protein ParB and SMC condensin complexes in the actinobacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum. Chromosome conformation capture reveals SMC-mediated long-range interactions around ten centromere-like parS sites clustered at the replication origin (oriC). At least one oriC-proximal parS site is necessary for reliable chromosome segregation. We use chromatin immunoprecipitation and photoactivated single-molecule localization microscopy to show the formation of distinct, parS-dependent ParB-nucleoprotein subclusters. We further show that SMC/ScpAB complexes, loaded via ParB at parS sites, mediate chromosomal inter-arm contacts (as previously shown in Bacillus subtilis). However, the MukBEF-like SMC complex MksBEFG does not contribute to chromosomal DNA-folding; instead, this complex is involved in plasmid maintenance and interacts with the polar oriC-tethering factor DivIVA. Our results complement current models of ParB-SMC/ScpAB crosstalk and show that some condensin complexes evolved functions that are apparently uncoupled from chromosome folding.

### Keywords
Protein complex

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP LMU Munich BioMedical Center Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 71804

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP LMU Munich BioMedical Center Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 71804


