### Accession
PXD022017

### Title
Comparative multiplexed interactomics of SARS-CoV-2 and homologous coronavirus non-structural proteins identifies unique and shared host-cell dependencies

### Description
Human coronaviruses (hCoV) have become a threat to global health and society, as evident from the SARS outbreak in 2002 caused by SARS-CoV-1 and the most recent COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2. Despite high sequence similarity between SARS-CoV-1 and -2, each strain has distinctive virulence. A better understanding of the basic molecular mechanisms mediating changes in virulence is needed. Here, we profile the virus-host protein-protein interactions of two hCoV non-structural proteins (nsps) that are critical for virus replication. We use tandem mass tag-multiplexed quantitative proteomics to sensitively compare and contrast the interactomes of nsp2 and nsp4 from three betacoronavirus strains: SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2, and hCoV-OC43 – an endemic strain associated with the common cold. This approach enables the identification of both unique and shared host cell protein binding partners and the ability to further compare the enrichment of common interactions across homologs from related strains. We identify common nsp2 interactors involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca2+ signaling and mitochondria biogenesis. We also identify nsp4 interactors unique to each strain, such as E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes for SARS-CoV-1 and ER homeostasis factors for SARS-CoV-2. Common nsp4 interactors include N-linked glycosylation machinery, unfolded protein response (UPR) associated proteins, and anti-viral innate immune signaling factors. Both nsp2 and nsp4 interactors are strongly enriched in proteins localized at mitochondrial-associated ER membranes suggesting a new functional role for modulating host processes, such as calcium homeostasis, at these organelle contact sites. Our results shed light on the role these hCoV proteins play in the infection cycle, as well as host factors that may mediate the divergent pathogenesis of OC43 from SARS strains. Our mass spectrometry workflow enables rapid and robust comparisons of multiple bait proteins, which can be applied to additional viral proteins. Furthermore, the identified common interactions may present new targets for exploration by host-directed anti-viral therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) with high glucose and supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 1% glutamine. Cells were kept at 37°C, 5% CO2. Generally, 2 x 106 cells were seeded into 10cm dishes. 24 hours post-seeding, cells were transfected with 5µg nsp2, nsp4, or fluorescent control DNA constructs in pcDNA3.1-(+)-C/N-DYK vectors using a calcium phosphate method. Media was exchanged 16 hours post-transfection, and cells were harvested 24 hours after changing media. Cells were collected and washed with PBS. Immunoprecipitation samples were lysed by resuspension in TNI buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% IGEPAL-CA-630) with Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor on ice for at least 10 minutes, followed by sonication in a room temperature water bath for 10 minutes. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10-20 minutes. Sepharose 4B resin (Sigma) and G1 anti-DYKDDDDK resin (GenScript) were pre-washed 4x with the respective lysis buffer for each sample. Protein concentrations in cleared lysates were normalized using BioRad Protein Assay Dye and added to 15 µL Sepharose 4B resin for 1 hour, rocking at 4°C. Resin was collected by centrifugation for 5-10 minutes at 400 x g and pre-cleared supernatant was added directly to 15 µL G1 anti-DYKDDDDK resin and rocked at 4°C overnight. The next day, supernatant was removed and resin was washed 4 times with the respective lysis buffer. Bound proteins were eluted with the addition of modified 3x Laemelli buffer (62.5 mM Tris, 6% SDS) for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by 15 minutes at 37°C, followed by a second elution for 5-15 minutes at 37°C. 10% of elution was set aside for SDS-PAGE and silver staining to confirm immunoprecipitation efficiency, and the remainder was prepared for mass spectrometry. Eluted samples were precipitated in methanol/chloroform, washed three times with methanol, and air dried. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 3uL 1% Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters) followed by the addition of 10uL of 50mM HEPES pH 8.0, and 32.5uL of water. Samples were reduced with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma) at room temperature for 30 minutes and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetimide (Sigma) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. 0.5ug of Trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Promega or Pierce) was then added and incubated for 16-18 hours at 37°C while shaking at 700rpm. Peptide samples were reacted with TMTpro 16-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) in 40% v/v acetonitrile and incubated for one hour at room temperature. Reactions were quenched by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (0.4% w/v final concentration) and incubated for one hour at room temperature. TMT labeled samples for a given experiment were then pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid (Sigma, v/v). Samples were concentrated using a speedvac and resuspended in buffer A (95% water, 4.9% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v). Cleaved Rapigest SF surfactant was removed by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 21,100 x g.

### Data Protocol
The nsp2 AP-MS experiments included three individual MS runs combining 34 Co-AP samples (SARS-CoV-2 n = 13; SARS-CoV-1 n = 9; GFP (mock) n = 12). Samples were distributed to TMTpro 16plex or TMT11plex channels as outlined in Figure S2A. The nsp4 AP-MS experiments consisted of three individual MS runs, containing 40 Co-IPs (SARS-CoV-2 n = 12; SARS-CoV-1 n = 8; OC43 = 8; GFP (mock) n = 12). Samples were distributed to TMTpro 16plex channels as outlined in Figure S5A. Identification and quantification of peptides and proteins were carried out in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using a SwissProt human database (Tax ID 9606, release date 11/23/2019). CoV nsp2 and nsp4 protein sequences were added manually. Searches were conducted in Sequest HT using the following setting: Trypsin cleavage with max. 2 missed cleavage sites, minimum peptide length 6, precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, dynamic modifications: Met oxidation (+15.995 Da), Protein N-terminal Met loss (-131.040 Da), Protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), static modifications: Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), TMTpro or TMT6plex at Lys and N-termini (+304.207 Da for TMTpro or +229.163 for TMT6plex). Peptide IDs were filtered using the Percolator node using an FDR target of 0.01. Proteins were filtered based on a 0.01 FDR requiring two peptide IDs per protein, and protein groups were created according to a strict parsimony principle. TMT reporter ions were quantified using the reporter ion quantification considering unique and razor peptides, and excluding peptides with co-isolation interference greater than 25%. Peptide abundances were normalized based on total peptide amounts in each channel assuming similar levels of background signal in the APs. Protein quantification roll-up used all quantified peptides. Pairwise ratios between conditions were calculated based on total protein abundances and ANOVA on individual proteins was used to test for changes in abundances and to report adjusted p-values.  To filter high-confidence interactors of individual CoV nsp proteins, we used a variable filter combining log2 fold enrichment and adjusted p-value according to a published method75. Briefly, the histogram of log2 protein abundance fold changes between nsp-transfected versus mock-transfected groups were fitted to a gaussian curve using a nonlinear least square fit to determine the standard deviation  (see Figure S2B-C). Fold change cutoffs for high-confidence and medium-confidence interactors were based on 2 , or 1 , respectively. For actual cutoffs taking into consideration adjusted p-values, we utilized a hyperbolic curve y > c / (x – x0), where y is the adj. p-value, x the log2 fold change, x0 corresponds to the standard deviation cutoff (2  or 1 ), and c is the curvature (c = 0.4 for 1 , and 0.8 for 2 ). (see Figures 2C-D, 4A, S5B-C).

### Publication Abstract
Human coronaviruses (hCoV) have become a threat to global health and society, as evident from the SARS outbreak in 2002 caused by SARS-CoV-1 and the most recent COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2. Despite high sequence similarity between SARS-CoV-1 and -2, each strain has distinctive virulence. A better understanding of the basic molecular mechanisms mediating changes in virulence is needed. Here, we profile the virus-host protein-protein interactions of two hCoV non-structural proteins (nsps) that are critical for virus replication. We use tandem mass tag-multiplexed quantitative proteomics to sensitively compare and contrast the interactomes of nsp2 and nsp4 from three betacoronavirus strains: SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2, and hCoV-OC43 - an endemic strain associated with the common cold. This approach enables the identification of both unique and shared host cell protein binding partners and the ability to further compare the enrichment of common interactions across homologs from related strains. We identify common nsp2 interactors involved in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) Ca <sup>2+</sup> signaling and mitochondria biogenesis. We also identifiy nsp4 interactors unique to each strain, such as E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes for SARS-CoV-1 and ER homeostasis factors for SARS-CoV-2. Common nsp4 interactors include <i>N</i> -linked glycosylation machinery, unfolded protein response (UPR) associated proteins, and anti-viral innate immune signaling factors. Both nsp2 and nsp4 interactors are strongly enriched in proteins localized at mitochondrial-associated ER membranes suggesting a new functional role for modulating host processes, such as calcium homeostasis, at these organelle contact sites. Our results shed light on the role these hCoV proteins play in the infection cycle, as well as host factors that may mediate the divergent pathogenesis of OC43 from SARS strains. Our mass spectrometry workflow enables rapid and robust comparisons of multiple bait proteins, which can be applied to additional viral proteins. Furthermore, the identified common interactions may present new targets for exploration by host-directed anti-viral therapeutics.

### Keywords
Nsp2, Mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum membrane, Covid-19, Non-structural proteins, Affinity purification-mass spectrometry, Tandem mass tags, Nsp4

### Affiliations
Departments of Biology and Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Jonathan Davies

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Plate
Departments of Biology and Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, USA


