### Accession
PXD018921

### Title
HDX-MS analysis of the full human proteasome in complex with regulators

### Description
Hydrogen-Deuterium eXchange coupled to Mass Spectrometry (HDX-MS) analysis to investigate the solvent accessibility of the full human 20S proteasome alone or in complex with PA28 regulatory particles. Our work reveals a reciprocal crosstalk between the inner and outer rings of the human 20S proteasome. HDX-MS experiments were performed on a Synapt-G2Si (Waters Scientific, Manchester, UK) coupled to a Twin HTS PAL dispensing and labelling robot (LEAP Technologies, Carborro, NC, USA) via a NanoAcquity system with HDX technology (Waters, Manchester, UK).

### Sample Protocol
* Method in HDxDirector: 20S proteasomes were incubated alone or with a 2-fold molar excess of PA28, with final concentrations of 0.4 µM and 0.8 µM, respectively. 5.7 µL of protein were aspirated and 5.2 µL were diluted in 98.8 µL of protonated (peptide mapping) or deuterated buffer (20 mM Tris pH/pD 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT) and incubated at 20 °C for 0, 0.5, 1, 5, 10 and 30 min. 99 µL were then transferred to vials containing 11 µL of pre-cooled quenching solution (500 mM glycine at pH 2.3). For experiments involving PA28αβ, the quenching buffer was supplemented with 250 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) in order to reduce the disulphide bridge between Cys21 of chain α and Cys3 of chain β. After 30 sec. of quenching, 105 µL were injected into a 100 µL loop. Proteins were digested on-line with a 2.1 mm x 30 mm Poros Immobilized Pepsin column (Life Technologies/Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The temperature of the digestion room was set at 15°C. *Chromatographic run Peptides were desalted for 3 min on a C18 pre-column (Acquity UPLC BEH 1.7 µm, VANGUARD) and separated on a C18 column (Acquity UPLC BEH 1.7 µm, 1.0 x 100 mm) by the following gradient: 5% to 35% buffer B (100% acetonitrile , 0.2% formic acid) for 12 min,  35% to 40% for 1 min, 40% to 95% for 1 min, 2 min at 95% followed by 2 cycles of 5% to 95% for 2 min and a final equilibration at 5% buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) for 2min. The total runtime was 25 min. The temperature of the chromatographic module was set at 4°C. Experiments were run in triplicates and protonated buffer was injected between each triplicate to wash the column and avoid cross-over contamination. *MS acquisition The acquisitions were performed in positive and resolution mode in the m/z range 50 to 2000 Th. The sample cone and capillary voltages were set at 30 V and 3 kV, respectively. The analysis cycles for non-deuterated samples alternated between a 0.3 sec low energy scan (Trap and Transfer collision energies set to 4 V and 2 V, respectively), a 0.3 sec high energy scan (Ramp Trap and Transfer collision energies set to 18 V to 40 V and 2 V to 2 V, respectively) and a 0.3 sec lockspray scan (0.1 µM [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide in 50% acetonitrile, 50% water and 0.2% formic acid infused at 10 µL/min). The lockspray trap collision energy was set at 32 V and a GFP scan of 0.3 sec is acquired every min. In order to double the signal intensity of deuterated peptides, deuterated samples were acquired only with the low energy and lockspray functions.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS, Waters, Manchester, UK) based on the MSE data acquired on the non-deuterated samples. The MSMS spectra were searched against a home-made database containing sequences from the 17 std20S and i20S subunits, PA28α, PA28β, PA28γ and pepsin from Sus scrofa. Peptides were filtered in DynamX 3.0 with the following parameters: peptides identified in at least 2 acquisitions, 0.2 fragments per amino-acid, intensity threshold 1000. The quantitative analysis of deuteration kinetics was performed using the statistical package R (R Development Core Team, 2012; http://www.R-project.org/) on the corresponding MS intensities. The deuterium uptakes of each ion for each time point were calculated based on the theoretical maximum, (considering that all amino-acids (except proline residues and the first amino-acid or each peptide) were deuterated), and then averaged (weight = intensity) to get a value of relative deuterium uptake (RDU) per peptide sequence/condition/time point. To identify the protein regions that presented conformational changes in complex vs. alone, we performed an ANOVA (Anova(), type = "III", singular.ok = T) followed by Benjamini Hochberg correction of the P-value. For each comparison, we considered significantly regulated the peptides with a corrected P-value ≤ 0.01 and an absolute difference of RDU above 0.01569 (4 times the mean absolute difference of RDU in the entire data set) for 3 successive time points. The RDU and differences of RDU (for protein alones or comparison between conditions, respectively) were consolidated using the values of the smallest peptide to increase the spatial resolution.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
: proteasome, Pa28 alpha beta, Structural ms, Pa28 gamma, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Bioinformatics, Immunoproteasome, Structural biology

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Toulouse ,France
IPBS

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry of Biomolecules, Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale (IPBS), Toulouse ,France


