### Accession
PXD023757

### Title
Investigating the target and off-target landscape of PLK1 small molecule inhibitor volasertib

### Description
In this study we aimed to identify off-targets of polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) small molecule inhibitor volasertib. Plk1 is an important cell cycle kinase and an attractive target for anticancer treatment. Volasertib is ATP-competitive small molecules that may also block the ATP-pocket of other proteins. Despite the fatal infections and negative survival in a phase III trial on volasertib in acute myeloid leukemia volasertib has been a promising treatment option in children with rhabdomyosarcoma. Therefore, there is a need to understand the nature of adverse effects that possibly originate from the off-target proteins. We used thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to identify proteins that have a change in the thermal stability after treatment with volasertib. The temperature of aggregation of several proteins involved in prostaglandin and phosphatidyl-inositol phosphate metabolism increased after treatment with volasertib. PIP4K2A and ZADH2 were stabilized both by treatment in living cells and cell lysate. Functional disruption of these proteins affects the immune response and fatty acid metabolism. In addition, volasertib was found to affect transcriptional coactivators, normal and alternative RNA splicing regulators and proteins involved in the intracellular transport regulation. Our data suggests that the identified proteins may contribute more to the understanding of anti-tumor effect of volasertib.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat cells were distributed into T25 flasks to a density of 12*106 cells/mL in 10 mL medium. Cells were incubated with 20 μM volasertib or DMSO (vehicle) at a final DMSO concentration of 0.2% for 1.5 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2. The viability of the cells was checked after the incubation and was 95% throughout the conditions. Cells were pelleted at 400 g and RT for 3 min and washed two times with 37°C Hank’s balanced salt solution. Cells were resuspended to a density of 100*106 cells/mL and distributed as 100 μL aliquots into 0.2-mL PCR tubes. One of each of the compounds and vehicle containing tubes was heated in parallel for 3 min to the respective temperatures (37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, 67°C), followed by a 3-min incubation time at RT. Afterwards, cells were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were thawed at 25°C and lysed by this freeze-thawing cycle repeated for another two times. Cell debris and precipitated proteins were removed by centrifugation at 21000 g and 4°C for 40 min. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and protein concentrations were determined. Equal volumes of each condition that correspond to 140 μg protein in the 37°C sample were transferred to new tubes and subjected to the following digestion. First, the samples were diluted to contain 50 mM TEAB, 0.1% SDS and 5 mM TCEP. Reduction was performed at 65°C for 30 min. The samples were then cooled down to RT and alkylated with 15 mM of chloroacetamide for 30 min. The proteins were digested overnight with 1 to 40 Lys-C to protein-ratio and consecutively with Trypsin at a 1 to 25 enzyme to protein ratio. The digested peptides were labeled by 10-plex TMT-tags using 0.6 mg of the respective label for each sample. Of note, the labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of the samples. For the sample clean-up step, a solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) was performed and purified samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. An aliquot of approximately 10 µg was suspended in LC mobile phase A (3% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and 1 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system. Labeled peptide extracts were combined to a single sample per experiment (volasertib, DMSO) and pre-fractionated by means of high pH reversed-phase chromatography (XBridge BEH C18 (2.1mm x 250 mm) 300 A, 3.5 μm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using a 63 min gradient from 3% to 80% acetonitrile in 20 mM ammonia. Collected fractions were pooled into 14 samples, dried using a vacuum centrifuge and subjected to an LC-MS/MS measurement. Online LC-MS was performed as previously described 73 using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Each of the samples was dissolved in 20 μL solvent A and 10 μL were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5%DMSO, 0.1% FA; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, a curved gradient from 3 to 8% B (in 2 min, curve of 4) and from 8% to 45% B (in 148 min, curve of 5) was used followed by a steep increase to 99% B in 2 min. FTMS master scans were performed in a mass range of 3000-1500 m/z applying a resolution of 60 000 (and mass range 300-1500 m/z), followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window and 0.5 m/z isolation offset. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data was searched using isobarquant and data analsysis was performed according to Nat Protoc 10, 1567–1593 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.101 against the uniprot human reference proteome database (42130 entries) downloaded from uniprot.org on 2016-10-24.

### Publication Abstract
Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is an important cell cycle kinase and an attractive target for anticancer treatments. An ATP-competitive small molecular PLK1 inhibitor, volasertib, has reached phase III in clinical trials in patients with refractory acute myeloid leukemia as a combination treatment with cytarabine. However, severe side effects limited its use. The origin of the side effects is unclear and might be due to insufficient specificity of the drug. Thus, identifying potential off-targets to volasertib is important for future clinical trials and for the development of more specific drugs. In this study, we used thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to identify proteome-wide targets of volasertib. Apart from PLK1 and proteins regulated by PLK1, we identified about 200 potential volasertib off-targets. Comparison of this result with the mass-spectrometry analysis of volasertib-treated cells showed that phosphatidylinositol phosphate and prostaglandin metabolism pathways are affected by volasertib. We confirmed that PIP4K2A and ZADH2-marker proteins for these pathways-are, indeed, stabilized by volasertib. PIP4K2A, however, was not affected by another PLK1 inhibitor onvansertib, suggesting that PIP4K2A is a true off-target of volasertib. Inhibition of these proteins is known to impact both the immune response and fatty acid metabolism and could explain some of the side effects seen in volasertib-treated patients.

### Keywords
Drug, Lc-ms, Tpp, Leukemia

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat)
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Rozbeh Jafari
Karolinska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology (OnkPat)


