### Accession
PXD000918

### Title
Identification of Candidate Substrates for the Golgi Tul1 E3 Ligase Using Quantitative diGly Proteomics in Yeast

### Description
Maintenance of protein homeostasis is essential for cellular survival. Central to this regulation are mechanisms of protein quality control in which misfolded proteins are recognized and degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. One well-studied protein quality control pathway requires ER resident, multi-subunit E3 ubiquitin ligases that function in ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Using fission yeast, our lab identified the Golgi Dsc E3 ligase as required for proteolytic activation of fungal sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP) transcription factors. The Dsc E3 ligase contains 5 integral membrane subunits and structurally resembles ERAD E3 ligases. S. cerevisiae codes for homologs of Dsc E3 ligase subunits, including the Dsc1 E3 ligase homolog Tul1 that functions in Golgi protein quality control. Interestingly, S. cerevisiae lacks SREBP homologs, indicating that novel Tul1 E3 ligase substrates exist. Here, we show that the S. cerevisiae Tul1 E3 ligase consists of Tul1, Dsc2, Dsc3, and Ubx3 and define Tul1 complex architecture. Tul1 E3 ligase function required each subunit as judged by vacuolar sorting of the artificial substrate Pep12D. Genetic studies demonstrated that Tul1 E3 ligase is required in cells lacking the multivesicular body pathway and under conditions of ubiquitin depletion. To identify candidate substrates, we used quantitative diGly proteomics to survey ubiquitylation in wild-type and tul1∆ cells. We identified 3,116 non-redundant ubiquitylation sites, including 10 sites in candidate substrates. Quantitative proteomics found 4.5% of quantified proteins (53/1172) to be differentially expressed in tul1∆ cells. Correcting the diGly dataset for these differences increased the number of Tul1-dependent ubiquitylation sites. Together, these data demonstrate that the Tul1 E3 ligase plays a minor role in protein homeostasis under non-stress conditions, consistent with functions in protein quality control. Furthermore, this quantitative diGly proteomics methodology serves as a robust platform to screen for stress conditions that require Tul1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type (JMP001) and tul1 strain (PEY1619) were cultured in SILAC media. Differentially labeled cells were lysed separately in buffer A (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaH2PO4, 8M urea, 10 mM beta-mercaptoethanol) using Avestin Emulsiflex C3 homogenizer. Clarified cell lysates were mixed 1:1 based on their protein content (250 mg total) and loaded onto 1.5 ml Ni-NTA column. After washing with buffer A, ubiquitylated proteins were eluted using the elution buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM Tris, 100 mM sodium phosphate, pH4.5) as described. Ubiquitylated proteins in elution buffer were exchanged to high pH urea buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) and a total of 4.1 g and 3.8 g of enriched ubiquitylated proteins from biological replicates were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60°C, subsequently cooled down on ice, and alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Lysates were then diluted to 2 M urea with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 and digested overnight at room temperature with trypsin (Worthington) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:25 (w/w). Tryptic digestion efficiency was assessed by SDS-PAGE prior to processing. A mixture of tryptic peptide samples was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% and subsequently desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak SPE cartridge (Waters). C18 cartridges were conditioned with 3 ml of 80% acetonitirile (ACN), followed by 3 ml of 50% ACN (0.1% TFA), and finally 5 ml of 0.1% TFA. Digest samples were loaded onto the conditioned C18 cartridge, washed with 2 ml of 0.1% TFA three times, and eluted with 2 ml of 50% ACN (0.1% TFA) twice. Eluates were lyophilized at -80°C for two days. In case of whole proteome analysis, equal amounts of proteins extracted from both wild-type strain and tul1 strain were mixed (70 g total), and two biological replicates of mixed samples were separated by SDS-PAGE using a gradient gel (4%–12% NuPAGE® Bis-Tris Precast Gel, Novex, Life Technologies Corporation). A total of eighteen gel slices were excised from the replicate samples and proteins in gel slices were digested by lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) after reduction by dithiothreitol and alkylation by iodoacetamide . Peptides extracted with 50% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) were vacuum-dried and kept at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Anti-K-ɛ-GG antibody was obtained from the PTMScan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ɛ-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology). Immunoaffinity purification of ubiquitylated peptides was carried out, as recommended by the company protocol. In brief, lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1.5 mL of ice cold immunoprecipitation buffer (IAP) (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated for 30 min with preincubated anti-K-ɛ-GG antibody beads in the IAP buffer on a rotator at 4°C. Anti-K-ɛ-GG antibody beads were washed with 1 ml of cold IAP buffer twice and 1 ml of cold highly pure H2O three times before eluting enriched ubiquitylated peptides with 40 µl of 0.15% TFA solution twice. Eluted peptide supernatants were desalted using C18 STAGE tips . STAGE tips were packed with a C18 Empore disk (3M) and conditioned with 100 μl of 80% ACN (0.1% formic acid (FA)), 100 μl of 50% ACN (0.1% FA), and two times of 100 μl of 0.1% FA before loading the peptide solution. Peptides were washed twice with 100 μl of 0.1% FA, and eluted with 50 μl of 50% ACN (0.1% FA). Desalted peptides were dried and kept at -20°C freezer until LC-MS/MS analysis. Dry peptides were resuspended in 9 μl of 0.1% FA, out of which 8 μl of peptide solution was loaded onto a trap column (2 cm long × 360 μm outer diameter × 75 μm inner diameter) and separated by an analytical column (20 cm long × 360 μm outer diameter × 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with C18 packing material (Magic C18 AQ, 3 μm size, 100 Å pore). Solvent A was 0.1% FA and the solvent B was 90% ACN (0.1% FA). Peptides were resolved with a solvent gradient generated by a Proxeon Easy-nLC system coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Peptides eluted were ionized by the nano-electrospray ionization at 1.8 kV and peptide ions were introduced directly into the mass spectrometer at a nano-flow rate of 300 nl/min of solvent gradient using 8% B for 1 min, to 35% B for 115 min, to 95% for 14 min and to 95% for 20 min with a total of 150 min of running time. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans (R=30,000) after each precursor scan (R=120,000) on the 15 most abundant ions using an MS1 target of 1×106 ions and an MS/MS target of 5×104 ions. The maximum ion time used for MS/MS scans was 300 ms, the HCD normalized collision energy was set to 32%, and the dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s. For the whole proteome analysis, all the parameters are identical except for the nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV and the total running time with 100 min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the MaxQuant platform (1.3.0.5)  and searched against the yeast protein database containing 6,026 entries including 115 common laboratory contaminants provided by GPM (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) using Andromeda database search algorithm. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with the maximum number of missed cleavages allowed up to 2. ‘Lysine8’ option was selected for a SILAC heavy label with the maximum number of labeled amino acids in a given peptide set to 3. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and was set to 10 ppm for the main search. Variable modifications were set as follows: oxidation at methionine, GlyGly addition to lysine, and acetylation at protein N-terminus, while a fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation at cysteine. Maximum allowed modifications in a given peptide was set to 5. The false discovery rates at peptide, protein, and site identification levels were set to 0.01. A few ubiquitination sites that were found to be differential were manually confirmed. Site identification and quantification values were obtained from the MaxQuant GlyGly sites table. Peptide ratios were normalized such that the median equaled zero. Data analysis from the whole proteome were carried out using the MaxQuant (1.4.1.2) with the same protein database used in the ubiquitinated peptides analysis. The enzyme specificity was set to LysC/P with the maximum number of missed cleavages allowed up to 2. Mass errors for precursor and fragment ions were set to 7 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Variable modifications were set as follow: pyro-glu at glutamine, oxidation at methionine and acetylation at protein N-terminus, while a fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation at cysteine. The false discovery rates at both PSM and protein levels were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of protein homeostasis is essential for cellular survival. Central to this regulation are mechanisms of protein quality control in which misfolded proteins are recognized and degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. One well-studied protein quality control pathway requires endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident, multi-subunit E3 ubiquitin ligases that function in ER-associated degradation. Using fission yeast, our lab identified the Golgi Dsc E3 ligase as required for proteolytic activation of fungal sterol regulatory element-binding protein transcription factors. The Dsc E3 ligase contains five integral membrane subunits and structurally resembles ER-associated degradation E3 ligases. Saccharomyces cerevisiae codes for homologs of Dsc E3 ligase subunits, including the Dsc1 E3 ligase homolog Tul1 that functions in Golgi protein quality control. Interestingly, S. cerevisiae lacks sterol regulatory element-binding protein homologs, indicating that novel Tul1 E3 ligase substrates exist. Here, we show that the S. cerevisiae Tul1 E3 ligase consists of Tul1, Dsc2, Dsc3, and Ubx3 and define Tul1 complex architecture. Tul1 E3 ligase function required each subunit as judged by vacuolar sorting of the artificial substrate Pep12D. Genetic studies demonstrated that Tul1 E3 ligase was required in cells lacking the multivesicular body pathway and under conditions of ubiquitin depletion. To identify candidate substrates, we performed quantitative diGly proteomics using stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture to survey ubiquitylation in wild-type and tul1&#x394; cells. We identified 3116 non-redundant ubiquitylation sites, including 10 sites in candidate substrates. Quantitative proteomics found 4.5% of quantified proteins (53/1172) to be differentially expressed in tul1&#x394; cells. Correcting the diGly dataset for these differences increased the number of Tul1-dependent ubiquitylation sites. Together, our data demonstrate that the Tul1 E3 ligase functions in protein homeostasis under non-stress conditions and support a role in protein quality control. This quantitative diGly proteomics methodology will serve as a robust platform for screening for stress conditions that require Tul1 E3 ligase activity.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Silac, Protein homeostasis

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


