### Accession
PXD007872

### Title
MELK promotes melanoma growth by stimulating the NF-B pathway

### Description
Melanoma accounts for over 80% of skin cancer-related deaths and current therapies provide only short-term benefit to patients. Here, we show in melanoma cells that maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) is transcriptionally upregulated by the MAP kinase pathway via transcription factor E2F1. MELK knockdown or pharmacological inhibition blocked melanoma growth and enhanced the effectiveness of BRAFV600E inhibitor against melanoma cells. To identify mediators of MELK function, we performed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and identified 469 proteins that had downregulated phosphorylation after MELK inhibition. Remarkably, 139 of these proteins were previously reported as substrates of BRAF or MEK, demonstrating that MELK is an important downstream mediator of the MAPK pathway. Furthermore, we show that MELK promotes melanoma growth by activating NF-B pathway activity via Sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1/p62). Collectively, these results underpin an important role for MELK in melanoma growth, downstream of the MAPK pathway.

### Sample Protocol
The heavy and light cells pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer spiked with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, using short 15 sec sonication bursts. Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 20 min. After centrifugation, the supernatants were collected and protein concentration was measured using a Hitachi L-8900 Amino Acid Analyzer. From each sample, 200 µg of proteins were aliquoted, combined, and precipitated using a methanol-chloroform precipitation method. The protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea/0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 45 mM DTT for 30 min at 37C, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature, and digested with Lys-C protease (1:20 w/w) by incubating overnight (~16 h) at 37°C. The Lys-C digest was further diluted and digested with trypsin (1:20 w/w) by incubating for 8 h at 37°C. The digest was desalted with MacroSpin column (The Nest Group, Inc., Southboro, MA) and dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator. Desalted peptides were then phosphopeptide enriched using titanium dioxide resin imbedded in 10-µl tips (Glygen Corp., Columbia, MD). Flow-throughs were reserved and enriched peptides were eluted using 1:33 ammonium hydroxide:water. The SpeedVac dried flow-through and elution fractions were resuspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with a nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters, Milford, MA) at the front end. Samples were loaded into a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 180 µm × 20 mm, Product Number: 186006527) at a flowrate of 5 µl/min and separated with a C18 column (nanoACQUITY column Peptide BEH C18, 75 µm × 250 mm, Product number: 186003545). The peptides were eluted with buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in a gradient from 6% to 35% in 150 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. LC-MS/MS data were acquired using 3 s, the top speed data-dependent acquisition mode. Details of the instrument settings can be found in Supporting Information S1. Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified with the Sequest HT search engine using Proteome Discoverer v 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) software. A standardized SILAC 2plex (Arg10, Lys8) quantification workflow in the Proteome Discoverer was slightly modified as described below and used for analysis. Briefly, MS/MS data were searched against the SwissProt human database (downloaded in September 2015; number of protein entries = 20,193). The search criteria include 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and a trypsin miscleavage setting of two. Static modification settings included carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) on cysteine, while dynamic modifications were set to include oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionine and phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were verified based on q-values set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator. Precursor Ions Quantifier node was used in the processing step workflow and the Peptide and Protein Quantifier node was selected for the consensus workflow to calculate and quantify peptides, protein abundances, and ratios. SILAC data analysis for identifying the preferred MELK amino acid context for phosphorylation. To identify the MELK phosphorylation consensus site from the SILAC data, we used a prediction algorithm developed in house. The motifs were generated by R/Bioconductor package dagLogo (v.1.9.2). The background of the motifs was built from the human proteome retrieved via R/Bioconductor package UniProt.ws (v.2.11.9).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Melk

### Affiliations
Pathology Department; Yale University
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
narendra wajapeyee

### Lab Head
Dr Narendra Wajapayee
Pathology Department; Yale University


