### Accession
PXD016387

### Title
Development and Validation of an in-house library with Colombian Candida auris strains in MALDI TOF MS to improve yeast identification

### Description
Creation of a new library entries for Candida auris using MALDI Biotyper. Candida auris has a high genetic variability in the world, the identification of Colombian isolates is difficult using the main Bruker library. A new in-house library was created using Colombian isolated and was validated using 300 isolated strains

### Sample Protocol
For construction of the new in-house library the protein extraction protocol recommended by Bruker was performed. After of incubation in petri dish culture two or three isolated colonies were mixed with 300 ul of HPLC grade water and then 600 ul of HPLC grade ethanol was added and vortex. centrifugation at 15,000 g for 2 minutes and solvent decanted; the pellet was dried at 25C and reconstituted in equal volumes of 100% formic acid and acetonitrile. One microlitter of supernatant was spotted onto the MALDI target plate.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra generated were analyzed in Flexanalysis 3.4 software, only higher quality spectra ware considered. For the Main Spectra library MSP creation the MALDI Biotyper 3.1 was used. All the smooth, baseline subtraction and peak piking processes were those recommended by Bruker; an average of the centroid spectra was used for the MSP entries

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida auris, Microflex, Maldi biotyper, Maldi tof

### Affiliations
Bruker Mexicana

### Submitter
Crescencio Rodriguez

### Lab Head
Dr Crescencio Rodriguez
Bruker Mexicana


