### Accession
PXD015445

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Protein in Human Fingerprints and Artificial Fingerprints

### Description
Quantitative genomic and proteomic evaluation of human latent fingerprint depositions represents a challenge within the forensic field, due to the high variability in the amount of DNA and protein initially deposited. To better assess recovery techniques for touch depositions, we present a method to produce simple and customizable artificial fingerprints. Capitalizing on recent advancements in the use of protein sequence identification for human forensic analysis, these samples contain a representative quantity of protein, originating from epidermal skin cells collected from the fingers and palms of volunteers. Proteomic sequencing by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis indicates a high level of protein overlap between artificial and latent prints.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in Rapigest by water bath sonication for 1 minute, boiled for 5 minutes, cooled on ice, and briefly vortexed. To the sample, 5.0 µL of 5.0 mg/mL dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and the solution was incubated at 65 oC for 15 minutes. The reduced disulfide bonds were alkylated by adding 5.0 µL of 15.0 mg/mL iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and allowing the reaction to proceed for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Trypsin (Promega) was reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, added at a 1:30 w/w ratio to the protein sample and incubated for 16 h at 37 oC. Following trypsin enzymatic digestion, RapiGest was precipitated with 0.5 % trifluoracetic acid. samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus high-resolution, accurate-mass (HRAM) mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 nano LC system. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent MS2 mode. Full scan mass spectra were acquired from m/z 375 to 1575 at a resolution of 70,000. The fifteen (15) most abundant precursor ions in each full MS1 spectrum (intensity threshold of 50,000) were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 17,500. Tandem mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
After analysis by nanoLC-HRAM-MS/MS, data from the samples were further analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 SP1 (Thermo Fisher). Data files were processed using SequestHT and Percolator analytical tools against a custom generated FASTA file based on the UniProt human database, augmented with specific peptides and proteins that were targets of this study. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. The enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteines were fixed with carbamidomethyl modifications and the only allowable variable modification was methionine oxidation. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs), peptide identifications, and protein identifications were all validated using Percolator at a false discovery rate of 0.05. Outputs of Proteome Discoverer were further processed and summarized in R (v3.5.1).

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative genomic and proteomic evaluation of human latent fingerprint depositions represents a challenge within the forensic field, due to the high variability in the amount of DNA and protein initially deposited. To better assess recovery techniques for touch depositions, we present a method to produce simple and customizable artificial fingerprints. These artificial fingerprint samples include the primary components of a typical latent fingerprint, specifically sebaceous fluid, eccrine perspiration, extracellular DNA, and proteinaceous epidermal skin material (i.e., shed skin cells). A commercially available emulsion of sebaceous and eccrine perspiration material provides a chemically-relevant suspension solution for fingerprint deposition, simplifying artificial fingerprint production. Extracted human genomic DNA is added to accurately mimic the extracellular DNA content of a typical latent print and comparable DNA yields are recovered from the artificial prints relative to human prints across surface types. Capitalizing on recent advancements in the use of protein sequence identification for human forensic analysis, these samples also contain a representative quantity of protein, originating from epidermal skin cells collected from the fingers and palms of volunteers. Proteomic sequencing by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis indicates a high level of protein overlap between artificial and latent prints. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015445. By including known quantities of DNA and protein into each artificial print, this method enables total DNA and protein recovery to be quantitatively assessed across different sample collection and extraction methods to better evaluate extraction efficiency. Collectively, these artificial fingerprint samples are simple to make, highly versatile and customizable, and accurately represent the biochemical composition and biological signatures of human fingerprints.

### Keywords
Artificial fingerprint, Latent fingerprint, Forensics, Protemics

### Affiliations
Signature Science, LLC
Signature Science

### Submitter
Curt Hewitt

### Lab Head
Dr Curt Hewitt
Signature Science


