### Accession
PXD026589

### Title
Plasma from Rainbow trout housed for 7 days in normoxic and hypoxic water

### Description
Hypoxic water had 5 mg/L of Dissolved Oxygen (DO) and normoxic water had 11.5 mg/L DO. 40 immature rainbow trout (about 100 g) were housed for 7 days under these conditions (20 fish in each treatment). Then fish were anesthetized with 100 mg/L MS-222, and blood was sampled using caudal puncture with heparinized syringes. The blood was centrifuged at 10 000 x g for 4 minutes in Heraeus Fresco 21 centrifuge (Thermo Fisher). Plasma was removed from this using a pipette, and placed in cryotubes, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and then stored at -80oC until preparation for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Upon thawing, samples were vortexed, and 15 µL of each sample was aliquoted into low retention microcentrifuge tubes. Next, 35 µL of 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer was added to each sample and mixed with gentle vortex. After this, proteins were reduced with the addition of 2.65 µL of 100 mM of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 100 mM TEAB buffer, mixed using gentle vortex, and allowed to incubate at room temperature for 45 minutes. Proteins were then alkylated with the addition of 2.8 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM TEAB, vortexed gently, and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 minutes. At the end of the second incubation, 50 µL of chemical digestion solution (20% formic acid v/v) was added to each sample and vortexed for 5 seconds. Lid locks were placed on each tube and incubated at 115oC for 30 minutes in a heating block (VWR 96 place heating block).  Samples were dried in a centrifugal evaporator (Genevac miVac Quattro Concentrator; model Quc-12060-C00; Ipswich, England) for 40 minutes. Dried samples were stored at 4oC overnight, and then re-suspended in 20 µL of 95% H2O 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  2 μL of the peptide solution from each sample were injected and then separated by reverse phase liquid chromatography using a Zorbax, 300SB-C18, 1.0 × 50 mm 3.5 μm column (Agilent Technologies Canada Inc., Mississauga, ON) using an Agilent 1260 Infinity Binary LC32. The Agilent 6530 Accurate-Mass Quadrupole Time of- Flight (Q-TOF) was used as the detector in tandem to the Agilent 1200 series liquid chromatography system (TRACES lab, University of Toronto Scarborough). Each analytical run included a solvent blank, peptide standard (H2016, Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON), and a BSA digest standard (Agilent Technologies Canada Inc, Mississauga, ON) injection every 10 samples in order to monitor baseline, carry-over, drift, and sensitivity during the runtime. Each sample was injected once per individual.

### Data Protocol
Spectral files for each fish (n = 20) were pooled into groups by treatment (hypoxia vs control). Each group was analyzed separately using Spectrum Mill Software (Version B.04.01.141). Proteins were manually validated and accepted when at least one peptide had a peptide score (quality of the raw match between the observed spectrum and the theoretical spectrum) greater than 5 and a %SPI (percent of the spectral intensity that are accounted for by theoretical fragments) of greater than 60% (these settings are recommended by the manufacturer for validating results obtained with an Agilent Q-TOF mass spectrometer). After peptides were sequenced and identified by Spectrum Mill at the MS/MS level, quantification at the MS1 level was performed using the DDA workflow in Skyline 20.2 (MacCoss Lab Software) with a score of 0.9, retention time window of 5 mins, and 5 missed cleavages with transition settings for TOF (Pino et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of hypoxia in water bodies is increasing more rapidly than aquatic life can adapt. This study aimed to determine the effects of hypoxia on fish physiology, as well as protein expression through proteomics. To do this, 40 rainbow trout were divided into normoxic control (11.5&#x202f;mg/L dissolved oxygen) and hypoxic treatment (5&#x202f;mg/L dissolved oxygen) tanks for a period of 7&#x202f;days. Fish were then anesthetized and blood was sampled. Fish were then euthanized and heart and liver samples were taken. Blood glucose, cortisol and lipid, body and liver mass, fork length, hematocrit and, blood cell counts and global heart methylation were measured. Red blood cell counts were significantly lower, while hematocrit and mean corpuscular volume were significantly higher in the hypoxic treatment. Global DNA methylation was significantly decreased in hypoxic heart tissue. Plasma cortisol and 18:1 monoacylglyerol increased, while 15:0-18:1 phosphatidylethanolamine, and 18:1 lysophosphatidylethanolamine decreased in plasma of rainbow trout under hypoxic conditions. Plasma proteomics revealed 70 significantly altered proteins (p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.05) in the hypoxia treatment (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026589). Many of these molecular changes appear to be related to the observed increase in red blood cell volume and epigenetic modifications, as well as to angiogenesis, lipid, and glucose metabolism. This study highlights a range of cellular and molecular responses in the blood and plasma of freshwater fish that may be phenotypic adaptions to hypoxia, and that could aid in diagnosing the health status of wild fish populations using several, potential, discovered biomarkers.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plasma, Agilent 6530 qtof, Rainbow trout, Shotgun

### Affiliations
Ontario Tech University
Faculty of Science, Ontario Tech University Oshawa, ON, Canada

### Submitter
Denina Simmons

### Lab Head
Dr Dr, Denina Simmons
Faculty of Science, Ontario Tech University Oshawa, ON, Canada


