### Accession
PXD025422

### Title
Label-free shotgun proteomics of M. hyopneumoniae and M. feriruminatoris

### Description
Mycoplasmas are wall-less parasitic bacteria possessing extremely small genomes. Despite this, growth rates differ among mycoplasma species with doubling times ranging from only 0.5h to 16h. Here, we analyzed the whole proteomes of M. hyopneumoniae and M. feriruminatoris and performed a comparative study in slow and fast growing mycoplasmas.

### Sample Protocol
M. hyopneumoniae 232 and M. feriruminatoris G5847 strains were grown in suspension (180 rpm at 37°C) in Hayflick medium without glucose and supplemented with sodium pyruvate 0.5% or SP-4 medium, respectively. Sample preparation for MS analysis was performed as follows. Briefly, 5 ml cultures of M. hyopneumoniae or M. feriruminatoris were grown for 48 h or overnight, respectively. Cultures were then centrifuged, washed twice in PBS, and the pelleted cells resuspended in 150 μl of urea lysis buffer (6M urea, 0.2M NH4CO3) or SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM HEPES). Two biological replicates were performed for each condition and bacterial species. Samples extracted with SDS were reduced with dithiothreitol (30nmols, 30min, 56°C), alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60nmols, 30 min, 25 ºC) and digested with 1 µg  LysC (Wako, cat # 129-02541) overnight at 37ºC and then with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega, cat # V5113) for eight hours at 37˚C following the filter-aided protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Samples extracted with urea were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmols, 1 h, 37°C) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 30 min, 25 ºC). The resulting protein extract was first diluted 1/3 with 200 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako, cat # 129-02541) overnight at 37ºC and then diluted 1/2 and digested with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega, cat # V5113) for eight hours at 37˚C. After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300°C. Ultramark 1621 for the was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1x106, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1x104, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument, and QCloud (Chiva et al., 2018) has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science (Perkins et al., 1999)). The data were searched against home-made databases for M. hyopneumoniae 232 (94848 entries) or M. feriruminatoris G5847 (75,500 entries), plus a list (Beer et al., 2017) of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein top 3 area with the unique peptide for protein ungrouped.

### Publication Abstract
Trans-translation is a ubiquitous bacterial mechanism of ribosome rescue mediated by a transfer-messenger RNA (tmRNA) that adds a degradation tag to the truncated nascent polypeptide. Here, we characterize this quality control system in a genome-reduced bacterium, <i>Mycoplasma pneumoniae</i> (MPN), and perform a comparative analysis of protein quality control components in slow and fast-growing prokaryotes. We show <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> that in MPN the sole quality control cytoplasmic protease (Lon) degrades efficiently tmRNA-tagged proteins. Analysis of tmRNA-mutants encoding a tag resistant to proteolysis reveals extensive tagging activity under normal growth. Unlike knockout strains, these mutants are viable demonstrating the requirement of tmRNA-mediated ribosome recycling. Chaperone and Lon steady-state levels maintain proteostasis in these mutants suggesting a model in which co-evolution of Lon and their substrates offer simple mechanisms of regulation without specialized degradation machineries. Finally, comparative analysis shows relative increase in Lon/Chaperone levels in slow-growing bacteria suggesting physiological adaptation to growth demand.

### Keywords
M. hyopneumoniae, M. feriruminatoris

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain
Centre for Genomic Regulation

### Submitter
Marc Weber

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona 08003, Spain


