### Accession
PXD034131

### Title
Oncogenic CALR Mutant C-terminus Mediates Dual Binding to the Thrombopoietin Receptor Triggering Complex Dimerization and Activation

### Description
Calreticulin (CALR) is a master lectin chaperone that guides the proper folding of integral membrane proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. In healthy cells, CALR transiently and non-specifically interacts with thousands of immature N-glycosylated proteins through its N-terminal glycan-binding domain. Conversely, frameshift mutants of CALR turn into rogue cytokine by acquiring the ability to stably and specifically interact with the Thrombopoietin Receptor (TpoR). Strikingly, this interaction induces activation of TpoR leading to myeloproliferative neoplasms, blood cancers resulting from the overproduction of blood cells. Using a multidisciplinary approach, we unveil how the CALR frameshift mutations result in structural overhaul of the entire protein and identify the structural basis of its acquired specificty for TpoR. We further describe the mechanisms by zhich complex formation triggers TpoR dimerization and activation. In addition, we provide the first complete dynamic conformational footprints of both wild-type and mutant CALR and identify novel potentially targetable sites.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed for hydrogen-deuterium exchange using a Waters nanoAcaquity UPLC with HDx technology coupled with Synapt G2-Si. All purified proteins were used at 20uM concentration in eauilibration buffer (5mM K2HPO4, 5mM KH2PO4 dissolved in H2O, pH 7). Labelling was performed with a 20_fold dilution in labelling buffer (5mM K2HPO4, 5mM KH2PO4 dissolved in D2O, pD 7). After incubationmthe reaction was quenched using a 1:1 dilution in the quench buffer (0.05 M K2HPO4, 0.05 M KH2PO4 with 30 mM TCEP, pH 2.3) prior to injection into a pepsin column with a dynamic flowrate of 75ul/min.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were identified from triplicates with PLGS 3.0. The peptides identified were further analyzed with DynamX 3.0 (Waters) using a tolerence of 10 ppm, a maximum of 35 a.a., a mininum products per amino acid of 0.2  and requiring that each peptide was identified in 3 out of 3 relplicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms

### Affiliations
de Duve Institute 
Ludwig Cancer Research
UCLouvain
Universite Catholique de Louvain and de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels, Belgium

### Submitter
Nicolas Papadopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan N. Constantinescu
Universite Catholique de Louvain and de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Brussels, Belgium


