### Accession
PXD029542

### Title
Structural basis for the mechanisms of human presequence protease conformational  switch and substrate recognition

### Description
Presequence protease (PreP) degrades presequence peptides cleaved off from nuclear-encoded proteins and other aggregation-prone peptides, such as amyloid β (Aβ). PreP structures have only been determined in a closed conformation; thus, the mechanisms of substrate binding and selectivity remain elusive. Here, we leverage advanced vitrification techniques to overcome the preferential denaturation of one of two ~55 kDa homologous domains of PreP caused by airwater interface adsorption, and thereby elucidate cryoEM structures of three apo-PreP open states along with Aβ- and citrate synthase presequence-bound PreP. Together with integrative biophysical and pharmacological approaches, these structures reveal the key stages of the PreP catalytic cycle and how the binding of substrates or PreP inhibitor drives the rigid body motion of the protein for substrate binding and catalysis. Together, our studies provide key mechanistic insights into M16C metalloproteases for future therapeutic innovations.

### Sample Protocol
13 μM PreP in the presence or absence of 130 μM MB-60 with buffer 8.3 mM Tris-HCl pH7.2, 50mM NaCl, and 2.1%DMSO in H2O, 260 μM Ab , or 260 μM CS27 in buffer B and 2.1%DMSO in H2O was incubated at room temperature for 30 min prior to chilling to 0 °C for deuteration studies. Functional hydrogen-deuterium exchange reactions were initiated by adding 3 μl sample into 9 μl of buffer A or buffer B in D2O (pDREAD=7.2) and incubated at 0 °C for 10, 100, 1,000, 10,000, and 100,000 sec. The exchange reaction was terminated by adding 18 µl of ice-cold 0.8% formic acid, 0.8M GuHCl, 16.6% glycerol for a final pH of 2.5. Quenched samples were then immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at -80°C prior to LC/MS analysis. Un-deuterated and equilibrium-deuterated control samples are also prepared. Frozen samples were later loaded onto a cryogenic autosampler, thawed at 4°C, then passed over an immobilized pepsin column (16 μl bed volume) for 30-40 sec digestion. Proteolytic fragments were collected on a trap column and separated using Optimize Technologies C18 reverse phase analytical column (Halo EC-C18 0.2 x 50mm, 2.7 µm) with an acetonitrile linear gradient (6.4%-38.4% over 30 min). The effluent was directed into an OrbiTrap Elite Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  The data was acquired in either MS1 profile mode (at a mass resolutio of 120,000) or data-dependent MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was processed using Proteome Discoverer software (ThermoFisher). SEQUEST Search is using 10ppm mass error tolerance for precursor ions, 0.08 Da tolerance for fragment masses, and no enzyme specified.  Mass envelope centroids of deuterated peptides were calculated with HDExaminer v2.5.1 (Sierra Analytics Inc, Modesto, CA) then converted to corresponding deuterium incorporation with corrections for back-exchange.

### Publication Abstract
Presequence protease (PreP), a 117&#x2009;kDa mitochondrial M16C metalloprotease vital for mitochondrial proteostasis, degrades presequence peptides cleaved off from nuclear-encoded proteins and other aggregation-prone peptides, such as amyloid &#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;). PreP structures have only been determined in a closed conformation; thus, the mechanisms of substrate binding and selectivity remain elusive. Here, we leverage advanced vitrification techniques to overcome the preferential denaturation of one of two ~55&#x2009;kDa homologous domains of PreP caused by air-water interface adsorption. Thereby, we elucidate cryoEM structures of three apo-PreP open states along with A&#x3b2;- and citrate synthase presequence-bound PreP at 3.3-4.6&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. Together with integrative biophysical and pharmacological approaches, these structures reveal the key stages of the PreP catalytic cycle and how the binding of substrates or PreP inhibitor drives a rigid body motion of the protein for substrate binding and catalysis. Together, our studies provide key mechanistic insights into M16C metalloproteases for future therapeutic innovations.

### Keywords
Hdxms, Presequence protease, Amyloid peptide, Cryoem

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, UCSD
University of California, San Diego

### Submitter
Sheng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Li
Department of Medicine, UCSD


