### Accession
PXD015337

### Title
Therapeutic miR-132 inhibition reverses heart failure

### Description
Despite some success of pharmacotherapies targeting primarily neurohormonal dysregulation, heart failure is a growing global pandemic with increasing burden. Treatments that improve the disease by reversing heart failure at the cardiomyocyte level are lacking. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are transcriptional regulators of gene expression, acting through complex biological networks, and playing thereby essential roles in disease progression. Adverse structural remodelling of the left ventricle due to myocardial infarction (MI) is a common pathological feature leading to heart failure. We previously demonstrated increased cardiomyocyte expression of the miR-212/132 family during pathological cardiac conditions. Transgenic mice overexpressing the miR-212/132 cluster (miR-212/132-TG) develop pathological cardiac remodelling and die prematurely from progressive HF. Using both knockout and antisense strategies, we have shown miR-132 to be both necessary and sufficient to drive the pathological growth of cardiomyocytes in a murine model of left ventricular pressure overload. Based on the findings, we proposed that miR-132 may serve as a therapeutic target in heart failure therapy. Here we provide novel mechanistic insight and translational evidence for the therapeutic efficacy in small and large animal models (n=135) of heart failure. We demonstrate strong PK/PD relationship, dose-dependent efficacy and high clinical potential of a novel optimized synthetic locked nucleic acid phosphorothioate backbone antisense oligonucleotide inhibitor of miR-132 (antimiR-132) as a next-generation heart failure therapeutic.

### Sample Protocol
Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were transfected either with Negative control 2 or pre-miR-132. After transfection cells were scraped from the culture plate and Mem-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit (Thermo Fisher scientific) was used to remove the soluble cytosolic proteins. The remaining membrane and myofilament proteins were denatured by 6M urea, 2M thiourea and reduced by 10mM DTT at 37°C for 1h. After alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark for 1h, the proteins were precipitated by pre-chilled acetone at -20°C overnight. The precipitated proteins were spin down at 16,000 g for 30min at 4°C and resuspended in 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH=8.5. Trypsin was used with enzyme:protein ratio=1:50 for in-solution digestion at 37°C overnight. The digested samples were cleaned up by using C18 spin plate and separated by nanoflow HPLC (U3000 RSLCnano, EASY-SPRAY C18 column 75µm x 50cm) with a 2h gradient then analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS was acquired on Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 and MS2 was acquired on linear ion trap using CID fragmentation for most abundant ions within 3 seconds cycle time and with dynamic exclusion enabled. Each sample was injected twice.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to search RAW files against UniProt/SwissProt Mammalia database (version 2015_02) using Mascot (version 2.3.1, Matrix Science). Search results were loaded into Scaffold (version 4.3.2, Proteome Science) for further validation with the following filters: peptide probability > 95%, protein probability >99% with at least 2 unique peptides. Proteins were quantified using Top 3 Precursor Intensity method and missing values were imputed using a small number (1000). Proteins with a Student’s t-test P value < 0.05 and fold change >2 were considered significantly changed. Pathway enrichment analysis was performed on the significantly changed proteins using Enrichr.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myocardial infarction, Myocardial biology, Contractile function, Translational studies, Calcium cycling/excitation-contraction coupling

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, London, UK


