### Accession
PXD018561

### Title
Blockade of High-Fat Diet Phenotypes using Exercise as Prevention versus Treatment

### Description
The increasing consumption of high-fat western foods combined with a lack of exercise is a major contributor to the burden of obesity in humans. Aerobic exercise such as running is known to provide metabolic benefits, but how the over-consumption of a high fat diet (HFD) and exercise interact is not well characterized at the molecular level. Here, we examined the plasma proteome in mice for the effects of aerobic exercise as both a treatment and as a preventative regime for animals on either HFD or a healthy control diet. This analysis detected large changes in the plasma proteome induced by the HFD intervention, such as increased abundance of SERPINA7, ALDOB, APOE, and down-regulation of SERPINA1E, CFD (adipsin), LIFR. Some of these changes were only significantly reverted using aerobic exercise as a preventative measure, but not as a treatment regime. To determine if either the intensity, or duration, of exercise influenced the outcome, we compared high-intensity interval training (HIIT) and endurance running. Endurance running slightly outperformed HIIT exercise, but overall both provided similar reversion in abundance of plasma proteins modulated by the high-fat diet including SERPINA7, APOE, SERPINA1E, and CFD. Finally, we compared the changes induced by over-consumption of HFD to previous data from mice fed an isocaloric high saturated fat (SFA) or polyunsaturated fat (PUFA) diet. This identified several common changes including increased APOC2 and APOE, but also highlighted changes specific for either over-consumption of HFD (ALDOB, SERPINA7, CFD), SFA-based diets (SERPINA1E), or PUFA-based diets (Haptoglobin - Hp). Together, these data highlight the importance of early intervention with exercise to revert HFD-induced phenotypes and suggest some of the molecular mechanisms leading to the changes in the plasma proteome generated by high fat diet consumption in both mice and humans.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection Mice were euthanized at 0900 h and concluded by 1100 h after an overnight period of feeding by terminal anaesthesia with isoflurane (3%) in oxygen and then plasma collected via cardiac puncture into tubes pre-coated with 0.5 M EDTA at 10% recovered blood volume. Whole blood was kept on ice and then spun at 1,500 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C, with collected plasma snap frozen in liquid nitrogen before being stored at -80°C.   Plasma sample preparation using SDB-RPS StageTips Plasma sample preparation was performed as described previously (2). Briefly, 1 µl of plasma (70 µg protein) was added to 24 µl of SDC buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and heated to 95°C for 10 minutes. Once cooled to RT the sample was diluted 10-fold with water. LysC and trypsin were then added at a 1:100 ratio (ug/ug) and digested at 37°C for 16 h. An equal volume (250 uL) of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA was added to the digested peptides and vortexed. Digested peptides were purified using SDB-RPS StageTips and the Spin96 as described (2). Dried peptides were resuspended in 30 L of 5% formic acid and stored at 4°C until analysed by LC-MS.  LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra Using a Thermo Fisher RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL) were directly injected onto a 15 cm x 150 um C18Aq (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a ~10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over 25 min with a flow rate of 1,200 nL min−1 (capillary flow). Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using data-independent acquisition. The data-independent acquisitions were performed as described previously using variable isolation widths for different m/z ranges (15). Stepped normalized collision energy of 25 +/- 10% was used for all DIA spectral acquisitions.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software Spectronaut Pulsar X (version 12.0.20491.11.25225 (Jocelyn)). Only the PREFER plasma samples were searched, not the high pH RP samples. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was the human UniProt database downloaded on the 30th September 2017, containing 42,325 protein sequence entries. Enzyme specificity was set to semi-specific N-ragged trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. To recalibrate for retention drift and intensity assignment for peaks the iRT profiling workflow was used (16). For peak list generation, interference (MS1 & MS2) correction was enabled, removing fragments/isotopes from potential quantitation if there was a presence of interfering signals, while keeping a minimum of three for quantitation. Spectra were de-isotoped based on RT apex distance and m/z spacing, de-multiplexing was not required. Each observed fragment ion could only be assignment to a single precursor peak list (17). The FDR was set to 1% using a target-decoy approach. Spectronaut generated a custom mass tolerance for each precursor ion. The threshold for accepting a precursor was set at a Q value <0.01 and each precursor must have >3 fragment ions. All other settings were factory default. Processed data was analysed and statistical tests performed using the R software package (version 3.4.3) with plot generated using Tableau (version 10.0.2).  Experimental design and statistical rationale The number of animals used per treatment group was established from previous studies in mice muscle high molecular weight (HMW) adiponectin (1). We have used the values for HMW adiponectin as pilot data to provide suitable values for power calculation. At 90% power, with a worst case true difference in means of 200, a representative standard deviation of 130, probability of type I error of 0.05, and using a one-way ANOVA test the observations that are required is n=10 and we therefore used 10 animals per treatment group. For all datasets statistical analyses were performed using R (version 3.4.3) and processed data was plotted using Tableau (version 2019.2), where outliers beyond 1.5 times the inter-quartile range may have been excluded from plots to aid visualization.  Fold changes for protein abundance were calculated using the median in each group. Statistical significance for changes induced by Diet condition (chow vs HFD), Exercise (none vs endurance vs HIIT), or the interaction between these was calculated using a two-way ANOVA and for the HFD group only a one-way ANOVA was used to examine the effect of exercise in this group alone. The resulting p-values were adjusted to control for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Significance was set at P<0.05, corresponding to a false discovery rate in the ANOVA of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Exercise, Mouse, High fat diet

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Mark Larance

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Mark Larance
University of Sydney


