### Accession
PXD004727

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of ZIKV infected C6/36 cells

### Description
An iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of ZIKV infected Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells was performed to investigate host proteins involved in ZIKV infection process. A total of 3,544 host proteins were quantified, with 200 being differentially regulated. Bioinformatics analysis on regulated host proteins highlights several ZIKV infection regulated biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative proteomic analysis, C6/36 cells were infected with ZIKV at MOI=1 or mock treated. At 96 hours post infection (hpi), C6/36 cells were harvested and washed with pre-chilled PBS. Cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer (8M urea/0.2M Tris, pH 8.0), and subjected to sonication. After centrifugation, supernatant containing extracted proteins was collected, and protein concentration was measured with BCA assay. Extracted protein was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 ℃ for 30 min, alkylated with 40 mM IAA in the dark for 30 min, and left at room temperature for 1 hour. The proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin/protein w/w) at 37℃ overnight. Digested peptides were desalted with SepPak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried by SpeedVac (Thermo). Then, 100 μg of desalted peptides from mock treated and ZIKV infected cells were labelled with iTRAQ reagents according to manufacturer’s instruction. Labelled peptides were mixed at ratio of 1 and subjected to SCX fractionation. Fractionated peptides were desalted with Ziptip (Millipore) and stored at -80℃. LC-MS/MS detection was carried out on a hybrid quadrupole-TOF LC/MS/MS mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+, AB SCIEX) equipped with a nanospray source. Peptides were first loaded onto a C18 trap column (5 µm, 5 x 0.3 mm, Agilent Technologies) and then eluted into a C18 analytical column (75 μm × 150 mm, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Eksigent). Mobile phase A (3% DMSO, 96.9% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (3% DMSO, 96.9% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) were used to establish a 100 min gradient, and the constant flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. For MS/MS analysis, each scan cycle consisted of one full-scan mass spectrum (with m/z ranging from 350 to 1500 and charge states from 2 to 5) followed by 20 MS/MS events. The threshold count was set to 120 to activate MS/MS accumulation and former target ion exclusion was set for 18 s. Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Peakview version 2.0 (AB SCIEX).

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were submitted to ProteinPilot version 5.0 (AB SCIEX) to perform peptide identification and quantification. A concatenated database containing ZIKV strain SZ-WIV01 polyprotein sequence and Aedes albopictus protein database (GCA_001444175.2_A.albopictus_v1.1_protein) downloaded from NCBI was used. Search parameters were as follows: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8plex (Peptide labeled); Cysteine Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 5600. The cutoff for peptide conf. score was >95%, and protein FDR cutoff was <1%. Only peptides with ratio value were exported and used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) is an emerging arbovirus belonging to the genus <i>Flavivirus</i> of the family <i>Flaviviridae</i> During replication processes, flavivirus manipulates host cell systems to facilitate its replication, while the host cells activate antiviral responses. Identification of host proteins involved in the flavivirus replication process may lead to the discovery of antiviral targets. The mosquitoes <i>Aedes aegypti</i> and <i>Aedes albopictus</i> are epidemiologically important vectors for ZIKV, and effective restrictions of ZIKV replication in mosquitoes will be vital in controlling the spread of virus. In this study, an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of ZIKV-infected <i>Aedes albopictus</i> C6/36 cells was performed to investigate host proteins involved in the ZIKV infection process. A total of 3,544 host proteins were quantified, with 200 being differentially regulated, among which CHCHD2 can be upregulated by ZIKV infection in both mosquito C6/36 and human HeLa cells. Our further study indicated that CHCHD2 can promote ZIKV replication and inhibit beta interferon (IFN-&#x3b2;) production in HeLa cells, suggesting that ZIKV infection may upregulate CHCHD2 to inhibit IFN-I production and thus promote virus replication. Bioinformatics analysis of regulated host proteins highlighted several ZIKV infection-regulated biological processes. Further study indicated that the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) plays roles in the ZIKV entry process and that an FDA-approved inhibitor of the 20S proteasome, bortezomib, can inhibit ZIKV infection <i>in vivo</i> Our study illustrated how host cells respond to ZIKV infection and also provided a candidate drug for the control of ZIKV infection in mosquitoes and treatment of ZIKV infection in patients.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> ZIKV infection poses great threats to human health, and there is no FDA-approved drug available for the treatment of ZIKV infection. During replication, ZIKV manipulates host cell systems to facilitate its replication, while host cells activate antiviral responses. Identification of host proteins involved in the ZIKV replication process may lead to the discovery of antiviral targets. In this study, the first quantitative proteomic analysis of ZIKV-infected cells was performed to investigate host proteins involved in the ZIKV replication process. Bioinformatics analysis highlighted several ZIKV infection-regulated biological processes. Further study indicated that the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) plays roles in the ZIKV entry process and that an FDA-approved inhibitor of the UPS, bortezomib, can inhibit ZIKV infection <i>in vivo</i> Our study not only illustrated how host cells respond to ZIKV infection but also provided a candidate drug for the control of ZIKV infection in mosquitoes and treatment of ZIKV infection in patients.

### Keywords
Zikv, C6/36, Itraq

### Affiliations
Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China
State Key Laboratory of Virology,Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lei-Ke Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei-Ke Zhang
Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China


