### Accession
PXD023484

### Title
Iron deficiency and recovery in yeast: a quantitative proteomics approach

### Description
A model used to study iron deficiency is yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Here, we used quantitative (phospho)proteomics to explore the early (4h and 6h) and late (12h) response to ID. We showed that metabolic pathways like the Krebs cycle, amino acid and ergosterol biosynthesis were affected by ID. In addition, during the late response, several proteins related to the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy were upregulated. We also explored the proteomic changes during a recovery period after 12h of ID. We found that several proteins recovered their steady-state levels, but some others such as cytochromes did not recover during the time tested. Our results highlight the complex proteome changes occurring during ID and recovery. This study constitutes a valuable dataset for researchers interested in iron biology, offering a temporal proteomic dataset for ID, as well as a compendium the proteomic changes associated with episodes of iron recovery

### Sample Protocol
The wild-type S. cerevisiae strain for this study was the haploid MATalpha BY4742. Starter cultures were inoculated with a patch of yeast cells and incubated overnight (30°C, 230 rpm). The next day, synthetic complete medium plus 2% glucose complemented with 100 µM BPS (a specific iron chelator) was inoculated with a starting OD600nm=0.2, incubated at 30°C and 230 rpm (cultures were performed in triplicated for each time point). After 4h and 6h, a sample equivalent to 20 OD was obtained, cells were pelleted by centrifugation and washed twice with PBS and stored at -80°C. At 6h, to avoid the combined effect of iron deficiency plus nutrient limitation, the cell cultures were diluted to 0.75 OD600nm using fresh medium and the cells were cultured for another 6h. For the recovery experiment, cells were cultured for 12h in synthetic complete media plus 2% glucose and 100µM BPS (at 6h the media was changed as above), cells were pelleted by centrifugation, washed with synthetic complete media and were used to inoculate synthetic complete media plus 2% glucose (OD600nm=0.75), sampling was performed as above at 1h and 4h.  The sample preparation was performed as previously reported. Briefly, yeast pellets were lysed by bead-beating in lysis buffer (8M urea, 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined by BCA following manufacturer instructions, then proteins were reduced using 5mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), at room temperature for 15 min and alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark) and excess of iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). The samples (100 µg) were precipitated using methanol-chloroform method and resuspended in 100 µL of 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5), then the samples were digested overnight using LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio, the next day trypsin was added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and incubated for 6h at 37°C.  After digestion, each sample (100 µg) was labelled using TMT reagents. To ensure equal amount of total peptides in each fraction a label check was performed, then the reaction was quenched using 0.3% (v/v) hydroxylamine, combined into a single tube and desalted using a SepPak. Phosphorylated peptides were enrich using a High Select Fe-NTA column, according to manufacturer’s instructions. The unmodified proteome was fractionated through basic pH reversed-phase chromatography into 96 fractions, consolidated into 24 and 12 fractions were analyzed by the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the S. cerevisiae database (SGD project, March 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, DCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than 10 TMT reporter ion channels missing, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized as summing equal protein loading of all eleven samples

### Publication Abstract
Iron is an essential element for life, as it is critical for oxygen transport, cellular respiration, DNA synthesis, and metabolism. Disruptions in iron metabolism have been associated with several complex diseases like diabetes, cancer, infection susceptibility, neurodegeneration, and others; however, the molecular mechanisms linking iron metabolism with these diseases are not fully understood. A commonly used model to study iron deficiency (ID) is yeast, <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>. Here, we used quantitative (phospho)proteomics to explore the early (4 and 6 h) and late (12 h) response to ID. We showed that metabolic pathways like the Krebs cycle, amino acid, and ergosterol biosynthesis were affected by ID. In addition, during the late response, several proteins related to the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy were upregulated. We also explored the proteomic changes during a recovery period after 12 h of ID. Several proteins recovered their steady-state levels, but some others, such as cytochromes, did not recover during the time tested. Additionally, we showed that autophagy is active during ID, and some of the degraded proteins during ID can be rescued using KO strains for several key autophagy genes. Our results highlight the complex proteome changes occurring during ID and recovery. This study constitutes a valuable data set for researchers interested in iron biology, offering a temporal proteomic data set for ID, as well as a compendium the proteomic changes associated with episodes of iron recovery.

### Keywords
Iron-sulfur cluster, Ubiquitin-proteasome system, Sl-tmt, Nutritional deficiency, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Professor, Dept. Cell Biology   Director, Taplin Biological MS Facility

### Submitter
Jose Navarrete Perea

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P.Gygi
Professor, Dept. Cell Biology   Director, Taplin Biological MS Facility


