### Accession
PXD001257

### Title
Shotgun ecotoxicoproteomics of Daphnia pulex: biochemical effects of the anticancer drug tamoxifen

### Description
Among pollutants released into the environment by human activities, residues of pharmaceutical agents have been identified worldwide, and are an increasing matter of concern because of their potential impact on ecosystems. Because micro-crustaceans, such as daphnids, are sensitive to chemicals and are key organisms in the food chain, they are particularly convenient for studying the effects of these drugs in the aquatic environment. The aim of this study was to analyse differences of protein expression resulting from acute (2 days) and middle-term (7 days) exposure of Daphnia pulex daphnids to the anticancer drug tamoxifen, with the hope to unveil links between the effects of xenobiotics at the organism level and changes at the molecular level. Using a liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry shotgun approach, about 4000 proteins could be identified with a minimum of one unique peptide, providing the largest proteomics dataset of D. pulex published up to now. Considering both time points and tested concentrations, 189 proteins showed a significant fold change, most of the regulated proteins being observed at the highest concentration tested and for the longer exposure time. About one third of significant proteins were positively regulated, whereas two thirds showed decreased levels after tamoxifen treatment. The identity of regulated proteins suggested a decrease in translation, an increase in protein degradation and changes in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism as the major effects of the drug. Besides these impacted processes, which reflect a general stress response of the organism, some other regulated proteins play a role in Daphnia reproduction. These latter results are in accordance with our previous observations of the impact of tamoxifen on D. pulex reproduction, and illustrate the potential of ecotoxicoproteomics to unravel links between xenobiotic effects at the biochemical and at the organismal level.

### Sample Protocol
Daphnia pulex neonates were exposed to two different concentrations (C1: 0.1 and C2: 2.4 µg/L) of anti-cancer drug tamoxifen during 2 or 7 days in duplicates. Two controls were carried out for both period exposures (2 replicates): a blank (i.e. Elendt M4 medium, without solvent and chemicals) and a solvent control with DMSO 0.0008 %, which corresponds to the highest concentration used in the tests. For both controls, an additional time point (4 days, 2 replicates) was also measured to follow evolution of proteome during D. pulex development. After cell lysis of frozen organisms, proteins were extracted, precipitated, digested with trypsin, and resulting peptides fractionated by by off-gel focusing before LC-MS/MS analyses with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free quantification were carried out with MaxQuant 1.3.0.5. Statistical analyses were performed using local-pooled-error (LPE) estimates with multiple testing corrections. Protein annotations and functional analysis were performed with PANTHER (www.pantherdb.org).

### Publication Abstract
Among pollutants released into the environment by human activities, residues of pharmaceuticals are an increasing matter of concern because of their potential impact on ecosystems. The aim of this study was to analyze differences of protein expression resulting from acute (2 days) and middle-term (7 days) exposure of aquatic microcrustacean Daphnia pulex to the anticancer drug tamoxifen. Using a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry shotgun approach, about 4000 proteins could be identified, providing the largest proteomics data set of D. pulex published up to now. Considering both time points and tested concentrations, 189 proteins showed a significant fold change. The identity of regulated proteins suggested a decrease in translation, an increase in protein degradation and changes in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism as the major effects of the drug. Besides these impacted processes, which reflect a general stress response of the organism, some other regulated proteins play a role in Daphnia reproduction. These latter results are in accordance with our previous observations of the impact of tamoxifen on D. pulex reproduction and illustrate the potential of ecotoxicoproteomics to unravel links between xenobiotic effects at the biochemical and organismal levels. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001257.

### Keywords
Ecotoxiproteomics, Daphnia pulex, Lc-ms/ms, Tamoxifen

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Protein Analysis Facility, Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Manfredo Quadroni
Protein Analysis Facility, Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne


