### Accession
PXD022380

### Title
Chronic exposure of humans to high level natural background radiation leads to robust expression of protective stress response proteins

### Description
Exposures to low doses of ionizing radiation are relevant since most environmental, diagnostic radiology and occupational exposures lie in this region. However, the molecular mechanisms that drive cellular responses at these doses, and the subsequent health outcomes, remain unclear. A local monazite-rich high level natural radiation area (HLNRA) in the state of Kerala on the south-west coast of Indian subcontinent show radiation doses extending from ≤1 to ≥45 mGy/y and thus, serve as a model resource to understand low dose mechanisms directly on healthy humans. We performed quantitative discovery proteomics based on multiplexed isobaric tags (iTRAQ) coupled with LC-MS/MS on human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from HLNRA individuals. Several proteins involved in diverse biological processes such as DNA repair, RNA processing, chromatin modifications and cytoskeletal organization showed distinct expression in HLNRA individuals, suggestive of both recovery and adaptation to low dose radiation. In protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, YWHAZ (14-3-3ζ) emerged as the top-most hub protein that may direct phosphorylation driven pro-survival cellular processes against radiation stress. PPI networks also identified an integral role for the cytoskeletal protein ACTB, signaling protein PRKACA; and the molecular chaperone HSPA8. The data will allow better integration of radiation biology and epidemiology for risk assessment.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared from PBMCs by sonication according to a previously published method and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion. For digestion, pooled proteins (100 μg) from each experimental group were treated with denaturant (2% SDS) for 1 h at room temperature. The disulfide bonds of proteins were reduced with 50 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 60oC for 1 h. Alkylation was performed for 30 min in dark by replacing the TCEP solution with cysteine-blocking reagent (200 mM iodoacetamide). Proteins were then digested with trypsin with a substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 20:1 overnight at 37oC. The digested peptides were concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The tryptic peptides were labelled with isobaric tags using iTRAQ Reagent Multiplex kit (AB Sciex, MA, USA). Label 114 was used for Group I pool samples (NLNRA), and labels 115, 116 and 117 for Group II, Group III and Group IV pools of HLNRA samples, respectively. The iTRAQ-labelled peptides were reconstituted in strong cation exchange (SCX) buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4 + 25% ACN, pH 3.0) and fractionated using BioBasic SCX (150 mm x 4.6 mm, 5µ particle size, 300 A˚ pore size) columns using a 75-min gradient at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. Retained peptides were eluted using the following gradient: 30-min with 100% Buffer A, followed by a linear increase to 25% Buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4 + 25% ACN + 350 mM KCl, pH 3), a second linear increase to 100% B for 10-min, and a final equilibration with 100% Buffer A for 15-min. A total of ten fractions were collected based on the retention time values and desalted with Zip-Tip C18 cartridges. Each SCX purified peptide fraction was re-dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Q-TOF Synapt G2 High Definition mass spectrometer connected to a nano-ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corp., MA, USA). The peptide fractions were injected into LC system with nano-ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column (Internal diameter - 75µm, Length - 150 mm, Particle size - 1.7µm, Column pore size - 130A˚, pH range - 2 to 10, Mode-reversed phase) for analysis. The eluted peptides were directed into Q-TOF instrument for mass spectrometric analysis for 200 min gradient run (flow rate-0.3 µL/min) using different combinations of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS Grade water) and B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated under Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired from the Q-TOF Synapt G2 High Definition mass spectrometer was processed with MassLynx 4.1 (Waters Corp., MA, USA). The raw data files were converted to mzML format using the MS convert proteowizard tool. Spectra acquired from each of the technical replicates were submitted individually to MassLynx 4.1 for peak list generation. Protein identification and quantification were simultaneously performed using inhouse Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK) by searching the individual peptide peak lists based on their m/z values against the UNIPROT database, specified for Homo sapiens taxonomy.  The search parameters of maximum missed cleavage of one were allowed in the trypsin digests with a peptide mass tolerance of 2.85 Da and a fragment tolerance of 1.5 ppm. Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ4plex (N-term), iTRAQ4plex (K) were chosen as fixed modifications and Oxidation (M) was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by using the automatic decoy database search algorithm of Mascot software. Minimum of one peptide was included for identification of each confident protein. Peak areas of the reporter ions from the isobaric tags were used to quantify relative abundance of proteins in the four experimental groups. The results were then exported into Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corp., USA) for manual data interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding exposures to low doses of ionizing radiation are relevant since most environmental, diagnostic radiology and occupational exposures lie in this region. However, the molecular mechanisms that drive cellular responses at these doses, and the subsequent health outcomes, remain unclear. A local monazite-rich high level natural radiation area (HLNRA) in the state of Kerala on the south-west coast of Indian subcontinent show radiation doses extending from&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;1 to&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;45&#xa0;mGy/y and thus, serve as a model resource to understand low dose mechanisms directly on healthy humans. We performed quantitative discovery proteomics based on multiplexed isobaric tags (iTRAQ) coupled with LC-MS/MS on human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from HLNRA individuals. Several proteins involved in diverse biological processes such as DNA repair, RNA processing, chromatin modifications and cytoskeletal organization showed distinct expression in HLNRA individuals, suggestive of both recovery and adaptation to low dose radiation. In protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, YWHAZ (14-3-3&#x3b6;) emerged as the top-most hub protein that may direct phosphorylation driven pro-survival cellular processes against radiation stress. PPI networks also identified an integral role for the cytoskeletal protein ACTB, signaling protein PRKACA; and the molecular chaperone HSPA8. The data will allow better integration of radiation biology and epidemiology for risk assessment [Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022380].

### Keywords
Chronic low dose radiation, High level natural radiation area (hlnra), Dose response analysis, Stress response, Itraq

### Affiliations
Bhabha Atomic Reasearch Centre
Radiation Signaling Group, Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bio-Science Group, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai - 400 085, India and Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Mumbai - 400 094, India

### Submitter
Anu Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Anu Ghosh
Radiation Signaling Group, Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bio-Science Group, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai - 400 085, India and Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Mumbai - 400 094, India


