### Accession
PXD038285

### Title
Proteomics profiling of vitreous humor reveals complement and coagulation components, adhesion factors, and neurodegeneration markers as discriminatory biomarkers of vitreoretinal eye diseases

### Description
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) and age-related macular degeneration (AMD) are leading causes of visual impairment and blindness in people aged 50 years or older in middle-income and industrialized countries. Anti-VEGF therapies have improved the management of neovascular AMD (nAMD) and proliferative DR (PDR), no treatment options exist for the highly prevalent dry form of AMD. To unravel the biological processes underlying these pathologies and to find new potential biomarkers, a label-free quantitative (LFQ) method was applied to analyze the vitreous proteome in PDR (n=4), AMD (n=4) compared to idiopathic epiretinal membranes (ERM) (n=4). Post-hoc tests revealed 96 proteins capable of differentiating among the different groups, whereas 118 proteins were found differentially regulated in PDR compared to ERM and 95 proteins in PDR compared to dry AMD. The pathway analysis indicates that mediators of complement and coagulation cascades and acute phase responses are enriched in PDR vitreous, whilst proteins highly correlated to the extracellular matrix (ECM) organization, platelet degranulation, lysosomal degradation, cell adhesion, and central nervous system development were found underexpressed. According to these results, 35 proteins were selected and validated by MRM (multiple reaction monitoring) in a larger cohort of patients with ERM (n=21), DR/PDR (n=20), AMD (n=11), and retinal detachment (n=13). Of these, 26 proteins were validated and were capable of differentiating between vitreoretinal diseases under study. Based on Partial least squares discriminant and multivariate exploratory receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses, a panel of 15 discriminatory biomarkers was defined, which includes complement and coagulation components (CO2 and prothrombin), acute-phase mediators (alpha-1-antichymotrypsin), adhesion molecules (e.g., myocilin, galectin-3-binding protein), ECM components (opticin), and neurodegeneration biomarkers (beta-amyloid, amyloid-like protein 2).

### Sample Protocol
Vitreous samples were centrifuged at 18 400 x g for 15 min at 4ºC and supernatant protein concentration was determined using a colorimetric assay (Pierce 660 nm protein assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA), according to manufacturer&#39;s instructions. For the removal of high-abundant proteins in vitreous, 400 µg of protein was depleted using High Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Mini Spin Columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Massachusetts, USA), Briefly, 300 µl of sample was mixed with the resin by inverting the column several times until completely homogeneous and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Depleted vitreous samples were recovered by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 2 min and concentrated using Nanosep® Centrifugal Devices 10K (Pall, Madrid, Spain). Then, samples were solubilized with loading sample buffer,denaturized at 60 ºC for 10 min, loaded, and concentrated in a 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) gel. After Quick Coomassie staining, protein bands were manually excised, cut into cubes (1 mm2), and placed in 96-well plates. In-gel tryptic digestion was performed automatically in a Proteineer DP robot (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), as previously described (36) . Tryptic peptides were extracted by adding 1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile, collected from wells, dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation, and frozen at -20ºC until further processing.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a nanoLC Ultra 1D plus (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 System via a Nanospray III source. Tryptic peptides were solubilized using solvent A (2% acetonitrile [ACN] in water, 0.1% FA) and the concentration was determined using Qubit assay (Thermo Fisher), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Tryptic peptides (1 µg) were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 trapping column (Thermo Scientific, 100 µm I.D. × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å) using solvent A at 2 µL/min and, after desalting, switched online with an Acquity UPLC® M-Class Peptide BEH C18 analytical Column (Waters, 75 µm × 15 cm, 1.7 µm, 130 Å). Peptides were fractionated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min in a 250 min gradient with increasing concentrations of ACN (2% to 90%). TripleTOF 5600 system was operated in positive ion mode with an ion spray voltage of 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) of 35, interface heater temperature (IHT) of 150ºC, ion source gas 1 (GS1) of 25, and declustering potential (DP) of 100 V. Data was acquired in information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, USA). IDA parameters were: survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 m/z, accumulation time of 250 ms, followed by MS2 spectrum accumulation for 100 ms(100–1800 m/z) in a cycle of 4.04 sec. The criteria for MS/MS fragmentation were defined for ions in 350-1250 m/z range with a charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold greater than 90 counts. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameter script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, Version 1.6.5.0) was used to generate peak lists from raw files,peptide and protein identification after database search, and for LFQ intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Andromeda search engine was used to search the acquired MS/MS spectra against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens database (20418 reviewed protein sequences). Search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln→pyro-Glu and, Glu→pyro-Glu as variable modifications, trypsin/P as protease allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance at 0.01 Da. Proteins identified only with modified peptides (“only by site”), reversed sequences, and potential contaminants were removed from the reported identified protein groups. For LFQ, multiplicity was set at 1, LFQ min ratio counts at 2, and the options “iBAQ” and “match between runs” (time window of 0.7 min and alignment of 20 min) were selected. The false discovery rate (FDR) of peptides and proteins was set at 1%. Additionally, mgf. files were generated using Peak View (AB SCIEX) and searched using Mascot v.2.2.04 against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens reviewed database, as described above. Search parameters were identical to those previously described but peptide mass tolerance was set as 25 ppm and MS/MS fragment tolerance as 0.05 Da. FDR of ≤1% at the peptide level was assessed by applying a target-Decoy approach, in which MS/MS data were searched against both the target database and the decoy sequence database, containing reversed shuffled peptide sequences (37).  The protein normalized intensity lists of the 12 vitreous samples from PDR (n=4), nAMD (n=4), and ERM (n=4) groups were processed using Perseus software (version 1.6.10.0). The normalized intensity was calculated by dividing the intensity of each protein by the sum of the intensity of all proteins detected in that sample and multiplying it by the median of the sum of the intensity of all proteins detected in vitreous samples. Depleted proteins, potential contaminants, reversed and proteins only identified by site were removed. Data were logarithmized (Log2), filtered by valid values (min 70% of valid values), and missing values were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution (width=0.3, shift=1.8). Multi-scatter plots and histograms were applied to evaluate data quality. Post-hoc tests, hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis (PCA), and two-sample t-tests were performed for differentiating the three groups in terms of protein MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, Version 1.6.5.0) was used to generate peak lists from raw files, peptide and protein identification after database search, and for LFQ intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ). Andromeda search engine was used to search the acquired MS/MS spectra against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens database (20418 reviewed protein sequences). Search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln→pyro-Glu and, Glu→pyro-Glu as variable modifications, trypsin/P as protease allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance at 0.01 Da. Proteins identified only with modified peptides (“only by site”), reversed sequences, and potential contaminants were removed from the reported identified protein groups. For LFQ, multiplicity was set at 1, LFQ min ratio counts at 2, and the options “iBAQ” and “match between runs” (time window of 0.7 min and alignment of 20 min) were selected. The false discovery rate (FDR) of peptides and proteins was set at 1%. Additionally, mgf. files were generated using Peak View (AB SCIEX) and searched using Mascot v.2.2.04 against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens reviewed database, as described above. Search parameters were identical to those previously described but peptide mass tolerance was set as 25 ppm and MS/MS fragment tolerance as 0.05 Da. FDR of ≤1% at the peptide level was assessed by applying a target-Decoy approach, in which MS/MS data were searched against both the target database and the decoy sequence database, containing reversed shuffled peptide sequences (37).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retinal detachment, Age-related macular degeneration, Neurodegeneration, Proliferative diabetic retinopathy, Biomarkers, Extracellular matrix, Complement and coagulation cascades, Vitreous proteomics.

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Calle Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.
CNB

### Submitter
Fátima Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Alberto Paradela
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Calle Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.


