### Accession
PXD006171

### Title
Phosphoproteome and proteome of T. cruzi metacyclogenesis

### Description
Trypanosoma cruzi metacyclogenesis is a natural process that occurs inside triatomine insect vector and corresponds to the differentiation of non-infective epimastigotes into infective metacyclic trypomastigotes. Here, centered on LC-MS/MS approach, a large scale phospho (proteome) study was carried out aiming to quantitatively understand the metacyclogenesis. Cells were colected along metacyclogenesis totalizing six points, stress 2 hours, adhered 12, 24 and 48 hours, and metacyclic trypomastigote from two biological replicates. After extraction, total protein were digested, fractioned and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The samples for phosphoproteomics were processed for phosphopeptide enrichment prior to the analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were collected at the desired points along metacyclogenesis, lysed and the total protein extract (about 10 mg) were digested by FASP procedure. After, the eluted peptides were desalting and subjected to fracionation by reversed phase high pH technique generating 4 fractions (ACN 10%, 14%, 18% and 60%). Then, 0.5 mg peptide was processed to phosphopeptide enrichment by TiO2. All fractions were desalted and analyzed in triplicate (proteomics) or duplicate (phosphoproteomics) by LC-MS/MS. Chromatographic separation of the peptide mixtures was done in a 30 cm fused silica emitter (75 µm inner diameter) in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin. Peptide mixtures were separated on a flow rate of 250 nL /min of 0.5% formic acid, 5% DMSO with a linear gradient from 5% to 28% MeCN in 207 min and from 28% to 40% MeCN in 23 min (240 min total gradient) for the proteomics analysis. Phosphopeptides were separated with a linear gradient from 5% to 40% MeCN in 120 min. Full-scan MS spectra (at 300–1650 m/z range) were acquired on Orbitrap analyzer with resolution of 60,000 and the “lock mass” option enabled (m/z = 401.922718). MS/MS was acquired in DDA acquisition mode where the seven (phosphoproteomics) or ten (proteomics) most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by CID. An activation q of 0.25, activation time of 30 ms, normalized collision energy of 35% and a threshold of 100 counts for ion selection was applied to the MS2 acquisitions. MSA collision-induced dissociation was selected for phosphoproteomics. The general conditions for MS were: spray voltage of 2.3 kV; no cover and auxiliary gas flow; and ion transfer tube temperature of 175 ºC.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.2.8). Proteins and phosphorylation sites were identified by automatic search against 11,346 protein sequences (downloaded on April 2016 from Uniprot). Contaminant proteins (Achromobacter lyticus lysyl endopeptidase, human keratins, BSA and porcine trypsin) and the reverse of all sequences, including contaminant ones, were also added to the database and when identified were manually removed from the result list. Search parameters on MaxQuant specified a MS spectra accuracy of 20 ppm (first search) and 4.5 ppm (second search), CID MS/MS spectra accuracy of 0.5 Da, and full trypsin specificity allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation of proteins was set as variable modification. For phosphoproteomic search, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine (STY) were also allowed as variable modifications. Peptides were required to have at least 7 amino acids in length, and 1% FDR was applied at the levels of peptides, proteins and phosphorylation sites. The option match between runs was enabled to transfer identifications across replicate experiments. For the quantification, the peptides eluted from each LC run were detected as three-dimensional features (retention time versus signal intensity - extracted ion chromatogram, XIC, versus mass/charge) and consecutively compared across the runs.

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosoma cruzi metacyclogenesis is a natural process that occurs inside the triatomine vector and corresponds to the differentiation of non-infective epimastigotes into infective metacyclic trypomastigotes. The biochemical alterations necessary for the differentiation process have been widely studied with a focus on adhesion and nutritional stress. Here, using a mass spectrometry approach, a large-scale phospho(proteome) study was performed with the aim of understanding the metacyclogenesis processes in a quantitative manner. The results indicate that major modulations in the phospho(proteome) occur under nutritional stress and after 12 and 24 h of adhesion. Significant changes involve key cellular processes, such as translation, oxidative stress, and the metabolism of macromolecules, including proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates. Analysis of the signalling triggered by kinases and phosphatases from 7,336 identified phosphorylation sites demonstrates that 260 of these sites are modulated throughout the differentiation process, and some of these modulated proteins have previously been identified as drug targets in trypanosomiasis treatment. To the best of our knowledge, this study provides the first quantitative results highlighting the modulation of phosphorylation sites during metacyclogenesis and the greater coverage of the proteome to the parasite during this process. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier number PXD006171.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Proteomics, Metacyclogenesis, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Carlos Chagas Institute
Funcional Genomics Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil

### Submitter
juliana carolina amorim

### Lab Head
Dr Fabricio Klerynton Marchini
Funcional Genomics Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil


