### Accession
PXD015661

### Title
IDENTIFICATION OF THE CANIDAE IRON REGULATORY HORMONE HEPCIDIN

### Description
Quantification and characterisation of canine hepcidin by LC-MS

### Sample Protocol
Abundant proteins of greyhound serum were removed by organic solvent precipitation and centrifugation, Hepcidin was isolated following the methods of Gummer et al. 2016 using solid phase extraction

### Data Protocol
Raw Wiff files were convertered to MGF using ProteoWizard version 3, Ions were then visulised using Peaks Studio 10 and Identified by manual de novo sequencing at retention time 3.75 minutes. mzIdentML file was generated using the online MASCOT MS/MS Ions Search in October of 2019, the PEAkS file used have ions with an intensity of <0.0 removed to reach the 10,000 ions limit of MASCOT MS/MS Ions Search. The complete PEAKS list is also provided.

### Publication Abstract
Hepcidins are an evolutionarily conserved class of liver-expressed peptide, from which the twenty-five amino acid hormone, hepcidin-25 (herein hepcidin), has gained significant notoriety as the master regulator of iron homeostasis in mammals. Hepcidin maintains iron homeostasis by controlling the dietary absorption of iron and the mechanisms of recycling cellular iron stores. With the physiological significance of this hormone well established, it has emerged as an informative biomarker. In a comparison of the genome, transcriptome and peptidome of Canis lupis familiaris, we reveal the size of the hepcidin peptide in the canine, previous reports of which were contradictory to the evolutionary conservation predicted by genome annotation. Here, measurement of the peptide by mass spectrometry, following isolation from greyhound blood serum, revealed an amino acid sequence and peptide mass, differing from all accounts to date, yet demonstrating perfect sequence identity to that of the greater Canidae lineage of the Carnivora. Importantly, in the greyhound, the measured hepcidin peptide showed a similar temporal pattern to total serum iron, consistent with our understanding of hepcidin regulating iron homeostasis, in agreement with human diagnostics, and providing added translational evidence of the measured peptide being the iron regulatory hormone of the Canidae.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hepcidin, Canine

### Affiliations
Murdoch University
Research Fellow  Research and Innovation, Murdoch University

### Submitter
Martin Mead

### Lab Head
Dr Joel Gummer
Research Fellow  Research and Innovation, Murdoch University


