### Accession
PXD035628

### Title
Structural perturbation at the N-terminal domain of human phosphoglycerate kinase 1 reduces the kinetic stability and unfolding cooperativity of a two-domain enzyme

### Description
Phosphoglycerate kinase has been a model for the stability, folding cooperativity and catalysis of a two-domain protein. The human isoform 1 (hPGK1) is associated with cancer development and rare genetic diseases that affect several of their features. To investigate how mutations affect hPGK1 folding landscape, we have designed and introduced mutations at a buried site in the N-terminal domain (F25 mutants) that either created cavities (F25L, F25V, F25A), enhanced conformational entropy (F25G) or introduced structural strain (F25W) and evaluated their effects using biophysical experimental and theoretical methods. All F25 mutants folded well, but showed reduced unfolding cooperativity, kinetic stability and altered activation energetics according to the results from thermal and chemical denaturation analyses. These alterations correlated well with the structural perturbation caused by mutations and the destabilization caused in the interdomain interface. Importantly, experimental and theoretical analyses showed that these effects are significant even when the perturbation is mild and local based on biophysical and HDX-MS analyses. Our approach will be useful to establish the molecular basis of hPGK1 genotype-phenotype correlations due to phosphorylation events and single amino acid substitutions associated with disease in vitro and inside cells

### Sample Protocol
Backbone amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange (HDX) was monitored for hPGK1 wild type (WT) and mutant variants F25A, F25G, F25L, F25V, F25W using mass spectrometry. 20 μM protein solution was 10× diluted with a D2O-based 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), pD 7.4, to start the exchange reaction. The exchange was terminated after 10 s, 30 s, 2 min, 5 min, 20 min, 1 h, 3 h 20 min and 20 h by mixing (1:1) with 0.5 M Glycine-HCl, pH 2.3 and the samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Time points 30 s, 5 min and 3 h 20 min were replicated. Custom-made nepenthesin-2 column was used for online proteolysis and the peptides were trapped and desalted on a SecurityGuard™ pre-column (ULTRA Cartridges UHPLC Fully Porous Polar C18, 2.1 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). Solvent for this step - 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water - was pumped by 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow rate of 150 μl·min-1. Subsequent peptide separation was performed on an analytical column (LUNA® Omega Polar C18 Column, 100 Å, 1.6 µm, 100 mm X 1.0 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using linear gradient (5-45% B in 6 min) followed by a quick step to 99% B lasting 5 min pumped by 1290 Infinity II LC System (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow of 40 μl·min-1. Solvent A was 0.1% FA / 2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, B was 0.1% FA / 98% ACN in water. Digestion, desalting, and separation were performed at 0 °C and pH 2.3 to minimize deuterium back-exchange. LC system was directly coupled to an ESI source of 15T FT-ICR mass spectrometer (solariX XR, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) operating in broad-band MS mode.

### Data Protocol
Fully deuterated control was prepared for each PGK1 variant and was used to correct back-exchange levels. MS data were exported using DataAnalysis 5.3 and processed by in-house developed program Deutex. Peptide identification was done in a separate data-dependent LC-MS/MS run performed using the identical LC settings but connected to ESI-timsTOF Pro with PASEF. LC-MS/MS data were exported to mgf files using DataAnalysis 5.3 and searched by MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, UK) against a database containing hPGK1 sequences, nepenthesin-2 and cRAP contaminant sequences. Decoy search was enabled with false-discovery ratio < 1% and Ion Score cut-off 15.

### Publication Abstract
Guanidino acids such as taurocyamine, guanidinobutyrate, guanidinopropionate, and guanidinoacetate have been detected in humans. However, except for guanidionacetate, which is a precursor of creatine, their metabolism and potential functions remain poorly understood. Agmatine has received considerable attention as a potential neurotransmitter and the human enzyme so far annotated as agmatinase (AGMAT) has been proposed as an important modulator of agmatine levels. However, conclusive evidence for the assigned enzymatic activity is lacking. Here we show that AGMAT hydrolyzed a range of linear guanidino acids but was virtually inactive with agmatine. Structural modelling and direct biochemical assays indicated that two naturally occurring variants differ in their substrate preferences. A negatively charged group in the substrate at the end opposing the guanidine moiety was essential for efficient catalysis, explaining why agmatine was not hydrolyzed. We suggest to rename AGMAT as guanidino acid hydrolase (GDAH). Additionally, we demonstrate that the GDAH substrates taurocyamine, guanidinobutyrate and guanidinopropionate were produced by human glycine amidinotransferase (GATM). The presented findings show for the first time an enzymatic activity for GDAH/AGMAT. Since agmatine has frequently been proposed as an endogenous neurotransmitter, the current findings clarify important aspects of the metabolism of agmatine and guanidino acid derivatives in humans.

### Keywords
Protein folding; structural perturbation; disease

### Affiliations
BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic

### Submitter
Dmitry Loginov

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


