### Accession
PXD000457

### Title
Large scale proteomics of cholesteatoma

### Description
The study describes comprehensive proteomics data of the cholesteatoma disease. Cholesteatoma is a serious and destructive growth of keratinizing squamous epithelium in the middle ear, with a poorly understood etiopathogenesis. The large scale proteomics approach used in this study highly expands our molecular knowledge of cholesteatoma and implicates several biological functions in its pathology. Human samples of cholesteatoma, neck of cholesteatoma, tympanic membrane, external auditory canal skin, and middle ear mucosa were analyzed. Approximately two thousand unique proteins were identified by label-free nanoLC-MS/MS proteomics.        The protein and peptide identification data were obtained by Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.3.0.339) processing of LTQ Orbitrap raw files using the Mascot algorithm (Matrix Sciences, version 2.4.0). To yield comprehensive proteome data the tissue biopsy was separated into ten protein fractions, which were MS analysed separately, and the resulting MS files were subsequently merged in the database analysis. Precursor mass tolerance was 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Dynamic Modification was Oxidation (M) and Static Modification was Carbamidomethyl (C); annotated in the PRIDE files as mass deviations (e g for double charged peptides m/z deviation of approximately 8.00 and 28.51 for modification of Met and Cys, respectively). FASTA file was SwissProt_2012_03.fasta (containing 20,255 Homo sapiens sequences). MudPit scoring was applied, and up to two missed trypsin cleavages were accepted. Peptide cut off Score was 10 and protein relevance threshold was 20.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Cholesteatoma is the growth of keratinizing squamous epithelium in the middle ear. It is associated with severe complications and has a poorly understood etiopathogenesis. Here, we present the results from extensive bioinformatics analyses of the first large-scale proteomic investigation of cholesteatoma. The purpose of this study was to take an unbiased approach to identifying alterations in protein expression and in biological processes, in order to explain the characteristic phenotype of this skin-derived tumor. Five different human tissue types (cholesteatoma, neck of cholesteatoma, tympanic membrane, external auditory canal skin, and middle ear mucosa) were analyzed. More than 2,400 unique proteins were identified using nanoLC-MS/MS based proteomics (data deposited to the ProteomeXchange), and 295 proteins were found to be differentially regulated in cholesteatoma. Validation analyses were performed by SRM mass spectrometry. Proteins found to be up- or down-regulated in cholesteatoma were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and clustered into functional groups, for which activation state and associations to disease processes were predicted. Cholesteatoma contained high levels of pro-inflammatory S100 proteins, such as S100A7A and S100A7. Several proteases, such as ELANE, were up-regulated, whereas extracellular matrix proteins, such as COL18A1 and NID2, were under-represented. This may lead to alterations in integrity and differentiation of the tissue (as suggested by the up-regulation of KRT4 in the cholesteatoma). The presented data on the differential protein composition in cholesteatoma corroborate previous studies, highlight novel protein functionalities involved in the pathogenesis, and identify new areas for targeted research that hold therapeutic potential for the disease.

### Keywords
Epithel, Cholesteatoma, Biopsy, Mucosa, Patient, Tympanic membrane, Middle ear

### Affiliations
Research Unit of Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Johan Palmfeldt

### Lab Head


