### Accession
PXD010871

### Title
Prosit: Proteome-wide prediction of peptide tandem mass spectra by deep learning

### Description
In this study, we extended the ProteomeTools peptide library (PROPEL, see PXD004732 and PXD010595) to train a deep neural network resulting in chromatographic retention time and fragment ion intensity predictions for (tryptic) peptides that exceed the quality of the experimental data.

### Sample Protocol
For training we used the publicly available ProteomeTools data (PRIDE Dataset PXD004732 and PXD010595).

### Data Protocol
Data from the ProteomeTools project was searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) with 1% FDR filter at PSM, Protein or Site level. MS2 spectra were extracted from the RAW files using Thermo Fisher’s RawFileReader (http://planetorbitrap.com/rawfilereader). The extracted spectra were then annotated, whereas y- and b-ions were annotated at fragment charges 1 up to 3. Spectral and retention time training data was split into three distinct sets and used for machine learning. External data for subsequent Percolator processing was searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) with no FDR filter at PSM, Protein or Site level

### Publication Abstract
In mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, the identification and quantification of peptides and proteins heavily rely on sequence database searching or spectral library matching. The lack of accurate predictive models for fragment ion intensities impairs the realization of the full potential of these approaches. Here, we extended the ProteomeTools synthetic peptide library to 550,000 tryptic peptides and 21&#x2009;million high-quality tandem mass spectra. We trained a deep neural network, termed Prosit, resulting in chromatographic retention time and fragment ion intensity predictions that exceed the quality of the experimental data. Integrating Prosit into database search pipelines led to more identifications at &gt;10&#xd7; lower false discovery rates. We show the general applicability of Prosit by predicting spectra for proteases other than trypsin, generating spectral libraries for data-independent acquisition and improving the analysis of metaproteomes. Prosit is integrated into ProteomicsDB, allowing search result re-scoring and custom spectral library generation for any organism on the basis of peptide sequence alone.

### Keywords
Dda, Predicted spectra, Spectral library, Machine learning, Irt, Proteometools, Synthetic peptides, Retention time, Dia, Prosit

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Tobias Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany


