### Accession
PXD033437

### Title
Label-free proteomic analysis of the HCC secretome and compared the protein profiles of human PLC liver cancer cells with that of human THLE3 hepatocytes secreted in conditioned medium

### Description
To identify potential factors related to the development and progression of HCC, we employed label-free proteomic analysis of the HCC secretome and compared the protein profiles of human PLC liver cancer cells with that of human THLE3 hepatocytes secreted in conditioned medium.

### Sample Protocol
Before harvesting secreted proteins, cells were cultured in serum starvation condition for 24 hours. Collected the media and filtered with 0.22µm filter (Millipore) to ensure removal of any dead cells. Thereafter samples were transferred to an Amicon Ultra-4 3K molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filter (Millipore), spun down until the remaining liquid is up to minimum volume. Transferred the remaining liquid to new tubes as the concentrated secreted proteins mixture. Harvest at least 100µg of secreted proteins per condition. Determine the protein concentration of the supernatant using established methods such as the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Sangon biology). Guanidine hydrochloride were added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 4M for secreted proteins denature. Then the proteins were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 45min and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 30min. The alkylation was quenched by DTT at the final concentration of 20mM at room temperature. Then 100µg protein mixture were transferred to the 3kD molecular weight cut-off filter, spun down and washed twice with 100mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.0). Then the proteins were resuspended in 100μL 50mM HEPES (pH 8.0) in the filter and digested by trypsin at a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w) (overnight, 37 °C). Then the digested peptides were filtered with 10kD molecular weight cut-off filter, desalted using Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were vacuum dried for HPLC−MS/MS analysis.  For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were analyzed on an QE-plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with an EASY-nLC 1200 nano liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were dissolved in mobile phase buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water) and loaded onto Precolumn (Nano Trap 100µm i.d. x 20mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5µm, 100Å) and Analytical column (PepMap C18 2μm 50μm x 150mm NV FS 1200bar) by an autosampler. Then the peptides were separated and eluted with a linear gradient of 3%–8% of mobile phase buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile) for 3min, 8%-28% buffer B for 70min, 28%-45% buffer B for 35min, 45%-90% buffer B for 2min, and 90% buffer B for 10min at the flow rate of 300nL/min on HPLC system. The eluted peptides were ionized under high voltage (2.2 KV) and detected by QE-plus using nano-spray ion source (NSI). For full MS scan, peptides with 350–1700 m/z were detected at the resolution 70000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1 x 106, and maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms. The ions with intensity above 2 × 104 were subjected to fragmentation via high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with 27% normalized collision energy (NCE). The fragmented ions were analyzed in Orbitrap. The AGC target in the ion trap was set to 1 x 105, and the isolation window was 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All data analysis was conducted using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.5). The reviewed human proteins documented with key word “secreted” in Uniprot database was downloaded as target human secreted protein database, the reviewed human proteins in Uniprot database was downloaded as target human protein database. First search peptide mass tolerance was 20p.p.m. and main search peptide mass tolerance was 4.5p.p.m. MS/MS match tolerance was set to 0.5Da. For the peptide identification via peptide spectrum matching the FDR was controlled with a standard target-decoy approach. 1% peptide FDR was applied at PSM level. Enzyme specificity with trypsin was used, and maximum missing cleavages was set as two. The fixed modification was set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term). False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein and peptide were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plc, Thle3, Hcc, Secretome

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China

### Submitter
Ting Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Huafeng Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China


