### Accession
PXD005579

### Title
A Unique Ribosome Signature Reveals bacterium Translation Initiation Sites

### Description
Overnight stationary cultures of wild type S. Typhimurium (Salmonella enterica serovar Thyphimurium - strain SL1344) grown in LB media at 37°C with agitation (200 rpm) were diluted at 1:200 in LB and grown until they reached and OD600 of 0.5 (i.e., logarithmic (Log) phase grown cells). Bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation (6000 × g, 5 min) at 4°C, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and cryogenically pulverized using liquid nitrogen cooled pestle and mortar. The frozen pellet of a 50 ml culture was re-suspended and thawed in 1 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mm NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9) supplemented with a complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) and subjected to mechanical disruption by two repetitive freeze-thaw and sonication cycles (i.e. 2 minutes of sonication on ice for 20-s bursts at output level 4 with a 40% duty cycle (Branson Sonifier 250; Ultrasonic Convertor)). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 × g and the protein concentration measured using the protein assay kit (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The lysate was added Gu.HCl (4M f.c.) and subjected to N-terminal COFRADIC analysis. Free amines were blocked at the protein level making use of an N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of (stable isotopic encoded) acetate (i.e. NHS esters of 13C2D3 acetate), which allows distinguishing in vivo and in vitro blocked N-terminal peptides. The modified protein sample was digested overnight with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/100 (w/w trypsin /substrate)) at 37°C and subsequent steps of the N-terminal COFRADIC procedure were performed.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC (Dionex, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The sample mixture was loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). After back flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 m I.D. × 150 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded in solvent A’ (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN)) and separated with a linear gradient from 2% solvent A’’ (0.1% formic acid) to 50% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a wash reaching 100% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60,000. The ten most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 1E4 ion counts. Mascot Generic Files were created from the MS/MS data in each LC run using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com/Distiller.html). To generate these MS/MS peak lists, grouping of spectra was allowed with a maximum intermediate retention time of 30 s and a maximum intermediate scan count of 5. Grouping was done with a 0.005 Da precursor tolerance. A peak list was only generated when the MS/MS spectrum contained more than 10 peaks. There was no de-isotoping and the relative signal-to-noise limit was set at 2.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). Searches were performed using a 6-FT database of the S. Typhimurium (Salmonella enterica serovar Thyphimurium - strain SL1344) genome combined with the Ensembl protein sequence database (assembly ASM21085v2, version 86.1). All redundant sequences were then removed resulting to a total 139408 entries. The 6-FT database was generated by traversing the entire genome across the six reading frames and searching for all NTG (N=A,T,C,G) start codons and extending each to the nearest in frame stop codon (TAA,TGA,TAG), and at least 7aa long.  The Mascot search parameters were set as follows: Heavy acetylation at lysine side-chains (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) (K)), carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were formylation, acetylation and heavy acetylation of N-termini (Acetyl:2H(3)C13(2) (N-term)) and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine (both at peptide level). Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (semi Arg-C specificity with Arg-Pro cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme allowing for no missed cleavages. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm on the precursor ion and to 0.5 Da on fragment ions. Peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only peptides that scored above the threshold score, set at 95% confidence, and belonged to the category of in vivo or in vitro blocked N-terminal peptides compliant with the rules of initiator methionine (iMet) processing were withheld

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap velos, Salmonella t. str sl1344, N-terminal cofradic, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
University of Ghent
Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Petra Van Damme

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Belgium


