### Accession
PXD026982

### Title
Mildly  pathogenic Rickettsia-macrophage interactions

### Description
The molecular details underlying differences in pathogenicity between Rickettsia species remain to be fully understood. Evidence points to macrophage permissiveness as a key mechanism in rickettsial virulence. Different studies have shown that several rickettsial species responsible for mild forms of rickettsioses can also escape macrophage-mediated killing mechanisms and establish a replicative niche within these cells. However, their manipulative capacity with respect to host cellular processes is far from being understood. A deeper understanding of the interplay between mildly pathogenic rickettsiae and macrophages and the commonalities and specificities of host responses to infection would illuminate differences in immune evasion mechanisms and pathogenicity. We have used quantitative proteomics by SWATH-MS/MS to profile alterations resulting from infection of THP-1 macrophages with three mildly pathogenic rickettsiae: R. parkeri, R. africae, and R. massiliae, all successfully proliferating in these cells. We show that all three species trigger different proteome signatures. Our results reveal a significant impact of infection in proteins categorized as type-I interferon responses, here included several components of the RIG-1-like signaling pathway, mRNA splicing, and protein translation. Moreover, significant differences in protein content between infection conditions anticipate species-specific induced alterations. Indeed, we confirm a distinct impact on host inflammatory responses between species during infection, demonstrating that these species trigger different levels of INF-β, differences in the bioavailability of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL1-β, and in triggering pyroptotic events. This work reveals novel aspects and exciting nuances of macrophage-Rickettsia interactions, adding additional layers of complexity between Rickettsia and host cells constant arms race for survival.

### Sample Protocol
PMA-differentiated THP-1 cells monolayers at a cell confluency of 2×105 cells per well, in 24 well plates (6 wells per condition) were infected with R. parkeri, R. africae, and R. massiliae at MOI of 10 or maintained uninfected as control. Plates were centrifuged at 300xg for 5min at room temperature to induce contact between rickettsiae and host cells, and incubated at 34°C and 5% CO2 for 24h. At 24h, culture medium was removed, cells were washed 1x with PBS and total protein was extracted using 100 μL of protein extraction buffer per well [25 mM Tris/HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, and Pierce protease inhibitors tablet (ThermoFisher Scientific), pH 7.0]. Samples were passed 10 times through Insulin Syringe with 28-gauge needle (Becton Dickinson) and denatured using 6x SDS sample buffer (4x Tris/HCl, 30% glycerol, 10% SDS, 0.6 M DTT, 0.012% Bromophenol Blue, pH 6.8) for 10min at 95°C. Total protein content was assessed using Pierce 660nm protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) and samples were kept at -80°C. Experiments were done in quadruplicate. After thawing, 10μg of each replicate from each experimental condition were pooled, creating four pools (R. parkeri, R. africae, R. massiliae, and uninfected pool). The same amount of a recombinant protein (malE-GFP) was added to each sample to serve as an internal standard. All the samples were boiled for 5min and acrylamide was added as an alkylating agent. Forty μg of each replicate as well as pooled samples was loaded into a precast gel (4–20%Mini-Protean TGX Gel, Bio-Rad), and the SDS-PAGE was partially run at 110V. After SDS-PAGE, proteins were stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. The lanes were sliced into 3 fractions. The gel pieces were de-stained using a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by a washing step with water [each step performed in a thermomixer (Eppendorf) at 1,050 x rpm for 15min]. The gel pieces were dehydrated on Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf). To each gel band 75μL of trypsin (0.01 μg/μL solution in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were added and left for 15min at 4°C to rehydrate. After this period, 75μL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added and in-gel digestion was performed overnight at room temperature in the dark. After digestion, the excess solution from gel pieces was collected to a low binding microcentrifuge tube (LoBind, Eppendorf) and peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequential addition of 3 solutions of increasing % of ACN (30, 50, and 98%) in 1% formic acid (FA). After each solution, the gel pieces were shaken in a thermomixer at 1,250 rpm for 15min and the solution was collected to the same tube. The peptides from the pooled samples were kept separated in the 3 fractions. After digestion, all samples were subjected to solid phase extraction with C18 sorbent (OMIX tip, Agilent Technologies). The eluted peptides were evaporated and solubilized in mobile phase, aided by ultrasonication (Vibra-cell 750 watt, Sonics). Samples were centrifuged for 5min at 14,100 × g and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The Triple TOF 6600 System (Sciex) was operated in two phases: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of each fraction of the pooled samples; followed by SWATH acquisition of each sample. Peptide separation was performed using liquid chromatography (nanoLC 425, Eksigent) on a Triart C18 Capillary Column 1/32" (12 nm, S-3µm, 150 x 0.3 mm, YMC) and using a Triart C18 Capillary Guard Column (0.5 × 5 mm, 3 μm, 12nm, YMC) at 50°C at 5 μL/min with a 50min gradient from 5 to 30% ACN in 0.1% FA in a total run of 65min, the peptides were eluted into the MS using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray Source, Sciex). IDA experiments were performed by analyzing the pooled samples. The MS was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-2,250 m/z) for 250ms, followed by 50 MS/MS scans [100–1,500 m/z with an accumulation time of 60ms to maintain a cycle time of 3.3s]. Candidate ions with a charge state between +1 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 100 cps were isolated for fragmentation and 1 MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15s (MS operated by Analyst TF 1.8, Sciex). Rolling collision energy (CE) was used with a CE spread of 5. The SWATH setup was essentially as in Gillet, 2012, with the same chromatographic conditions used for IDA. The MS was operated in a looped product ion mode. The setup was designed to adapt the SWATH windows to the complexity of these samples. A set of 168 windows of variable width was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-2,250 m/z. A 500ms survey scan (350-2,250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100 to 2,250 m/z for 19ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.76s from the precursors ranging from 350 to 2,250 m/z. The CE for each window was determined according to a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with variable CE spread.

### Data Protocol
Specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions were created by combining all files from the IDA experiments, and used for subsequent SWATH processing. The library was obtained using Protein PilotTM software (v5.0.1, Sciex), with the following search parameters: Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (downloaded in September 2020) and malE-GFP; acrylamide alkylated cysteines as fixed modification; and the gel based special focus option. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis using the target-decoy approach provided with Protein Pilot software was used to assess the quality of the identifications, and positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5% local FDR. Data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakView (v2.2, Sciex), briefly peptides were selected from the library using the following criteria: (i) the unique peptides for a specific targeted protein were ranked by the intensity of the precursor ion from the IDA analysis as estimated by the Protein Pilot software, and (ii) Peptides that contained biological modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded from selection. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein, and SWATH quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the library file that were identified below 5% local FDR from Protein Pilot searches. Peptide’s retention time was adjusted by using the malE-GFP peptides. In SWATH Acquisition data, peptides are confirmed by finding and scoring peak groups, which are a set of fragment ions for the peptide. Up to 5 target fragment ions were automatically selected and the peak groups were scored following the criteria described in Lambert,2013. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on an FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and 1% extraction FDR threshold was used for all the analyses. Peptides that met the 1% FDR threshold in at least three replicates of a given experimental group were retained, and the peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiments using an extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 4min. Protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides for a given protein and normalized to the total intensity at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
And r. massiliae, Macrophages, Rickettsia, R. africae, Swath-ms, R. parkeri

### Affiliations
Center for neuroscience and cell biology
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Cátia Santa

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for neuroscience and cell biology


