### Accession
PXD029576

### Title
Proteomics Indicates Lactate Dehydrogenase is Prognostic in Acetaminophen-induced Acute Liver Failure Patients and Reveals a Role for LKB1-AMPK Signaling

### Description
Better biomarkers to predict death early in acute liver failure (ALF) are needed. To that end, we obtained early (study day 1) and later (day 3) serum samples from transplant-free survivors (n=28) and non-survivors (n=30) of acetaminophen (APAP)-induced ALF from the NIH-sponsored Acute Liver Failure Study Group, and from control volunteers (n=10). To identify proteins that increase early in serum during ALF, we selected individuals from this cohort for whom ALT was lower on day 1 than day 3, indicating a time point before the peak of injury (n=10/group). We then performed untargeted proteomics on their day 1 samples. Out of 1,682 quantifiable proteins, 79 were elevated ≥4-fold in ALF patients vs. controls and 23 of those were further elevated ≥4-fold in non-survivors vs. survivors, indicating potential to predict death. Interestingly, the biomarker with best performance was LDH. To confirm the prognostic potential of LDH, we measured activity in all day 1 and 3 samples from all 58 ALF patients. LDH was elevated in the non-survivors vs. survivors on both days. In addition, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses revealed that LDH alone performed similarly to the model for end-stage liver disease (MELD), while a combination of MELD and LDH outperformed either alone. Finally, Upstream Analysis of our proteomics data indicated activation of LKB1-AMPK signaling in liver regeneration after APAP overdose and we confirmed that in mice. Overall, we conclude LDH can predict death in APAP-induced ALF and that LKB1-AMPK signaling may be a promising therapeutic target to improve survival.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples from 28 random transplant-free survivors and 30 random non-survivors of APAP-induced ALF were obtained from the Acute Liver Failure Study Group (ALFSG) biorepository. ALF was diagnosed by ALFSG investigators and defined as INR ≥ 1.5, hepatic encephalopathy, duration of illness <26 weeks, and absence of chronic liver disease. APAP toxicity was determined to be the etiology based on a combination of patient-reported history of APAP overdose, a detectable APAP level documenting ingestion, and aminotransferase level of ≥ 1,000 IU/L. Due to hepatic encephalopathy, consent was obtained from next of kin. Samples were centrifuged at each ALFSG study site to obtain serum and stored at −80°C for later distribution and analysis. Demographic and laboratory data provided with the samples included daily values for serum ALT, AST, total bilirubin (Tbili), prothrombin time (PT), and creatinine (Cre) during hospitalization; age; sex; race; and ethnicity. Internal review board (IRB) approval was obtained at each ALFSG study site and the study was conducted in accordance with the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki.  Abundant serum proteins were depleted with HighSelect Top14 resin (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were reduced and alkylated prior to digestion with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) using S-Trap columns (Protifi). Tryptic peptides were then separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 65:35 buffer A:B ratio (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). To assemble a chromatogram library, six gas-phase fractions were acquired on the Orbitrap Exploris with 4 m/z DIA spectra (4 m/z precursor isolation windows at 30,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum inject time 66 ms) using a staggered window pattern from narrow mass ranges using optimized window placements. Precursor spectra were acquired after each DIA duty cycle, spanning the m/z range of the gas-phase fraction (i.e. 496-602 m/z, 60,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 50 ms). For wide-window acquisitions, the Orbitrap Exploris was configured to acquire a precursor scan (385-1015 m/z, 60,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 50 ms) followed by 50x 12 m/z DIA spectra (12 m/z precursor isolation windows at 15,000 resolution, normalized AGC target 100%, maximum injection time 33 ms) using a staggered window pattern with optimized window placements. Precursor spectra were acquired after each DIA duty cycle.

### Data Protocol
Following data acquisition, data were searched using an empirically corrected library and a quantitative analysis was performed to obtain a comprehensive proteomic profile. Proteins were identified and quantified using EncyclopeDIA (Searle et al.) and visualized with Scaffold DIA using 1% false discovery thresholds at both the protein and peptide level. Protein exclusive intensity values were assessed for quality using an in-house ProteiNorm app, a tool for systematic evaluation of normalization methods, imputation of missing values and comparisons of multiple differential abundance methods (Graw et al.). Normalization methods evaluated included log2 normalization (Log2), median normalization (Median), mean normalization (Mean), variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) (Huber et al.), quantile normalization (Quantile) (Bolstad et al.), cyclic loess normalization (Cyclic Loess) (Ritchie et al.), global robust linear regression normalization (RLR) (Chawade et al.), and global intensity normalization (Global Intensity) (Chawade et al.). The individual performance of each method was evaluated by comparing of the following metrics: total intensity, pooled intragroup coefficient of variation (PCV), pooled intragroup median absolute deviation (PMAD), pooled intragroup estimate of variance (PEV), intragroup correlation, sample correlation heatmap (Pearson), and log2-ratio distributions. The normalized data were used to perform statistical analysis using linear models for microarray data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing to the standard errors (Ritchie et al.). Proteins with an FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05 and a fold change >2 were generally considered significant. For biomarker identification, we focused on biomarkers elevated ≥4-fold in ALF patients vs. controls and further elevated ≥4-fold in non-survivors vs. survivors of ALF.

### Publication Abstract
Better biomarkers to predict death early in acute liver failure (ALF) are needed. To that end, we obtained early (study day 1) and later (day 3) serum samples from transplant-free survivors (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;28) and nonsurvivors (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;30) of acetaminophen-induced ALF from the NIH-sponsored Acute Liver Failure Study Group and from control volunteers (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10). To identify proteins that increase early in serum during ALF, we selected individuals from this cohort for whom alanine aminotransferase was lower on day 1 than day 3, indicating a time point before peak injury (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10/group). We then performed untargeted proteomics on their day 1 samples. Out of 1682 quantifiable proteins, 361 were &#x2265; 4-fold elevated or decreased in ALF patients versus controls and 16 of those were further elevated or decreased &#x2265; 4-fold in nonsurvivors versus survivors, indicating potential to predict death. Interestingly, 1 of the biomarkers was lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), which is already measured in most clinical laboratories. To validate our proteomics results and to confirm the prognostic potential of LDH, we measured LDH activity in all day 1 and 3 samples from all 58 ALF patients. LDH was elevated in the nonsurvivors versus survivors on both days. In addition, it had prognostic value similar to the model for end-stage liver disease and outperformed the King's College Criteria, while a combination of model for end-stage liver disease and LDH together outperformed either alone. Finally, bioinformatics analysis of our proteomics data revealed alteration of numerous signaling pathways that may be important in liver regeneration. Overall, we conclude LDH can predict death in APAP-induced ALF.

### Keywords
Biomarkers, Drug-induced liver injury, Acute liver injury, Liver regeneration

### Affiliations
1Dept. of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205   2Dept. of Environmental and Occupational Health, Fay W. Boozman College of Public Health, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205
UAMS

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Michell R. McGill
1Dept. of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205   2Dept. of Environmental and Occupational Health, Fay W. Boozman College of Public Health, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205


