### Accession
PXD024298

### Title
A compendium of murine (phospho)peptides encompassing different isobaric labeling and data acquisition strategies

### Description
Targeted mass spectrometry-based assays typically rely on previously acquired large datasets for peptide target selection. Such repositories are widely available for unlabeled peptides. However, they are less common for isobaric tagged peptides. Here we have assembled two series of six datasets originating from a mouse embryonic fibroblast cell line (NIH/3T3). One series is of peptides derived from a tryptic digest of a whole cell proteome and a second from enriched phosphopeptides. These datasets encompass three labeling approaches (unlabeled, TMT11-labeled and TMTpro16-labeled) and two data acquisition strategies (ion trap MS2 with and without FAIMS-based gas phase separation). We identified a total of 1,509,526 peptide-spectrum matches which covered 11,482 proteins from the whole cell proteome tryptic digest, and 188,849 phosphopeptides from the phosphopeptide enrichment. For each series, the datasets were of similar depth, but peptide overlap across datasets was modest. We then examined differences in characteristics and physicochemical properties of dataset-unique peptide sequences. These datasets provide a rich resource of peptides which may be used as starting points for targeted assays. Future datasets may be compiled for any genome-sequenced organism using the technologies and strategies highlighted herein.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 22-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 20 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Approximately 3 mg protein were processed for total proteomics analysis and 60 mg protein for phosphoproteomics analysis. Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (room temperature, 15 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, 4-parts neat methanol were added to each sample and vortexed, 1-part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and 3-parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 RPM for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed once with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 14 h with Lys-C protease at a 50:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37°C. Phosphopeptides were enriched with the High-Select Fe2+-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit according to manufacturer’s specifications using approximately 2.5 mg protein digest per enrichment column. . TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL) of which 20 μL was added to the peptides (200 µg) with 60 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). TMTpro reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL) of which 28 μL was added to the peptides (200µg) with 52 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE, Sep-Pak).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the mouse UniProt Database (downloaded: November 2019). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and the product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.169 Da for TMT11 and +304.207 Da for TMTpro where appropriate), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Data analysis and visualization was performed in Microsoft Excel or R Bioconductor and the “peptides,” “dplyr,” “DT,” and “shiny”packages.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted mass spectrometry-based assays typically rely on previously acquired large data sets for peptide target selection. Such repositories are widely available for unlabeled peptides. However, they are less common for isobaric tagged peptides. Here we have assembled two series of six data sets originating from a mouse embryonic fibroblast cell line (NIH/3T3). One series is of peptides derived from a tryptic digest of a whole cell proteome and a second from enriched phosphopeptides. These data sets encompass three labeling approaches (unlabeled, TMT11-labeled, and TMTpro16-labeled) and two data acquisition strategies (ion trap MS2 with and without FAIMS-based gas phase separation). We identified a total of 1&#x202f;509&#x202f;526 peptide-spectrum matches which covered 11&#x202f;482 proteins from the whole cell proteome tryptic digest, and 188&#x202f;849 phosphopeptides from the phosphopeptide enrichment. The data sets were of similar depth, and while overlap across data sets was modest, protein overlap was high, thus reinforcing the comprehensiveness of these data sets. The data also supported FAIMS as a means to increase data set depth. These data sets provide a rich resource of peptides that may be used as starting points for targeted assays. Future data sets may be compiled for any genome-sequenced organism using the technologies and strategies highlighted herein. The data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium with data set identifier PXD024298.

### Keywords
3t3, Targeted proteomics, Eclipse, Tmt, Faims, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA


