### Accession
PXD038697

### Title
Comparative proteome and serum analysis identified FSCN1 as a marker of abiraterone resistance in castration-resistant prostate cancer

### Description
Background: Abiraterone (Abi) is an androgen receptor signaling inhibitor that significantly improves patients' life expectancy in metastatic prostate cancer (PCa). Despite its beneficial effects, many patients have baseline or acquired resistance against Abi.  Objective: To identify predictive serum biomarkers for Abi treatment. Design, setting, and participants: We performed a comparative proteome analysis on three Abi sensitive (LNCaPabl, LAPC4, DuCaP) and resistant (LNCaPabl-Abi, LAPC4-Abi, DuCaP-Abi) PCa cell lines using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) technique. Two bioinformatic selection methods were applied to select the most promising candidate serum markers. Serum levels of selected proteins were assessed in samples of 100 Abi-treated patients with metastatic castration-resistant disease using ELISA. Moreover, FSCN1 serum concentrations were measured in samples of 69 Docetaxel (Doc) treated mCRPC patients. Outcome measurements and statistical analysis: Serum levels were correlated with patients‘ clinicopathological parameters and survival.  Results and limitations: Our proteome analysis identified 68 significantly, at least two-fold upregulated proteins in Abi resistant cells. Using two filtering methods four proteins (AMACR, KLK2, FSCN1 and CTAG1A) were selected for ELISA analyses. We found high baseline FSCN1 serum levels to be significantly associated with poor survival in Abi-treated mCRPC patients. Moreover, the multivariable analysis revealed that higher ECOG status (>1) and high baseline FSCN1 serum levels (>10.22 ng/ml by ROC cut-off) were independently associated with worse survival in Abi-treated patients (p<0.001 and p=0.021, respectively). In contrast, no association was found between serum FSCN1 concentrations and overall survival in Doc-treated patients. Conclusions: Our analysis identified baseline FSCN1 serum levels to be independently associated with poor survival of Abi-treated, but not Doc-treated mCRPC patients, suggesting a therapy specific prognostic value for FSCN1. Patient summary: In this study, we identified serum FSCN1 as a marker that may help to predict PCa patients who derive less benefit from Abi but not Doc treatment.

### Sample Protocol
In order to identify differentially expressed proteins between Abi-sensitive and resistant cell lines, proteome analyses were done using the LC-MS/MS technique. Six technical replicates for each cell line were used for the analysis  Abiraterone sensitive (parental) and resistant PC cell lines were harvested at about 80% confluence. We lysed the cell pellets using 0.1% NaDOC in TBS supplemented with protease inhibitors (complete mini, Roche, Penzberg, Germany) and Benzonase (25 U per sample, Merck). Then, we sonicated the samples on ice for 10 min and we added lysis buffer for protein solubilization (30 mM Tris, 7M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.5). We centrifuged the samples at 16100 x g for 10 min. We measured the supernatant concentrations using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). 30 μg of proteins were loaded to 18% Tris-Glycine-Gels (Anamed Elektrophorese, Rodau, Germany) and allowed to run into the gel (15 min at 100 V). The protein bands were stained with Coomassie and cut from the gels. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer overnight at 37 °C. The generated peptides were extracted in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA. Peptide concentrations were measured via amino acid analysis as described before (Megger et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Jul;12(7):2006-20.).  LC–MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (Megger et al., Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Jul;12(7):2006-20.). Briefly, 300 ng tryptic digested proteins were injected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Elite instrument (both Thermo Sientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were concentrated on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 30 μl/min with 0.1% TFA for 7 min. Peptides were transferred to a Nano Viper C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) and separated with a gradient from 5%–40% solvent B over 98 min at 400 nl/min and 60°C (solvent A: 0.1% FA; solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% ACN). Full-scan mass spectra were operated in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z within a mass range of 350–2000 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 5,400. For MS/MS measurements, the 20 most abundant peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID, NCE 35).

### Data Protocol
We used the Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for protein identification. Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Release 2016_05; 70625 entries) using Mascot v.2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The following search parameters were applied: Homo sapiens taxonomy, precursor ion mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.4 Da, dynamic and static modifications methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (carbamidomethyl). The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with the Target Decoy PSM Validator and identifications with an FDR > 1% were rejected. We used Progenesis QI v.2.0.5387.52102 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Durham, NC, USA) for label-free quantification. Raw files were aligned to a reference run and a master map of features was applied to all experimental runs to adjust for differences in retention time. Ion charge states of 2+, 3+, and 4+ with a minimum of three isotope peaks were considered. Statistical analysis was done using R and t-tests were calculated using arcsinh-transformed normalized protein abundances. We determined the ratios of mean abundances (RoM) based on non-transformed data. Proteins quantify with minimum two unique peptides and those passing the applied significance thresholds (p-value < 0.05) were considered as significantly differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amacr, Biomarker, Ctag1a, Abiraterone, Fscn1, Klk2, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Bracht
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum


