### Accession
PXD029419

### Title
Proteomics of the periodontal pathogen Prevotella intermedia secretome in biofilm and planktonic lifestyles

### Description
Protein secretion into extracellular space is an important virulence mechanism both among Gram negative and Gram-positive bacteria. Prevotella intermedia, an important species associated with periodontitis, is known to be resistant to several antibiotics. Since P. intermedia is a part of normal oral microbiota, its complete elimination is not possible.  Despite the remarkable clinical significance P. intermedia has, little is known about the molecular basis for its virulence. The aim of this study was to characterize the secretome of P. intermedia in biofilm and planktonic life mode. Proteins in the secretome preparations were identified by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. The biofilm secretome showed 109 proteins while the planktonic secretome showed 136 proteins. The biofilm and the planktonic secretomes contained 17 and 33 signal-peptide bearing proteins, 13 and 18 lipoproteins, respectively. Proteins with predicted virulence potential were 39 in biofilm and 44 in planktonic secretomes, respectively. Gene ontology analysis revealed that the biofilm secretome displayed a markedly higher percent proteins compared to planktonic secretome in terms of cellular amino acid metabolic process, nitrogen compound metabolic process, protein binding and methyltransferase and kinase activities. In conclusion, this study revealed differences in the protein profiles of P. intermedia biofilm and planktonic secretomes. This may set a basis for asking further questions into molecular mechanisms how this species exerts its virulence potential in the oral cavity.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome preparations from P. intermedia biofilms and planktonic cells were subjected to mass spectrometry for protein identification at Proteome Factory, Berlin, Germany. About 400 ng proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany). Then, the resulting peptides were subjected to the nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. 1% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid was used as eluent for 5 minutes to trap and desalt the peptides on the enrichment column (Zorbax SB C18, 0.3  5 mm, Agilent). An acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile was then used within 120 minutes to separate the peptides on a Zorbax 300 SB C18, 75 µm x 150 mm column (Agilent). The mass spectrometer automatically recorded the mass spectra according to the manufacturer's settings.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was made using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, England) and the National Center for Biotechnology Information non-redundant (NCBI-nr) protein database, version 20151202, (NCBI, Bethesda, USA). Ion charge in search parameters for ions from ESI-MS/MS data acquisition was set to "1+, 2+ or 3+" according to the instrument's and method's standard charge state distribution. The search parameters were: Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M); Peptide Mass Tolerance: ± 5 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: ± 0.6 Da; Missed Cleavages: 2. The inclusion criterion was: peptides that match with a score of 20 or above.

### Publication Abstract
Prevotella intermedia is an important species associated with periodontitis. Despite the remarkable clinical significance, little is known about the molecular basis for its virulence. The aim of this study was to characterize the secretome of P. intermedia in biofilm and planktonic life mode. The biofilm secretome showed 109 proteins while the planktonic secretome showed 136 proteins. The biofilm and the planktonic secretomes contained 17 and 33 signal-peptide bearing proteins, 13 and 18 lipoproteins, respectively. Superoxide reductase, sensor histidine kinase, C40 family peptidase, elongation factor Tu, threonine synthase etc. were unique to biofilm. Of the&#x2009;~&#x2009;30 proteins with predicted virulence potential from biofilm and planktonic secretomes, only 6 were common between the two groups, implying large differences between biofilm and planktonic modes of P. intermedia. From Gene Ontology biofilm secretome displayed a markedly higher percent proteins compared to planktonic secretome in terms of cellular amino acid metabolic process, nitrogen compound metabolic process etc. Inflammatory cytokine profile analysis revealed that only the biofilm secretome, not the planktonic one, induced important cytokines such as MIP-1&#x3b1;/MIP-1&#x3b2;, IL-1&#x3b2;, and IL-8. In conclusion, the revealed differences in the protein profiles of P. intermedia biofilm and planktonic secretomes may trigger further questions about molecular mechanisms how this species exerts its virulence potential in the oral cavity.

### Keywords
Planktonic, Virulence, Proteomics, Biofilm, Prevotella, Secretome

### Affiliations
Faculty of Dentistry
Kuwait University
Oral Microbiology Research Laboratory Faculty of Dentistry Kuwait University

### Submitter
Maribasappa Karched

### Lab Head
Dr Maribasappa Karched
Oral Microbiology Research Laboratory Faculty of Dentistry Kuwait University


