### Accession
PXD018154

### Title
20S proteasomes exported by malaria parasite promote its growth

### Description
Mature Red Blood Cells (RBCs) lack internal organelles and canonical defense mechanisms, making them both a fascinating host cell, in general, and an intriguing choice for the deadly malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum (Pf), in particular. While growing inside RBCs, Pf are known to secrete multipurpose extracellular vesicles (EVs), yet their influence on this parasite’s essential host cell, the RBC, remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that Pf parasites export within such EVs assembled and functional 20S proteasome complexes (EV-20S). The EV-20S proteasomes modulate the mechanical properties of naïve host RBCs by remodeling the cytoskeleton network. Furthermore, we identified four novel degradation targets of the exported 20S proteasome, the phosphorylated cytoskelatal proteins β-adducin, ankyrin-1, dematin and Epb4.1. Overall, our findings reveal a previously unknown 20S proteasome export mechanism of Pf-iRBCs, which prime naïve RBC by altering membrane stiffness, to facilitate malaria parasite growth.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were proteolyzed, enriched for phosphopeptides by TiOX and analysed by capillary chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (μLC-MS/MS)using Q Exactive plus (Thermo)

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (www.maxquant.org)(Cox and Mann 2008) fitted with the Andromeda search engine searching against the human Uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
Mature red blood cells (RBCs) lack internal organelles and canonical defense mechanisms, making them both a fascinating host cell, in general, and an intriguing choice for the deadly malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum (Pf), in particular. Pf, while growing inside its natural host, the human RBC, secretes multipurpose extracellular vesicles (EVs), yet their influence on this essential host cell remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that Pf parasites, cultured in fresh human donor blood, secrete within such EVs assembled and functional 20S proteasome complexes (EV-20S). The EV-20S proteasomes modulate the mechanical properties of na&#xef;ve human RBCs by remodeling their cytoskeletal network. Furthermore, we identify four degradation targets of the secreted 20S proteasome, the phosphorylated cytoskeletal proteins &#x3b2;-adducin, ankyrin-1, dematin and Epb4.1. Overall, our findings reveal a previously unknown 20S proteasome secretion mechanism employed by the human malaria parasite, which primes RBCs for parasite invasion by altering membrane stiffness, to facilitate malaria parasite growth.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Malaria, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Technion
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Neta Regev-Rudzki
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel


