### Accession
PXD011987

### Title
Cyclin Specificity Governs Centrosomal Cyclin/CDK Localisation and is Necessary for the G2/M Transition

### Description
In eukaryotes, cyclin/CDK complexes drive cells through DNA replication and mitosis, establising cell cycle temporal order. The fission yeast S. pombe is able to function with a single cyclin/CDK complex, with cell cycle order emerging from differential substrate sensitivities to CDK activity. What influence cyclin specificity has upon the cell cycle in this situation is currently unknown. Here we show that in a system that is reliant on a single cyclin for both the G1/S and G2/M transition, cyclin specificity is not needed for the G1/S transition, but instead is required for the G2/M transition and correct localisation of cyclin/CDK to the yeast centrosome equivalent, the SPB. This loss of centrosome localisation was also seen in human cells expressing mutant Cyclin B1, suggesting conservation of function. In fission yeast, although interphase centrosomal localisation is lost, mitotic SPB localisation remains. This hitherto unknown second localisation method is dependent on Polo kinase, suggesting a finer spatiotemporal control of cyclin/CDK during cell cycle progression than previously known. Thus, cyclin specificity is intrinsically twinned with spatial control of cyclin/CDK, and we suggest that this regulation may be conserved through evolution.

### Sample Protocol
300 µg of each protein sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 7.5 mM DTT. Samples were then diluted with 50 mM HEPES prior to trypsin digestion. Peptides were desalted using a C18 SepPak and dried. The samples were then labelled by the use of a Thermo Scientific TMT 10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set, 10 x 0.8 mg, as per manufacturer's instructions. Following successful label and mixing checks, multiplexed samples were again desalted using a C18 SepPak. Phosphopeptide enrichment was completed using titanium dioxide beads: Dried peptide mixtures were re-suspended in 1 M glycolic acid + 80 % acetonitile + 5 % TFA, sonicated and added to TiO2 beads (5/1 (w/w) beads:protein), the beads were washed using 80 % acetonitrile + 1 % TFA followed by 10 % acetonitrile + 0.2 % TFA, and dried. Flow-through fractions were retained for analysis of non-phosphorylated peptides. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads by adding 1 % ammonium hydroxide followed by 5 % ammonium hydroxide. Phosphopeptides and non-phosphopeptides were both fractionated by the use of a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit and each eluted fraction analysed with a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system for on-line liquid chromatogaphic separation. Each run consisted of a 3 h gradient elution (75 µm x 50 cm C18 column).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.13) was used for all data processing. The data was searched against a UniProt extracted Schizosaccharomyces pombe proteome FASTA file, amended to include common contaminants. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with the following adjustments: Phospho(STY) was added as a variable modification (for the phosphopeptide enriched samples). MaxQuant output files were imported into Perseus (version 1.4.0.2) for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
CAPN5 Neovascular Inflammatory Vitreoretinopathy (CAPN5-NIV; OMIM 193235) is a poorly-understood rare, progressive inflammatory intraocular disease with limited therapeutic options. To profile disease effector proteins in CAPN5-NIV patient vitreous, liquid vitreous biopsies were collected from two groups: eyes from control subjects (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4) with idiopathic macular holes (IMH) and eyes from test subjects (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12) with different stages of CAPN5-NIV. Samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Protein expression changes were evaluated by principal component analysis, 1-way ANOVA (significant p-value&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05), hierarchical clustering, gene ontology, and pathway representation. There were 216 differentially-expressed proteins (between CAPN5-NIV and control vitreous), including those unique to and abundant in each clinical stage. Gene ontology analysis revealed decreased synaptic signaling proteins in CAPN5-NIV vitreous compared to controls. Pathway analysis revealed that inflammatory mediators of the acute phase response and the complement cascade were highly-represented. The CAPN5-NIV vitreous proteome displayed characteristic enrichment of proteins and pathways previously-associated with non-infectious posterior uveitis, rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD), age-related macular degeneration (AMD), proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), and proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR). This study expands our knowledge of affected molecular pathways in CAPN5-NIV using unbiased, shotgun proteomic analysis rather than targeted detection platforms. The high-levels and representation of acute phase response proteins suggests a functional role for the innate immune system in CAPN5-NIV pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Cdk mitosis tmt phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform The Francis Crick Institute


