### Accession
PXD038363

### Title
The central mediator of auxin-triggered phosphorylation in plants is a RAF-like kinase.

### Description
The plant signaling molecule auxin triggers both fast and slow cellular responses across the plant lineage, including both land plants and algae. We discovered an ultra-fast proteome-wide phosphorylation response to auxin across 5 land plant and algal species, converging on a core group of shared target proteins. We find conserved rapid physiological responses to auxin in the same species and identified a RAF-like protein kinase as a central mediator of auxin-triggered phosphorylation across species.

### Sample Protocol
For phosphopeptide enrichment, ground tissue powder was suspended in an extraction buffer  with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 7 M Urea, 1% Triton-X, 10 mM DTT,  10 U/ml DNase I (Roche), 1 mM MgCl2, 1% benzonase (Novagen), 1xphosphoSTOP (Pierce) and 1x cocktail protease inhibitor (Pierce). The suspended lysate was sonicated, centrifuged and an extra 1% (v:v) of benzonase was added and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. Acrylamide was added to 50 mM and incubated for an extra 30 minutes at room temperature. After alkylation, proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform and the protein pellet was air dried. For every biological replicate 500 µg protein was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (1:100 trypsin:protein; Roche) overnight at room temperature. Next, peptides were desalted and concentrated using home-made C18 microcolumns. Eluted peptides were suspended in 80 % acetonitrile, 5 % tri-fluor acetic acid (TFA). For phosphopeptide enrichment, MagReSyn® Ti-IMAC beads (Resyn bioscience) were used in a 1:4 peptide:bead ratio. Resuspended peptides were added to equilibrated beads and incubated for 20 minutes at room temperature with slow mixing. After 20 minutes, bead-bound phosphopeptides were washed once in loading buffer, once in 80 % acetonitrile, 1 % TFA, and once in 10 % acetonitrile, 0.2 % TFA. After washing, phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 150 ul 1 % NH4OH. After the last elution, phosphopeptides were acidified using 10 % formic acid. Phosphopeptides were subsequently desalted and concentrated using home-made C18 microcolumns and resuspended in 15µl of 0.1 % formic acid.  For nano liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis 5 ul of peptide samples were loaded and measured by Thermo EASY nanoLC1000 - Q Exactive HF-X or Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo electron, San Jose, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation. The following proteome databases were used: A. thaliana (UniProt ID UP000006548), Marchantia polymorpha (UP000244005), Physcomitrium patens (UP000006727), Klebsormidium nitens (UP000054558) and for Penium margaritaceum the proteome from a whole genome assembly was used (Jiao et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The plant-signaling molecule auxin triggers fast and slow cellular responses across land plants and algae. The nuclear auxin pathway mediates gene expression and controls growth and development in land plants, but this pathway is absent from algal sister groups. Several components of rapid responses have been identified in Arabidopsis, but it is unknown if these are part of a conserved mechanism. We recently identified a fast, proteome-wide phosphorylation response to auxin. Here, we show that this response occurs across 5 land plant and algal species and converges on a core group of shared targets. We found conserved rapid physiological responses to auxin in the same species and identified rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma (RAF)-like protein kinases as central mediators of auxin-triggered phosphorylation across species. Genetic analysis connects this kinase to both auxin-triggered protein phosphorylation and rapid cellular response, thus identifying an ancient mechanism for fast auxin responses in the green lineage.

### Keywords
Auxin, Raf kinase, Plant evolution, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Dolf Weijers
Wageningen University


