### Accession
PXD019967

### Title
Proteomic analyses reveal that immune integrins are major targets for proteolysis by Membrane-Associated Ring-CH (MARCH) proteins MARCH2, 3, 4 and 9.

### Description
MARCH proteins are membrane-associated Ring-CH E3 ubiquitin ligases that dampen immune responses by down-regulating cell surface expression of major histocompatibility complexes I and II as well as immune co-stimulatory receptors. We recently showed that MARCH2,3,4 and 9 also down-regulate cell surface expression of the inflammatory cytokine receptor for interleukin-6 (IL6Ra). We used over-expression of these MARCH proteins in the M1 myeloid leukemia cell line and cell surface proteomic analyses to globally analyse other potential targets of these proteins. A large range of overlapping and a few unique cell surface proteins were identified most of which were down-regulated by MARCH expression. Prominent amongst these were several integrin complexes associated with immune cell homing, adhesion and migration. Integrin 41 (VLA4 or VCAM-1 receptor) was down-regulated only by MARCH2 and we showed that in MARCH2 knockout mice Integrin 4 was up-regulated specifically in mature B-lymphocytes and this was accompanied by decreased numbers of B-cells in the spleen.

### Sample Protocol
The terminal sialic acid residue on glycans attached to cell surface proteins were oxidized and labelled with biotin by addition of 1mM sodium metaperiodate, 200 μm aminooxy-biotin (Biotium, USA), 10 mM aniline, PBS pH 6.7 and incubated in the dark at 4°C with gentle agitation for 1hr. The reaction was quenched by addition of 1 mM glycerol, before washing twice with PBS pH 7.4. Cells were lysed (lysis buffer: 150 mm NaCl, 1% v/v Triton X-100, 50 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 5 mm iodoacetamide, supplemented with cOmplete mini protease inhibitor tablets (Roche)) and incubated at 4°C for 30 min with end-over-end mixing followed by centrifugation at 2800 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were retained and centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 10 min. Biotinylated proteins were enriched from lysate mixtures using high capacity Streptavidin Agarose beads (Pierce, USA) for 1hr at 4 °C with end-over-end mixing. Beads were washed with Lysis Buffer (2 times), PBS/0.5% w/v SDS (2 times) before incubation of beads with 100mM dithiothreitol, 0.5% w/v SDS, PBS pH 7.4 for 20min. Beads were transferred into  snap cap columns (Pierce), washed with UC buffer (6M urea, 100 mm Tris-HCl pH 8.5; 2 times) before alkylation of cysteine residues by incubation with 50mM iodoacetamide in UC buffer in the dark for 20min. Beads were then washed in UC buffer (10 times), PBS pH 7.4 (4 times), water (3 times) before on-bead digestion of proteins using 2μg of trypsin (modified sequencing grade, Promega) resuspended in 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, over-night at 37°C with gentle shaking. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 1000g into a clean LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, Germany). Beads were washed with 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate before centrifugation again and pooling of samples followed by SpeedVac-assisted solvent removal and storage at −80 °C.  Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and injected and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a M-class UPLC system (Waters, USA) using a 250mm × 75µm column (1.6µm C18, packed emitter tip; IonOpticks, Australia) with a linear 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min from 98% solvent A (0.1% Formic acid in Milli-Q water) to 34% solvent B (0.1% Formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). The UPLC was coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The Q-Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the 15 most abundant peaks. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 100000 ions and an isolation width of 2 m/z and fragmented using HCD with normalized collision energy of 27. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50ms for full MS scan and 50ms for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) and the database search was performed using mouse sequence obtained from Uniprot including isoforms with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 20 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the LFQ intensity values in the MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt. Proteins not found in at least 50% of the replicates in one group were removed. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.3 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential protein expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package. Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method.  Protein interaction networks for lists of proteins whose expression was significantly altered by expression of individual MARCH proteins were determined by the STRING program version 11.0 (http://string-db.org/newstring_cgi/show_input_page.pl).

### Publication Abstract
MARCH proteins are membrane-associated Ring-CH E3 ubiquitin ligases that dampen immune responses by downregulating cell surface expression of major histocompatibility complexes I and II as well as immune co-stimulatory receptors. We recently showed that MARCH2,3,4 and 9 also downregulate cell surface expression of the inflammatory cytokine receptor for interleukin-6 (IL6R&#x3b1;). Here we use over-expression of these MARCH proteins in the M1 myeloid leukaemia cell line and cell surface proteomic analyses to globally analyse other potential targets of these proteins. A large range of cell surface proteins regulated by more than one MARCH protein in addition to several MARCH protein-specific cell surface targets were identified most of which were downregulated by MARCH expression. Prominent among these were several integrin complexes associated with immune cell homing, adhesion and migration. Integrin &#x3b1;4&#x3b2;1 (VLA4 or VCAM-1 receptor) was downregulated only by MARCH2 and we showed that in MARCH2 knockout mice, Integrin &#x3b1;4 was upregulated specifically in mature B-lymphocytes and this was accompanied by decreased numbers of B-cells in the spleen.

### Keywords
Immune cells, Cell surface, Integrins

### Affiliations
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
WEHI

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Nicos A Nicola
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research


