### Accession
PXD012335

### Title
The synthetic phenotype of bamBbamE double mutants results from a lethal jamming of the Bam complex by the lipoprotein RcsF

### Description
In Gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia coli, the heteropentomeric -barrel assembly machine (Bam) folds and inserts proteins into the outer membrane of the cell envelope. Here, we show that the conditional lethal phenotype of a mutant lacking two of the three nonessential lipoproteins, BamB and BamE, is caused by the lethal jamming of the stripped down Bam complex by a normally surface-exposed lipoprotein, RcsF. Our study highlights the importance of the nonessential Bam complex lipoproteins, BamB and BamE, in regulating the interaction between the essential Bam proteins, BamA and BamD and expands our understanding of the role of the Bam complex in outer membrane biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli cells were grown in suspension to exponential phase (OD600 ~0.5-0.8) in M63 minimal glucose media at 30C. Samples were normalized by OD600.  Cells were harvested by pelleting at room temperature and flash frozen. Each pellet containing ~140g (~9x108 cells) of total protein was resuspended in 100L of lysis buffer containing 50mM HEPES pH 7.2, 2% CTAB (hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide), 6M GuaCl (guanidine hydrochloride), and 5mM DTT. Cells were lysed by sonication: 10 pulses, 30 seconds, at 60% amplitude and further heating the lysate at 60C for 20 minutes.  Next, 200L of lysate from every condition was methanol-chloroform precipitated. Protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher). The samples were resuspended in 6M guanidine chloride in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 with a subsequent dilution to 2M guanidine chloride in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 for digestion with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) at room temperature with 20ng/L Lys-C overnight. The samples were further diluted to 0.5mM guanidine chloride in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5 and digested with 20ng/L Lys-C and 10ng/L trypsin at 37C overnight. The digested samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature and taken up in 200mM EPPS pH 8.0 for a pH shift which is necessary for optimal labeling conditions. 10L of total material from each condition were labeled with 3L of 20ng/L TMT.  TMT reagents were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile. TMT samples were labeled for 2 hours at room temperature. Labeled samples were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).  Samples from all conditions were combined into one tube, acidified with 5% phosphoric acid (pH<2), and subjected to a subsequent spin at 16,000 RCF for 10 minutes at 4C.  The samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature.  Dry samples were taken up in HPLC grade water and stage tipped for desalting.  The samples were resuspended in 1% formic acid to 1g/L and 1g of the total combined sample was analyzed with the TMTc+ approach.

### Data Protocol
A suite of software tools developed in-house was used to convert mass spectrometric data from the Thermo RAW file to the mzXML format, as well as to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z  . Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against the appropriate proteome reference dataset acquired from UniProt including common contaminants like human keratins and trypsin.  This forward database component was followed by a decoy component which included all listed protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance, where both peptide termini were required to be consistent with Trypsin or LysC specificity, while allowing one missed cleavage. Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2-spectrum was set at 0.02 Th (TMTc+), TMT was set as a static modification of lysine residues and peptides’ N-termini (+229.162932 Da), oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy.Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and unique Δ XCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length, and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviation of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as negative training set. Linear discrimination scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. Furthermore, we performed a filtering step towards on the protein level by the “picked” protein FDR approach. Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides, with above described filtering.

### Publication Abstract
The selective permeability of the Gram-negative outer membrane (OM) is maintained by integral &#x3b2;-barrel outer membrane proteins (OMPs). The heteropentomeric &#x3b2;-barrel assembly machine (Bam) folds and inserts OMPs into the OM. Coordination of the essential proteins BamA and BamD is critical for OMP assembly and therefore the viability of the cell. The role of the nonessential lipoproteins BamBCE has yet to be characterized; however, genetic evidence suggests that they have nonoverlapping roles in OMP assembly. In this work, we quantify changes of the proteome in the conditional lethal &#x394;<i>bamB</i> &#x394;<i>bamE</i> double mutant. We show that cells lacking BamB and BamE have a global OMP defect that is a result of a lethal obstruction of an assembly-competent Bam complex by the lipoprotein RcsF. RcsF is a stress-sensing lipoprotein that is threaded through the lumen of abundant &#x3b2;-barrel OMPs by the Bam complex to expose the amino terminus on the cell surface. We demonstrate that simply removing this lipoprotein corrects the severe OMP assembly defect of the double mutant nearly as efficiently as a previously isolated suppressor mutation in <i>bamA</i> We propose that BamB and BamE play crucial, nonoverlapping roles to coordinate the activities of BamA and BamD during OMP biogenesis.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Protein assembly into lipid bilayers is an essential process that ensures the viability of diverse organisms. In Gram-negative bacteria, the heteropentomeric &#x3b2;-barrel assembly machine (Bam) folds and inserts proteins into the outer membrane. Due to its essentiality, outer membrane protein (OMP) assembly by the Bam complex is an attractive target for antibiotic development. Here, we show that the conditional lethal phenotype of a mutant lacking two of the three nonessential lipoproteins, BamB and BamE, is caused by lethal jamming of the stripped-down Bam complex by a normally surface-exposed lipoprotein, RcsF. The heterotrimeric Bam complex (BamA, BamD, BamC) is nearly as efficient as the wild-type complex in OMP assembly if RcsF is removed. Our study highlights the importance of BamB and BamE in regulating the interaction between BamA and BamD and expands our understanding of the role of the Bam complex in outer membrane biogenesis.

### Keywords
Outer membrane, Proteomics, Bacteria, Bam

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology & the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
Princeton University 

### Submitter
Meera Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wuehr
Department of Molecular Biology & the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA


