### Accession
PXD009349

### Title
Biogas Plant Survey Magdeburg 2014-2016

### Description
Biogas plants (BGPs) produce methane and carbon dioxide through the anaerobic digestion of agricultural waste. Identification of strategies for more stable biogas plant operation and increased biogas yields require better knowledge about the individual degradation steps and the interactions within the microbial communities. The metaprotein profiles of ten agricultural BGPs and one laboratory reactor were investigated using a metaproteomics pipeline. Fractionation of samples using SDS-PAGE was combined with a high resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer, metagenome sequences specific for BGPs, and the MetaProteomeAnalyzer software. This enabled us to achieve a high coverage of the metaproteome of the BGP microbial communities.  The investigation revealed approx. 17,000 protein groups (metaproteins), covering the majority of the expected metabolic networks of the biogas process such as hydrolysis, transport, fermentation processes, amino acid metabolism, methanogenesis and bacterial C1-metabolism. Biological functions could be linked with the taxonomic composition. Two different types of BGPs were classified by the abundance of the acetoclastic methanogenesis and by abundance of enzymes implicating syntrophic acetate oxidation. Linking of the identified metaproteins with the process steps of the Anaerobic Digestion Model 1 proved the main model assumptions but indicated also some improvements such as considering syntrophic acetate oxidation. Beside the syntrophic interactions, the microbial communities in BGPs are also shaped by competition for substrates and host-phage interactions causing cell lysis. In particular, larger amounts of Bacteriophages for the bacterial families Bacillaceae, Enterobacteriaceae and Clostridiaceae, exceeding the cell number of the Bacteria by approximately four-fold. In contrast, less Bacteriophages were found for Archaea, but more CRISPR proteins were detected. On the one hand, the virus induced turnover of biomass might cause slow degradation of complex biomass in BGP. On the other hand, the lysis of bacterial cells allows cycling of essential nutrients.

### Sample Protocol
Ten industrial scale BGPs (BGP_02, BGP_03, BGP_04, BGP_05a, BGP_05b, BGP_07, BGP_09, BGP_10, BGP_X1, BGP_X2) and one lab scale BGP (BGP_X3) operating under stable process conditions were sampled twice about one month apart (T1, T2) [Table 1]. Samples were stored at -20 C. BGP operators provided information about biogas production and yield, substrates, fermenter content, process temperature, pH value, acid content and total ammonium nitrogen (TAN) whenever possible [Table 1]. Protein extraction was carried out in duplicates according to the protocol of Heyer et al. (2013)46 LC-MS/MS measurements were conducted according to Heyer et al. (2016)22. In brief, simultaneous cell lysis and protein extraction was achieved by phenol extraction in a ball mill. Extracted proteins were dissolved in a 2 mL solution containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea as well as 0.01 g/mL 1,4-dithiothreitol. Amido black assay was used to quantify the protein concentration47, 48. After acetone precipitation, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE49 using 500 µg protein extract. Subsequently, the SDS-PAGE lanes were sliced into ten fractions, and proteins trapped in the gel were digested tryptically to peptides50 and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Digital Series SpeedVac SPD121P, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Before the LC-MS/MS measurement the samples were dissolved in 30 µL solvent A, centrifuged (30 min, 13.000 xg, 4 °C) and transferred into a HPLC vial. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano splitless liquid chromatography system, coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap MS (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After injection, 8 µL peptides were loaded isocratically on a trap column (Dionex Acclaim, nano trap column, 100 μm i.d. x 2 cm, PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper) with a flow rate of 7 μL/min chromatographic liquid phase A (98% LC-MS Water, 2% ACN, 0.05% TFA) for desalting and concentration.  Chromatographic separation was performed on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLC nano reversed phase column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75μm inner diameter and 250 mm length) at 40°C column temperature. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied using a binary A/B-solvent gradient (solvent A: 98% LC-MS Water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 10% LC-MS Water, 10% trifluorethanol, 0.1% formic acid) starting with 4% B for 4 min, continuing with a linear increase to 55% B within 120 min, followed by a column wash with 90% B for 5 min and a re-adjusted with 4% B for 25 min. For MS acquisition a data-dependent MS/MS method was chosen. MS was operated in positive ion mode, and precursor ions were acquired in the orbital trap of the hybrid MS at a resolution of 30,000 and a m/z range of 350-2,000. Subsequently, the fragment ion scan was proceeded in the linear ion trap of the hybrid MS with a mass range and a scan rate with “standard” parameter settings for the top 20 most intense precursors selected for collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS spectral data was subjected to the bioinformatics workflow. The Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, version 1.4.1.14) converted raw mass spectral data (*.raw-files) into *.mgf-files. Protein database searches were performed with OMSSA51 and X!Tandem52 using the MPA (version 1.3, www.mpa.ovgu.de)24. Furthermore, protein database searches using Mascot53 (Matrix Science, London, England, version 2.5.1) were carried out through the ProteinScape Software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany, version 3.1.3 461) and the results were imported into the MPA.  Search parameters for the protein database searches were: trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ±10 ppm precursor and ±0.5 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 113C and +2/+ 3 charged peptide ions. Results were controlled using a decoy strategy and a cutoff of 1 % for the false discovery rate was applied (FDR). The protein database contained sequences aggregated from UniProtKB/SwissProt (version: 23.10.2014)25 and several metagenomes from BGP samples16, 17, 26, 27. All result files were submitted to PRIDE54 with the accession number XXXXX. Unknown protein sequences from the metagenome were identified by BLAST (NCBI-Blast-version 2.2.31)55 against UniProtKB/SwissProt requiring a maximum e-value of 10-4. All BLAST hits with best e-value were considered for further processing. Whenever possible, metaproteins were annotated with a taxonomy (NCBI taxonomy)31, biological processes (UniProtKB keywords), UniProt Reference Clusters (UniRef) 29, enzyme commission numbers (EC) and KEGG orthologies (KO) based on their UniProt entries56. Furthermore, redundant homologous proteins were grouped to metaproteins, based on UniRef50 clusters29. Finally, metaprotein profiles were exported as comma separated value files (csv) and combined into a single matrix using a Matlab script (The MathWorks GmbH, Ismaningen, Germany, version 8.3.0.532 (R2014a) (Additional file 1 Mascot Scripts). For visualization of taxonomic and functional results chord plots 32, Krona plots 30 and metabolic pathway maps (KEGG Mapper Color Pathway v2.6)57 were created.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Competition, Bacteriophages, Host-phage interactions, Syntrophy, Metaproteomics, Anaerobic digestion model 1, Metaproteomeanalyzer, Biogas process, Microbial communities, Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg
Bioprocess Engeneering, IVT, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany

### Submitter
Kay Schallert

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Bioprocess Engeneering, IVT, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany


