### Accession
PXD008370

### Title
Sequential enrichment of phosphorylation on reversibly oxidized proteoforms – part 1

### Description
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are necessary for the regulation of critical processes including metabolism, signaling, and overall homeostasis. While proteins PTMs have been largely investigated independently in bottom-up proteomics methodologies, examination into how different PTMs interact, or crosstalk, will reveal a more complete understanding of the reciprocity of signaling cascades across numerous pathways. Combinatorial reversible thiol oxidation and phosphorylation in eukaryotes is largely recognized, but rigorous approaches for experimental verification are underdeveloped and must be advanced to begin meaningful definition of crosstalk in targeted pathway and systems biology research. Herein, we applied protein-level enrichment of reversibly oxidized proteoforms in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii with subsequent phosphopeptide analysis to determine the extent of phosphorylation in the redox thiol proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Redox proteins were enriched intact and then digested on-resin with trypsin, where peptides collected in the eluate and flow-through represented fragments of proteins bound by a Cys-site of reversible oxidation. The recombined sample was then enriched for phosphopeptides using titanium dioxide resin and the extent of redoxome phosphorylation was determined via LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification using Progenesis QI for proteomics, database searching with Mascot, and bioinformatics using Python.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are covalent modifications to protein residues which may alter both conformation and activity, thereby modulating signaling and metabolic processes. While PTMs have been largely investigated independently, examination into how different modification interact, or crosstalk, will reveal a more complete understanding of the reciprocity of signaling cascades across numerous pathways. Combinatorial reversible thiol oxidation and phosphorylation in eukaryotes is largely recognized, but rigorous approaches for experimental discovery are underdeveloped. To begin meaningful interrogation of PTM crosstalk in systems biology research, knowledge of targeted proteins must be advanced. Herein, we demonstrate protein-level enrichment of reversibly oxidized proteoforms in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii with subsequent phosphopeptide analysis to determine the extent of phosphorylation in the redox thiol proteome. Label-free quantification was used to quantify 3353 oxidized Cys-sites on 1457 enriched proteins, where sequential phosphopeptide enrichment measured 1094 sites of phosphorylation on 720 proteins with 23% (172 proteins) also identified as reversibly oxidized. Proteins identified with both reversible oxidation and phosphorylation were involved in signaling transduction, ribosome and translation-related machinery, and metabolic pathways. Several redox-modified Calvin-Benson cycle proteins were found phosphorylated and many kinases/phosphatases involved in phosphorylation-dependent photosynthetic state transition and stress-response pathways had sites of reversible oxidation. Identification of redox proteins serves as a crucial element in understanding stress response in photosynthetic organisms and beyond, whereby knowing the ensemble of modifications co-occurring with oxidation highlights novel mechanisms for cellular control.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Redox proteomics, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Cross-talk, Redox regulation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
Graduate Research Assistant

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA


