### Accession
PXD019444

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis for a bifunctional chorismate mutase/prephenate dehydratase in Acidovorax citrulli

### Description
- Identification of proteins whose expression was affected by a bifunctional chorismate mutase/prephenate dehydratase in Acidovorax citrulli str. KACC17005 - Shotgun proteomic analysis was used -  Two strains were used with three biological replicates (total 6 samples). WT: the wild-type strain. 12G: a bifunctional chorismate mutase/prephenate dehydratase knockout mutant

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, Ac and AcΔcmpAc were used, and a label-free shotgun comparative proteomic approach was carried out using a previously reported protocol (Park et al., 2020b). Briefly, Ac strains were grown in TSB and harvested at an OD600 of 0.5 by centrifugation. The harvested cells were disrupted by an Ultrasonic Processor (Colo Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA). Total proteins were concentrated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation and digested by trypsin. After cleaning the tryptic-digested proteins using the Sep-Pak Vac 1cc tC18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), peptide concentration was determined using a BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). One μg of each sample (two strains with three biological replicates) was injected into a split-free nano LC (EASY-nLC II; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) combined with an LTQ Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by the nanospray ion mode. Tryptic-digested peptides were loaded onto a 7.5 cm of MAGIC C18AQ 200A (5 µm) (Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA, USA) with 300 nL/min flow rate for 420 min under water/acetonitrile gradient using buffer A (water with 0.1% formic acid) buffer B (100% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). For the mass spectra, six of data-dependent MS/MS scans with m/z 300-2000 range of mass were used. Dynamic exclusion was allowed under one repeat, 0.5 min duration, and 3 min exclusion. The ion charge state selection was permitted for 2+ and 3+. From the full mass scan, six of the most intense ions were chosen.

### Data Protocol
The procedure for identifying and quantifying proteins and peptides was followed as reported previously except for the database (Park et al., 2020b). The MS/MS spectra were identified by Thermo proteome discoverer (ver. 1.3.0.399) with a SEQUEST search algorithm. Genome information of Ac strain KACC17005 from the National Center for Biotechnology Information was used. To improve the credibility, the target-decoy strategy was used (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Two missed cleavages were permitted, and the false discovery rate was 0.01. One hundred ppm precursor was set for mass accuracy, and the probability scores were at least 20. The identified proteins by the Thermo Proteome Discoverer were imported again into Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA), which was used for comparison. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) was used for comparative analyses (Choi et al., 2008). PSMs from the proteins were normalized against the total proteins in a sample. Proteins were used for comparison with the presence in three biological replicates. The average of PSMs normalized from replicates was calculated for each protein and compared for the identification of proteins that are differentially abundant (over 2-fold) in Ac vs. AcΔcmpAc. The statistical analysis was performed using student’s t-test (P < 0.05). The clustering the orthologous group (COG) analysis was used for the categorization of the identified proteins (Tatusov et al., 2000).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acidovorax citrulli</i> (<i>Ac</i>) is a plant pathogenic bacterium that causes bacterial fruit blotch (BFB) in cucurbit crops. Despite its importance in the cucurbit industry, resistant cultivars/lines against BFB have not yet been identified. Therefore, there is a need to characterize the virulence factors/mechanisms in <i>Ac</i> to control the disease. Chorismate mutase, a key enzyme in the shikimate pathway, produces aromatic amino acids. Here, we report the functions of putative bifunctional chorismate mutase/prephenate dehydratase in <i>Ac</i> (CmpAc) determined by proteomic analysis and phenotypic assays. <i>Ac</i> strain lacking CmpAc, <i>Ac&#x394;cmpAc</i>(EV), were significantly less virulent on watermelon in the germinated-seed inoculation and leaf infiltration assays. Sequence analysis revealed that CmpAc possesses two distinct domains: chorismate mutase and prephenate dehydratase, indicating that CmpAc is a bifunctional protein. Auxotrophic assays demonstrated that CmpAc is required for the biosynthesis of phenylalanine, but not tyrosine. The comparative proteomic analysis revealed that CmpAc is mostly involved in cell wall/membrane/envelop biogenesis. Furthermore, <i>Ac&#x394;cmpAc</i>(EV) showed reduced twitching halo production and enhanced biofilm formation. In addition, <i>Ac&#x394;cmpAc</i>(EV) was less tolerant to osmotic stress but more tolerant to antibiotics (polymyxin B). Thus, our study provides new insights into the functions of a putative bifunctional protein related to virulence in <i>Ac</i>.

### Keywords
Prephenate dehydratase, Chorismate mutase, Lc-ms/ms, Acidovorax citrulli

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, Republic of Korea
Chung-Ang University

### Submitter
Sang-Wook Han

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Wook Han
Department of Plant Science and Technology, Chung-Ang University, Anseong, Republic of Korea


