### Accession
PXD015435

### Title
Mass spectrometry study of formaldehyde cross-linking of structured proteins

### Description
Formaldehyde is a widely used fixative in biology and medicine. The current chemical model for formaldehyde cross-linking of proteins is the formation of a methylene bridge that incorporates one carbon atom into the link. Here, we present mass spectrometry data that largely refute this model. Instead, our data show that cross-linking of structured proteins mainly involves a reaction that incorporates two carbon atoms into the link. Under MS/MS fragmentation, the link cleaves symmetrically to yield unusual fragments with a modification of one carbon atom. We apply this new understanding of the underlying cross-linking chemistry to the structural approach of cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry. First, we cross-linked a mixture of purified proteins with formaldehyde. Our new analysis readily identified tens of cross-links from these proteins, which fit well with their atomic structures. We then perform in-situ cross-linking of human cells in culture. We identified 469 intra-protein and 90 inter-protein cross-links, which also fit well with available atomic structures. Interestingly, many of these cross-links could not be mapped onto a known structure and thus provide new structural insights. We highlight an example in which formaldehyde cross-links localize the binding site of βNAC on the ribosome. We also find several interactions of actin with auxiliary proteins. Our findings not only expand our understanding of formaldehyde reactivity and toxicity, but also clearly demonstrate how to use this potent reagent for structural studies.

### Sample Protocol
Standard XL-MS preparion. Please see Methods in accompanying paper.

### Data Protocol
In house analysis applications. Please see Methods in accompanying paper

### Publication Abstract
Whole-cell cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry is one of the few tools that can probe protein-protein interactions in intact cells. A very attractive reagent for this purpose is formaldehyde, a small molecule which is known to rapidly penetrate into all cellular compartments and to preserve the protein structure. In light of these benefits, it is surprising that identification of formaldehyde cross-links by mass spectrometry has so far been unsuccessful. Here we report mass spectrometry data that reveal formaldehyde cross-links to be the dimerization product of two formaldehyde-induced amino acid modifications. By integrating the revised mechanism into a customized search algorithm, we identify hundreds of cross-links from in situ formaldehyde fixation of human cells. Interestingly, many of the cross-links could not be mapped onto known atomic structures, and thus provide new structural insights. These findings enhance the use of formaldehyde cross-linking and mass spectrometry for structural studies.

### Keywords
Actin, Xl-ms, Nascent polypeptide-associated complex, Cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry, Structural biology

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

### Submitter
Nir Kalisman

### Lab Head
Dr Nir Kalisman
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel


