### Accession
PXD020568

### Title
Rat EV proteins isolated from different tissues

### Description
Isolation and chrecterization of EV proteins in different organs.

### Sample Protocol
100 µg of EV protein prepared using RIPA buffer with 1% SDS per sample from three biological replicates and detergent removed by chloroform/methanol extraction. Samples were then subjected to quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomics. Briefly, the protein pellet was re-suspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) overnight at 37 C. Peptides cleaned with PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). 500 ng from each sample was loaded onto trap column Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm C18 LC Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 4 µl/min. Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (data-dependent acquisition mode) was used to analyze the eluted peptides. By Orbitrap, with a resolution of 120,000, the full survey scan MS (from m/z 350–1800) was acquired.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification was performed by searching MS/MS data against the swiss-prot Rattus norvegicus protein database downloaded on Feb 13, 2019, using the in house mascot 2.6.2 (Matrix Science) search engine. With a maximum of two unexploited cleavage sites, the search was set up for full tryptic peptides. N-terminus acetylation and oxidized methionine were included as variable modifications, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Forerunner mass tolerance threshold was set at 10 ppm, and the maximum fragment mass error was 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EV) are nano-sized vesicles that have been garnering a lot of attention for their valuable role as potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic vehicles for a plethora of pathologies. Whilst EV markers from biofluids such as plasma, serum, urine, cerebrospinal fluid and <i>in vitro</i> cell culture based platforms have been extensively studied, a significant knowledge gap that remains is the characterization of specific organ derived EVs (ODE). Here, we present a standardized protocol for isolation and characterization of purified EV isolated from brain, heart, lung, kidney and liver from rat and postmortem human tissue. Next, using quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomics, we characterized the respective tissue EV proteomes that identified synaptophysin (SYP), caveolin-3 (CAV3), solute carrier family 22 member 2 (SLC22A2), surfactant protein B (SP-B), and fatty acid-binding protein 1 (FABP1) as potential markers for the brain, heart, kidney, lung, and liver-EV, respectively. These respective tissue specific markers were further validated using both immunoblotting and a nanoplasmonic platform- single EV imaging analysis in the two species. To summarize, our study for the first time using traditional biochemical and high precision technology platforms provide a valuable proof of concept approach in defining specific ODE markers which further could be developed as potential therapeutic candidates for respective end-organ associated pathologies.

### Keywords
Ev, Rat

### Affiliations
UNMC
Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Neetha Nanoth V

### Lab Head
Dr Saumya Yellamanchili
Assistant Professor, University of Nebraska Medical Center


