### Accession
PXD022131

### Title
Network-based integration of multi-omics data identifies the determinants of miR-491-5p effects

### Description
The identification of miRNAs’ targets and associated regulatory networks might allow the definition of new strategies using drugs whose association might mimic a given miRNA’s effects. Based on this assumption our group devised a multi-omics approach in an attempt to precisely characterize miRNAs’ effects. We combined the analysis of miR-491-5p direct targets, and effects at the transcriptomic and proteomic levels. We thus constructed an interaction network which enlightened highly connected nodes, being either direct or indirect targets of miR-491-5p effects: the already known EGFR and BCL2L1, but also EP300, CTNNB1 and several small-GTPases. By using different combinations of specific inhibitors of these nodes, we could greatly enhance their respective cytotoxicity and mimic miR-491-5p-induced phenotype. Our methodology thus constitutes an interesting strategy to comprehensively study the effects of a given miRNA. Also, we identified targets for which pharmacological inhibitors are already available for a clinical use, or in clinical trial phases. This study might thus enable innovative therapeutic options for ovarian cancer, which remains the first cause of death from gynecological malignancies in developed countries.

### Sample Protocol
IGROV1-R10 were grown in SILAC RPMI Medium 1640 supplemented with 2 mM Glutamax™, 25 µM HEPES, 10% dialyzed Fetal Bovine Serum and 33 mM sodium bicarbonate (ThermoFisher Scientific, Illkirch, France). Medium was also supplemented with standard L-Lysine and L-Arginine (referred to as “light” medium) or with 13C615N2 L-Lysine and 13C615N4 L-Arginine (referred to as “heavy” medium). Cells were grown in either light or heavy medium for at least 7 doubling times to ensured >95% labeling of cellular proteins, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cells grown in either light or heavy media were transfected with control miRNA or with miR-491-5p, for a total of 4 experimental combinations. Equal amounts of protein extracts from heavy/miRNA control and light/miR-491-5p were mixed together; as well as light/miRNA control and heavy/miR-491-5p. Both protein mixes were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Protein extracts were separated on SDS–PAGE gels (10%, Invitrogen at 30mA during 1 h) and stained with colloidal blue staining (LabSafe GEL BlueTM GBiosciences). Gel slices were excised (7 bands) and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking the gel pieces with 100% MeCN, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin (Promega) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30°C. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (300-μm inner diameter × 5 mm; ThermoFisher Scientific), separated and MS data acquired using Xcalibur software. Peptides separation was performed over a multistep gradient of 95 min from 1% to 32% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (75-μm inner diameter × 50 cm; nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMapTM, ThermoFisher Scientific). Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (v 3.0) and the resulting spectra were interrogated by Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) with the SwissProt Homo Sapiens database (032015). We set carbamidomethyle cysteine, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, heavy 13C615N2 Lysine (Lys8) and 13C615N4-Arginine (Arg10) and medium 2H4-Lysine (Lys4) and 13C6 Arginine (Arg6) as variable modifications. We set specificity of trypsin digestion and allowed 2 missed cleavage sites and we set the mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The resulting files were further processed by using myProMS (v 3.5) (Poullet et al, 2007). The Sequest HT target and decoy search result were validated at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with Percolator. For SILAC-based protein quantification, peptides XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) were retrieved from Proteome DiscovererTM. Scale normalization was applied to compensate for mixing errors of the different SILAC cultures. Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a t test was performed with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR control threshold set to 0.05. (All quantified proteins have at least 3 peptides quantified (all peptides selected)).

### Publication Abstract
The identification of miRNAs' targets and associated regulatory networks might allow the definition of new strategies using drugs whose association mimics a given miRNA's effects. Based on this assumption we devised a multi-omics approach to precisely characterize miRNAs' effects. We combined miR-491-5p target affinity purification, RNA microarray, and mass spectrometry to perform an integrated analysis in ovarian cancer cell lines. We thus constructed an interaction network that highlighted highly connected hubs being either direct or indirect targets of miR-491-5p effects: the already known EGFR and BCL2L1 but also EP300, CTNNB1 and several small-GTPases. By using different combinations of specific inhibitors of these hubs, we could greatly enhance their respective cytotoxicity and mimic the miR-491-5p-induced phenotype. Our methodology thus constitutes an interesting strategy to comprehensively study the effects of a given miRNA. Moreover, we identified targets for which pharmacological inhibitors are already available for a clinical use or in clinical trials. This study might thus enable innovative therapeutic options for ovarian cancer, which remains the leading cause of death from gynecological malignancies in developed countries.

### Keywords
Mirna, Network, Multi-omics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Head of the Mass Spectrometry plateform of the Institut Curie (LSMP)
Curie Institute

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Mass Spectrometry plateform of the Institut Curie (LSMP)


