### Accession
PXD011442

### Title
Comparative proteomics of artificially infected Dermacentor reticulatus tick vector by human pathogenic bacterium Rickettsia slovaca

### Description
Ticks are vectors of different pathogens causing human and animal diseases. Particularly, Rickettsia slovaca is zoonotic infectious bacterium transmitted by Dermacentor ticks, agent of tick-borne lymphadenopathy (TIBOLA), common across Europe. Current studies point to extreme complexity of bacterial induced effects in tick host. Systems biology tools, including proteomics, greatly contribute to understanding of molecular details of pathogen-tick-host interactions. Herein we compared laboratory-infected ticks with uninfected control after four weeks of incubation. Propagation of R. slovaca was confirmed by quantitative PCR. Using DNA was confirmed infection with R. slovaca. By proteomic approach, we discovered 33 differentially abundant gel spots, 23 of them accumulated upon artificial infection with R. slovaca. Modest 6.9% of tick proteome was affected. The protein localizations showing that eight proteins spots might be secreted, three cytoplasmic, two mitochondrial, six likely having multiple localizations, one cell membrane and one nucleus. We identified following proteins defensin, serpins, glycine-rich protein, heat shock protein involved in artificially infected tick vector, Dermacentor reticulatus. Discovered differentially abundant proteins should be further evaluated as targets to block the transmission of bacterial pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Dermacentor reticulatus ticks were collected in Gabčíkovo locality during 2016 and 2017 years. Gabčíkovo is situated in southwest Slovakia, 110 m above sea level (asl), alluvial habitat near river Danube. Afterward arachnids were kept in the laboratory for limited amount of time. Ticks in this study were washed in 70% ethanol, followed with sterile water and dried. Ticks negative for Rickettsia slovaca were laboratory maintained and half of them infected as described below. Subsequently, proteins were extracted from crushed whole ticks: i) artificially infected by R. slovaca at 5, 10, 15 and 27 days post inoculation (dpi); ii) laboratory adapted control—using DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. Rickettsia slovaca strain 13-B originated from the collection of the Department of Rickettsiology, Institute of Virology, Biomedical Research Center was revived and propagated in Vero cell line (Cercopithecus aethiops monkey epithelial cells ATCC CCL-81) in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 3% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 34 °C. Rickettsia slovaca-negative ticks were infected with bacteria by capillary feeding. Latest infection time point was used for quantitative comparison. Protein concentration was measured by 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Protein aliquots of 200 μg were adjusted to 340 μL with isoelectric focusing buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM Tris 1% amidosulfobetaine-14, 1% Triton X-100, 1% ampholytes pH 3-10 and 1% DeStreak). After centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min, supernatant was transferred to 18 cm immobilized non-linear pH gradient strips 3-10 (GE Healthcare). First dimension separation isoelectric focusing was done in Ettan IPGphor 3 unit (GE Healthcare). and sealed with 0.5% agarose containing 0.002% bromophenol blue in running buffer. Second dimension separation was performed in Protean II xi Cell (Bio-Rad) in 13% polyacrylamide gels Gels were washed in 50% methanol in 50% acetic acid for 15 min two times and stained with SYPRO Ruby (Invitrogen) in the dark overnight. Following de-staining in milli-Q water, gels were scanned on PharosFX Molecular Imager (Bio-Rad). For the in-gel digestion the standard protocol was followed. Gel plugs were washed with 300 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile while shaking at 500 rpm for 15 min and dehydrated with 300 µL acetonitrile. Protein spots were digested with 20 µL of 10 ng/µL trypsin in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile at 37 °C. The peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), using nanoAcquity UHPLC (Waters) and Q-TOF Premier (Waters). Samples were loaded onto the trap column and after desalting separated by BEH130 C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 μm diameter, 1.7 μm particle size), using a 20 min gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column outlet was connected to the PicoTip emitter (360 μm outer diameter, 20 μm inner diameter, 10 μm tip diameter) and samples were nanosprayed (3.4 kV capillary voltage). The data were recorded in the MSE mode (parallel high and low energy traces without precursor ion selection). Ions with 50-1950 m/z were detected in both channels. The external mass calibrant Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B (500 fmol/mL) was infused through the reference line at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and used for mass correction.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative software-assisted gel analysis was done in SameSpots 5.1 (TotalLab) to reveal protein spots differentially accumulated between infected and control samples. Firstly, software aligned images, then dust/stain particles, obvious streaks and damaged gel areas were filtered. Relative volumes were normalized to median distribution of normalization reference gel to compensate for minor differences in sample loading. All spots were reviewed and manually edited if necessary. Differentially accumulated proteins were chosen based on ANOVA p-value ≤ 0.05 and abundance ratio ≥ 1.5. Mass spectrometry data were processed by ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0 (Waters). For peak picking the following threshold parameters were applied: low energy 140 counts and high energy 30 counts. Precursors and fragment ions were coupled, using correlations of chromatographic elution profiles in low/high energy traces. Spectra were searched against Ixodidae protein sequences supplemented with Rickettsia slovaca and Ricketsia raoultii proteomes downloaded from UniProt in June 2017 (137,542 entries, uniprot.org). Workflow parameters for the protein identification searches were: i) maximum one possible trypsin miscleavage; ii) a fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine, variable oxidized methionine and deamidated asparagine/glutamine; iii) the precursors and fragments mass tolerance was automatically determined by the software; iv) peptide matching was limited to less than 4% false discovery rate against the randomized database. Identifications were accepted if at least two distinct reliable peptides matched the protein sequence. Reliability scores were adjusted based on statistical distribution of target/decoy queries.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dermacentor vector, Real-time pcr, Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, Tibola, Protective antigens

### Affiliations
Department of Rickettsiology Biomedical Research Center Sloval Republic
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Spitalska
Department of Rickettsiology Biomedical Research Center Sloval Republic


