### Accession
PXD035049

### Title
Aggrelyte-2 Promotes Protein Solubility and Decreases Stiffness in Lenses through Lysine Acetylation and Disulfide Reduction

### Description
Aging proteins in the lens become increasingly aggregated and insoluble, contributing to presbyopia. In this study, we investigated the ability of aggrelyte-2 (N,S-Diacetyl-L-cysteine methyl ester) to reverse the water insolubility of aged human lens proteins and to decrease stiffness in cultured human and rodent lenses. Aggrelyte-2 was incubated (500 µM) with water-insoluble proteins of aged human lenses (65-75 years) for 24 or 48 h. A control compound that lacked an S-acetyl group (aggrelyte-2C) was also tested. We observed 19-30% solubility of WI upon the treatment with aggrelyte-2. Aggrelyte-2C also increased protein solubility, but its effect was approximately 1.4-fold lower than that of aggrelyte-2. The protein thiol contents were 1.9 to 4.9-fold higher in the aggrelyte-treated samples than in the untreated samples. The LC-MS/MS results showed N-acetyllysine (AcK) levels of 1.5 to 2.1 nmoles/mg protein and 0.6 to 0.9 nmoles/mg protein in the aggrelyte-2- and aggrelyte-2C-treated samples, respectively. Mouse (C57BL/6J) lenses (incubated for 24 h) and human lenses (incubated for 72 h) with 1.0 mM aggrelyte-2 showed significant decreases in stiffness with simultaneous increases in soluble proteins (human lenses) and protein-AcK levels and such changes were not observed in aggrelyte-2C treated lenses. Mass spectrometry of the solubilized protein revealed AcK in all crystallins but more in α-crystallins. These results suggest that aggrelyte-2 increases protein solubility and decreases lens stiffness through acetylation and disulfide reduction. Aggrelyte-2 might be useful in treating presbyopia in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Three-hundred and fifteen micrograms of cortical protein from the aggrelyte-2 treated (as above) and untreated control human lenses was prepared as previously reported for AcK site-specific analysis by LC/MS and LC-MS/MS (28). Briefly, samples were spiked with 200 ng of acetylated bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard, and then reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin using a urea-based method and then desalted using a C18 resin before being lyophilized. Samples were then immunoprecipitated according to the manufacturer’s protocol provided with the PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit no. 13416 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA). Peptides were purified with a Pierce C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) before evaporating to dryness in a Speed Vac concentrator at 45°C. The peptides were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis.     The enriched AcK-bearing peptides were loaded onto a 2cm PepMap 100 nanoviper trapping column and chromatographically resolved online with a 0.075 × 250 mm, 2.0μm Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase nanocolumn (Thermo Scientific) using a 1290 Infinity II LC system equipped with a nanoadapter (Agilent). Mobile phases consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid (A) and 90% aqueous acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (B). Samples were loaded onto the trapping column at 3.0 μL/min for 3.5 min under initial conditions before being chromatographically separated at an effective flow rate of 330 nL/min using a gradient of 3–8% B over 3 min, 8–30% B over 33 min, and 30–40% B over 4 min at 40°C. The gradient was followed by a column wash at 75% B for 5 min. Data was collected on a 6550 Q-TOF equipped with a nano source (Agilent Technologies) operated using intensity-dependent CID MS/MS to generate peptide identifications. MS/MS data were collected in positive ion polarity over a mass range of  290–1700 m/z at a scan rate of 8 spectra/second for MS scans, and a mass range of 50–1700 m/z at a scan rate of 3 spectra/second for MS/MS scans. All charge states, except singly charged species, were allowed during MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, searched, and summarized using PEAKS X+ Studio 10.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario). The spectra were searched against the UniprotKB SwissProt [2022_02] Homo sapiens database allowing up to 3 missed semi-tryptic cleavages with fixed carbamidomethyl (C) and a maximum of four variable deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), and acetylation (K) modifications per peptide. The monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance allowed was ± 15.0 ppm, and the MS/MS tolerance was ± 0.05 da. A false discovery rate (FDR) filter of 0.5% was used corresponding to a –10logP score ≥ 19.3.   The MS-only level data from the LC-MS/MS analyses were extracted and aligned using Profinder V.B.10.01 software (Agilent Technologies). Retention times, neutral masses, and chemical formulas generated from identified acetyl peptides were used to perform a batch-targeted feature extraction. Data were extracted with an ion count threshold set to two or more ions, 5000 counts, and a score threshold of 70. The score was based on the quality of the mass accuracy, isotope abundances, and isotope spacing of compounds based on the chemical formula of the target peptides within a specified retention time window. Using the peptide isotope model, charge states 2–6 were allowed with H+ and Na+ charge carriers. The retention time window and mass window alignment tolerances were set to 0.4 min and 10 ppm, respectively. Extracted peptide peak areas were then used to determine a fold change value in treated vs. control samples to help identify potential AcK sites that may be affected by the acetylating agent. Due to a lack of statistical power, a 3-fold change filter was used as a sufficient cutoff to identify potential AcK sites of interest. The list of AcK sites that passed the 3-fold change cutoff was further curated to only include those AcK sites for which all corresponding peptides with the same AcK site had a 3-fold change or greater when summed and averaged together. Samples were also searched using the UniprotKB SwissProt Bos taurus database to identify peptides from the acetylated BSA standard spiked-in at the beginning of sample preparation. All other search and MS-only level extraction parameters were unchanged compared to SwissProt Homo sapiens workflow. Extracted acetylated BSA peptide peak areas were summed and used to determine a fold change value in treated vs. control samples.

### Publication Abstract
Aging proteins in the lens become increasingly aggregated and insoluble, contributing to presbyopia. In this study, we investigated the ability of aggrelyte-2 (N,S-diacetyl-L-cysteine methyl ester) to reverse the water insolubility of aged human lens proteins and to decrease stiffness in cultured human and mouse lenses. Water-insoluble proteins (WI) of aged human lenses (65-75&#x2009;years) were incubated with aggrelyte-2 (500&#x2009;&#x3bc;M) for 24 or 48&#x2009;h. A control compound that lacked the S-acetyl group (aggrelyte-2C) was also tested. We observed 19%-30% solubility of WI upon treatment with aggrelyte-2. Aggrelyte-2C also increased protein solubility, but its effect was approximately 1.4-fold lower than that of aggrelyte-2. The protein thiol contents were 1.9- to 4.9-fold higher in the aggrelyte-2- and aggrelyte-2C-treated samples than in the untreated samples. The LC-MS/MS results showed N<sup>&#x3b5;</sup> -acetyllysine (AcK) levels of 1.5 to 2.1&#xa0;nmol/mg protein and 0.6 to 0.9&#xa0;nmol/mg protein in the aggrelyte-2- and aggrelyte-2C-treated samples. Mouse (C57BL/6J) lenses (incubated for 24&#x2009;h) and human lenses (incubated for 72&#x2009;h) with 1.0&#x2009;mM aggrelyte-2 showed significant decreases in stiffness with simultaneous increases in soluble proteins (human lenses) and protein-AcK levels, and such changes were not observed in aggrelyte-2C-treated lenses. Mass spectrometry of the solubilized protein revealed AcK in all crystallins, but more was observed in &#x3b1;-crystallins. These results suggest that aggrelyte-2 increases protein solubility and decreases lens stiffness through acetylation and disulfide reduction. Aggrelyte-2 might be useful in treating presbyopia in humans.

### Keywords
Human, Eye, Lysine, Ptm, Lens, Acetylation

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy
Univeristy of Colorado - Skaggs School of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Cole Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Cole Michel
University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy


