### Accession
PXD024153

### Title
U. Minnesota / Medical College of Wisconsin - Gihan Gunaratne

### Description
Protein identification from a gel band. This includes in-gel digestion with trypsin, LC-MS/MS, data analysis and reporting.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation  In-gel digestion with trypsin using a ProGest robot (DigiLab) with the following protocol:  • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing.  Mass Spectrometry  Half of each digested sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters M-Class HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 15,000 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The instrument was run with a 3s cycle for MS and MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot (Matrix Science) with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin/P Databases: SwissProt Human (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants) Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Acetyl (N-term), Deamidation (N,Q), Oxidation (M), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q)  Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2  Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold (Proteome Software) for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP) is a second messenger that releases Ca<sup>2+</sup> from acidic organelles through the activation of two-pore channels (TPCs) to regulate endolysosomal trafficking events. NAADP action is mediated by NAADP-binding protein(s) of unknown identity that confer NAADP sensitivity to TPCs. Here, we used a "clickable" NAADP-based photoprobe to isolate human NAADP-binding proteins and identified Jupiter microtubule-associated homolog 2 (JPT2) as a TPC accessory protein required for endogenous NAADP-evoked Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling. JPT2 was also required for the translocation of a severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pseudovirus through the endolysosomal system. Thus, JPT2 is a component of the NAADP receptor complex that is essential for TPC-dependent Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling and control of coronaviral entry.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Marcus Professor & Chair Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy Medical College of Wisconsin
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Gihan Gunaratne

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Marchant
Marcus Professor & Chair Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy Medical College of Wisconsin


