### Accession
PXD018182

### Title
Establishment of functional protein interaction networks of so far undescribed human mitochondrial proteins by q-AP-MS

### Description
The overall aim of the project is the definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells, referred to as MitoCoP. To this end, we combined complementary strengths of subtractive proteomics, ImportOmics and subcellular protein profiling in a global multidimensional classification approach (see dataset 'Definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells (MitoCoP)'). SILAC-based affinity purification-mass spectrometry (q-AP-MS) experiments were performed to establish functional protein interaction networks of so far undescribed mitochondrial proteins.

### Sample Protocol
LC/MS sample preparation: Mitochondrial protein complexes were affinity-purified from crude mitochondrial fractions of HEK293 cells expressing epitope-tagged bait proteins (i.e. TMEM256, MBLAC2, NCBP2-AS2, CXorf40A, PIGBOS1, NTPCR, LYRM9 or C22orf39) that were cultivated in either light or heavy arginine and lysine (Arg0/Lys0 or Arg10/Lys8). (For details about the preparation of crude mitochondrial fractions, see dataset 'Definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells (MitoCoP)'.) As a control, affinity-purification was performed from crude mitochondrial fractions of HEK293 cell with the reverse SILAC-label that expressed the wild-type version of the respective bait protein. Equal volumes of eluates were combined and proteins were precipitated by adding the four-fold volume of ice-cold acetone. Precipitates of MBLAC2, NCBP2-AS2, CXorf40A, PIGBOS1, NTPCR, LYRM9 and C22orf39 complexes (n = 2 each) were resuspended in 1x SDS sample buffer and loaded onto 4-12% NuPAGE BisTris gradient gels. Gels were run for 10 min at 150 V until the proteins had migrated into the top of the gel (approx. 1 cm). Following staining with Colloidal Coomassie Blue, protein-containing sections of the gel were excised en bloc and cut into approximately 1-mm3 cubes. Gel pieces were incubated for 10 min in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by incubation in 5 mM ABC/50% (v/v) ethanol for 10 min at RT to dehydrate the gel slices. This alternating incubation with 10 mM ABC and 5 mM ABC/50% ethanol was perfomed three times. Cysteine residues were reduced by incubation in 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP; dissolved in 10 mM ABC; 10 min at 60°C). Thiol groups were subsequently alkylated by incubating the gel pieces in 100 mM chloroacetamide (dissolved in 10 mM ABC; 15 min at 37°C). Gel pieces were washed by three cycles of alternating incubation with 10 mM ABC and 100% ethanol (10 min at RT each) and dried in vacuo. Proteins were digested with trypsin (300 ng in 10 mM ABC; overnight, 37°C) and eluted by incubation in 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in an ultrasonic bath (10 min, 4°C). This step was performed twice. Peptide-containing supernatants of each sample were pooled, peptides were dried in vacuo and desalted using StageTips. Precipitates of TMEM256 complexes (n = 4) were resuspended in 8 M urea/50 mM ABC. To reduce and alkylate cysteine residues, proteins were incubated in 5 mM TCEP (dissolved in 10 mM ABC; 30 min at 37°C) followed by incubation in 55 mM iodoacetamide/10 mM ABC (45 min at RT in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 25 mM. Subsequently, samples were diluted by adding 50 mM ABC to a final concentration of 1 M urea and trypsin was added at an estimated protease-to-protein ratio of 1/50. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. To stop proteolytic reactions, samples were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1% (v/v).  LC/MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed at an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were washed and preconcentrated using PepMap C18 precolumns (length, 5 mm; inner diameter, 0.3 mm) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Peptide separation was performed using a C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap; length, 500 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 2 µm; packing density, 100 Å) at 43°C and a flowrate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 4% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 30% (v/v) ACN/48% (v/v) methanol/4% (v/v) DMSO/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). The gradient was as follows: 3 - 25% B in 95 min, 25 - 60% B in 100 min, 60 - 95% B in 15 min, 5 min at 95% B (for TMEM256 complexes), 3 - 55% B in 120 min, 55 - 95% B in 30 min, 5 min at 95% B (for MBLAC2 and NCBP2-AS2 complexes), or 7 - 55% B in 120 min, 55 - 95% B in 30 min, 5 min at 95% B (for CXorf40A, PIGBOS1, NTPCR, LYRM9, and C22orf39 complexes). Peptides eluting from the LC column were transferred to a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Scientific) for electrospray ionization using a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction adaptor (Thermo Scientific) and applying a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a capillary temperature of 200°C. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode with a mass range of m/z 370 to 1,700, a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400, a target value of 1 x 10E06, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms for MS survey scans. The 25 most intense precursor ions with a charge ≥ +2 were selected for low energy collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap with the following parameters: normalized collision energy, 35%; activation q, 0.25; activation time, 10 ms; target value, 5,000; maximum injection time, 150 ms; dynamic exclusion time, 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1 (Cox und Mann, Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 2008). For protein identification, mass spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human proteome set including isoforms (retrieved 08/2018; 95,106 entries) and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant using Andromeda (Cox et al., J. Proteome Res. 10, 2011). Database searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Arg10 and Lys8 were selected as heavy labels, multiplicity was set to 2, Trypsin/P was selected as enzymatic specificity, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed, and the options 'requantify' and 'match between runs' were enabled. Proteins were identified based on ≥ 1 unique peptide with a length of ≥ 6 amino acids. A peptide spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied using the decoy mode 'Revert'. An FDR of 1% was further applied to the list of proteins identified. Relative protein quantification in SILAC was based on unique peptides and a ≥ 1 SILAC peptide pair.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Affinity purification-mass spectrometry, Proteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


