### Accession
PXD045579

### Title
Injury-specific factors in the cerebrospinal fluid regulate astrocyte plasticity in the human brain

### Description
The glial environment determines the outcome of neurological disease progression, yet much of our knowledge still relies on preclinical animal studies, especially regarding astrocyte heterogeneity. In murine models of traumatic brain injury, beneficial functions of proliferating reactive astrocytes on disease outcome have been unraveled, but little is known if and when they are present in human brain pathology. Here, we examined a broad spectrum of pathologies with and without intracerebral hemorrhage and found a striking correlation between lesions involving blood-brain barrier rupture and astrocyte proliferation that was further corroborated in an assay probing for neural stem cell potential. Most importantly, proteomic analysis unraveled a crucial signaling pathway regulating this astrocyte plasticity with GALECTIN3 as a novel marker for proliferating astrocytes and the GALECTIN3-binding protein LGALS3BP as a functional hub mediating astrocyte proliferation and neurosphere formation. Taken together, this work identifies a therapeutically relevant astrocyte response and their molecular regulators in different pathologies affecting the human cerebral cortex.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein content of CSF samples was measured by Bradford assay (BioRad, Feldkirchen, Germany)and 10μg per sample were proteolysed by the commercially available in-StageTip-NHS kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, CSF was reduced and alkylated and incubated for 3 hrs at 37°C with Lys-C and trypsin. Resulting peptides were dried for short term storage at -80°C. Prior to measurement, peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid.  Mass spectrometry Peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex). Samples were automatically injected and loaded onto the C18 trap cartridge and after 5 min eluted and separated on the C18 analytical column (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm; Waters) by a 90 min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60000 with an AGC target of 3 x 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 30 ms from 300 to 1500 m/z. From the MS scan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation via HCD with a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 with a AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Unassigned charges, and charges of +1 and >8 were excluded from precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data was analyzed in the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against the SwissProt Human database (Release 2020_02, 20432 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage site, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and a combination of methionine loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. The Percolator algorithm102 was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides. Only top scoring identifications for each spectrum were accepted, additionally satisfying a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (high confidence). The final list of proteins satisfying the strict parsimony principle included only protein groups passing an additional protein confidence FDR < 1% (target/decoy concatenated search validation). Quantification of proteins, after precursor recalibration, was based on abundance values (area under curve) for the unique peptides per protein. Peptide abundance values were normalized on total peptide amount. The protein abundances were calculated summing the abundance values for admissible peptides. The final protein ratio was calculated using median abundance values of the biological replicates in a non-nested design. Statistical significance of the ratio was ascertained with Bonferroni corrected t-test with imputed values equal 0.0001 selecting for proteins with at least 5 replicates with non-zero values in CSF-CCM. Differential protein expression analysis using fc ≥ 2 and p‐value cut-off 0.05 or lower was performed using R statistical framework (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria http://www.R‐project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The glial environment influences neurological disease progression, yet much of our knowledge still relies on preclinical animal studies, especially regarding astrocyte heterogeneity. In murine models of traumatic brain injury, beneficial functions of proliferating reactive astrocytes on disease outcome have been unraveled, but little is known regarding if and when they are present in human brain pathology. Here we examined a broad spectrum of pathologies with and without intracerebral hemorrhage and found a striking correlation between lesions involving blood-brain barrier rupture and astrocyte proliferation that was further corroborated in an assay probing for neural stem cell potential. Most importantly, proteomic analysis unraveled a crucial signaling pathway regulating this astrocyte plasticity with GALECTIN3 as a novel marker for proliferating astrocytes and the GALECTIN3-binding protein LGALS3BP as a functional hub mediating astrocyte proliferation and neurosphere formation. Taken together, this work identifies a therapeutically relevant astrocyte response and their molecular regulators in different pathologies affecting the human cerebral cortex.

### Keywords
Neurological diseases, Csf, Neural stem cells, Astrocyte proliferation, Human brain injury, Galectin-lgals3bp signalling

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München
Chair of Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center (BMC),  Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stefanie Hauck

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Götz
Chair of Physiological Genomics, Biomedical Center (BMC),  Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, Germany


