### Accession
PXD010151

### Title
Proteomics of candidate Desulfatiglans TRIP_1 and identification of enzymes involved in anaerobic degradation of phenanthrene

### Description
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are widely distributed pollutants. As in saturated PAH-contaminated sites oxygen is rapidly depleted, microorganisms able to use these compounds as a carbon source in the absence of molecular oxygen are crucial for their consumption. Here, we described the metabolic pathway for anaerobic degradation of phenanthrene by a sulfate-reducing enrichment culture (TRIP) obtained from a natural asphalt lake. The dominant organism of this culture belongs to the Desulfobacteraceae family of deltaproteobacteria. Proteogenome analysis revealed that the metabolic capacity of this bacterium includes the key enzymes for dissimilatory sulfate reduction, the Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway, a complete tricarboxylic acid cycle as well as the key elements of the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway. Genes encoding enzymes potentially involved in the degradation of phenanthrene were identified in the genome of this bacterium. Two gene clusters were identified encoding a carboxylase enzyme involved in the activation of phenanthrene, as well as genes encoding reductases potentially involved in subsequent ring dearomatization and reduction steps. The predicted metabolic pathways were corroborated by transcriptome and proteome analyses and provide the first metabolic pathway for anaerobic degradation of three-rings PAHs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Cells were harvested by centrifugation in the mid-exponential growth phase (20 min, 6000 x g, 4 °C) and immediately frozen at -20 °C. The frozen cell pellets were warmed to room temperature and taken up in phosphate buffered saline (PBS buffer, pH 7.4). Cells were lysed by ultrasonification in a Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 5 min to release the proteome and shear the genomic DNA. Samples were centrifugated (5 min, 12000 × g, 4 °C) and supernatants were transferred to fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes. The protein concentration was determined by using a modified Bradford assay (Ernst and Zor, 2010). An aliquot corresponding to 30 µg total protein per sample was removed and taken up in 2% SDS and subsequently reduced with DTT (final concentration 5 mM) for 5 min at 90°C. Next reduced proteins were alkylated with IAM (Iodoacetamide, final concentration 20 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Reduced and alkylated proteins were then precipitated by Methanol/Chloroform precipitation (Wessel and Flügge 1984 ). The protein pellets were then taken up in 50 µL 8M Urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and cleared by centrifugation (30 s; 10000× g). 25 µL of the clear solutions (corresponding to 15 µg total protein) were transferred to fresh Eppendorf tubes, supplemented with 500 ng LysC (ratio 1/30) and incubated at 37° for 3h while vigorously shaking. Next morning the samples were diluted with 100 mM ABC until the Urea concentration was below 1M. Then 1 µg Trypsin was added (ration 1/15) and the samples incubated over night at 37°C while vigorously shaking. The digestion was stopped the next morning by adding formic acid (final concentration 5%).  Sample clean-up for LC-MS. Acidified tryptic digests were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al 2007 ). On each 2 disc StageTip we loaded around 15 µg peptides (based on the initial protein concentration). After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution. LC-MS/MS. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo,[3 ]) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 35 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UHPLC (ultra high performance liquid chromatography) grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane)[4 ]. Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS; Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (1.0 × 106 ions or 30 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. CID (collision-induced dissociation) collision energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant. RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda[5] search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings.[6 ] Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated.[7 ] MS/MS spectra data were searched against the in-house generated TRIP_1 candidate Desulfatiglans (4868 entries), TRIP_2 candidate Desulfatiglans (4891 entries), TRIP_3 candidate Paludibacter (2636 entries) and TRIP_4 candidate Spirochaete (2930 entries), TRIP_5 candidate Zixibacteria (3045 entries) databases. All searches included also a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 267 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da), acetylation of protein N-terminus (42 Da as dynamic modification and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with IAM). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with 2 missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradation, Phenanthrene, Desulfatiglans, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


