### Accession
PXD027849

### Title
Proteomic profiling to predict therapeutic response to anti-PD1 therapy in advanced melanoma – Orbitrap Elite dataset depleted serum

### Description
MS-based proteomics based on data-dependent acquisition / shotgun MS was used to study the response of melanoma patients to anti-PD1 therapy. Human serum samples were collected from patients at the start of their therapy and later categorized into responders and non-responders based on clinical outcome. Samples were subjected to immunodepletion and proteins were identified by bottom-up proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Depletion of the most abundant serum proteins was performed using Thermo/Pierce Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns according to Muqaku et al., Mol. Cell. Proteomics, 2017. An aliquot corresponding to 20 µg of protein (after depletion) was concentrated using a 10 kDa cut-off filter and digested with trypsin as described previously in Zila et al., Clin. Proteomics, 2018. Purified samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy nLC-1000 HPLC system. Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (15 cm × 75 µm, 2 µm particle size, Thermo) with mobile phases A = 98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.15% formic acid (FA) and B = 98% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.15% FA at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed with a linear gradient from 5% to 30% B in 90 min. The data-dependent acquisition was performed with MS scans in the Orbitrap analyzer acquired at 120 000 nominal resolution. The 15 most abundant precursors per cycle (m/z 350-1600, charge state ≥2+) were fragmented in the linear ion trap after isolation with a 2.0 m/z window and normalized collision energy of 35%. MS/MS scans were acquired in the linear ion trap at normal scan speed. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
Protein inference and label-free quantitative (LFQ) data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0) and the Perseus statistical analysis package (v1.6.10.0). Protein inference was achieved searching against Homo sapiens proteins in the SwissProt Database. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was included as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Furthermore, search criteria included a minimum of two peptide identifications per protein (at least one of them unique), and FDR calculation based on q-values performed for peptide identification and protein inference (<0.01). Proteins were filtered for reversed sequences, contaminants and a minimum of three independent identifications per protein. Using Perseus, differences of LFQ values were calculated by applying a two-sided t-test with p <0.05 and an FDR-based permutation correction and significantly up- and down-regulated proteins with a minimum of a twofold abundance difference (log2 fold change) were determined. All proteins that met these criteria were considered in the study. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Melanoma; serum; immunodepletion; drug response; therapeutic efficacy; anti-pd1 therapy; biomarker discovery

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


