### Accession
PXD031034

### Title
Combining confocal microscopy, dSTORM, and mass spectroscopy to unveil the evolution of the protein corona associated with nanostructured lipid nanocarriers during blood-brain barrier crossing

### Description
Upon entering in contact with the biological environment, nanostructures are immediately covered by biomolecules, and in particular proteins forming the so-called “protein corona” (PC). The phenomenon of PC formation has gained great attention in recent years due to its implication for the use of nanostructures in biomedicine. In fact, it has been shown that the formation of the PC can impact the performance of nanostructures by reducing their stability, causing aggregation, increasing their toxicity, and causing unexpected and undesired nanostructure-cell interactions. In this work, we decided to study for the first time the formation and the evolution of PC on the surface of nanostructured lipid carriers loaded with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs), before and after the crossing of an in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier. Combining confocal microscopy, direct STochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (dSTORM), and proteomic analysis, we were able to provide a complete analysis of the PC formation and evolution. In particular, we evidence that PC formation is a fast process, being formed around particles even after just 1 min of exposure to fetal bovine serum. Moreover, PC formed around particles is extremely heterogeneous: while some particles have no associated PC at all, others are completely covered by proteins. Lastly, the interaction with an in vitro blood-brain barrier model strongly affects the PC composition: in particular, a large amount of the proteins forming the initial PC is lost after the BBB passage and is partially replaced by new proteins derived from both the brain endothelial cells and from the cell culture medium. Altogether, the presented data could potentially provide new insights into the design and fabrication of lipid nanostructures for the treatment of central nervous system disorders.

### Sample Protocol
LMNVs were pre-incubated with FBS as previously described to form LMNVs-PC, and then recovered through centrifugation. Six-well transwell inserts (3 µm pore size) seeded with bEnd.3 grown for 5 days and cultured as previously mentioned were treated with 400 µg/ml of LMNVs-PC, while wells without cells containing only medium doped with LMNVs-PC were used as a control. After 72 h from the addition of LMNVs-PC, the nanostructures present in the basolateral sides were isolated using centrifugation (16000 g for 5 minutes at RT, three times in PBS). After the last centrifugation passage, the obtained supernatant was discharged, and the LMNVs-PC pellet was frozen at -80°C. After thawing, samples were solubilized in 30 μl 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 40 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), and 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8 at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated with an Ultrasonic Processor UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cycles of 30 s. Lysates samples were digested with trypsin and LysC, at a 1:50 and 1:100 ratio of enzyme to sample protein respectively, overnight at 37°C. Then nanoparticles were separated from the samples by a DynaMag-2 magnetic particle concentrator (Invitrogen) and treated with 30 μl of 5% NH4OH. The supernatant separated from the nanoparticles was concentrated and joined with the rest of the sample and processed by iST protocol.The resulting peptides were analyzed by a nano-UHPLC-MS/MS system using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instrument). Elution was performed with an EASY spray column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific) maintained at 55°C at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a 140 min non-linear gradient of 7-45% solution B (80% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 5% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid). Orbitrap detection was used for MS1 measurements at a resolving power of 120 K in a range between 375 and 1500 m/z and with a standard AGC target. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 28% with a standard AGC target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Quadrupole isolation with a 1.6 m/z isolation window was used, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software26, version 1.6.8.0, was used to process the raw data. The false discovery rate (FDR) for the identification of proteins, peptides, and PSM (peptide-spectrum match) was set to 0.01. A minimum length of 6 amino acids was required for peptide identification. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot Mouse and Bos Taurus database (release Mouse_UP000000589 and Bos taurus_UP000009136 June 2019). In the processing, the variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), and Deamidation (NQ). Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Algorithm MaxLFQ was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option “match between runs” to reduce the number of the missing proteins. The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software27 version 1.6.10.43. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed with the app ClueGO of Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
Upon coming into contact with the biological environment, nanostructures are immediately covered by biomolecules, particularly by proteins forming the so-called "protein corona" (PC). The phenomenon of PC formation has gained great attention in recent years due to its implication in the use of nanostructures in biomedicine. In fact, it has been shown that the formation of the PC can impact the performance of nanostructures by reducing their stability, causing aggregation, increasing their toxicity, and providing unexpected and undesired nanostructure-cell interactions. In this work, we decided to study for the first time the formation and the evolution of PC on the surface of nanostructured lipid carriers loaded with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, before and after the crossing of an <i>in vitro</i> model of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Combining confocal microscopy, direct STochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (dSTORM), and proteomic analysis, we were able to carry out a complete analysis of the PC formation and evolution. In particular, we highlighted that PC formation is a fast process, being formed around particles even after just 1 min of exposure to fetal bovine serum. Moreover, PC formed around particles is extremely heterogeneous: while some particles have no associated PC at all, others are completely covered by proteins. Lastly, the interaction with an <i>in vitro</i> BBB model strongly affects the PC composition: in particular, a large amount of the proteins forming the initial PC is lost after the BBB passage and they are partially replaced by new proteins derived from both the brain endothelial cells and the cell culture medium. Altogether, the obtained data could potentially provide new insights into the design and fabrication of lipid nanostructures for the treatment of central nervous system disorders.

### Keywords
Protein corona; blood-brain barrier; lipid nanoparticles; magnetic nanoparticles; super resolution microscopy; dstorm; mass spectroscopy.

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini


