### Accession
PXD028855

### Title
Secretome of LYN deficient HS-5 stroma cells

### Description
LYN kinase is a tyrosine kinase, that regulates cellular homeostasis in a context specific manner. Our group could show, that its expression in the leukemic microenvironment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia contributes to disease progression (Nguyen PH et al.; Cancer Cell; 2016). To analyze the effect of LYN kinase on the leukemia supportive phenotype of the bone marrow stromal cell line HS-5, we generated single cell clones of LYN deficient cells. These cells were analyzed in a Multi-Omic approach, including quantitative, label-free proteomic analysis of the Secretome.

### Sample Protocol
8x106 HS-5 LYNWT and LYNKO label-free cells (3 separate single cell clones per genotype) were seeded in 15cm dishes in complete growth medium and left overnight to adhere. The next day, cells were carefully washed, and medium was changed to serum- and Phenol-red free RPMI (Gibco). Cells were cultivated 24h under these conditions, then supernatant was harvested. Further processing included removal of cell debris by centrifugation, concentration of proteins on a 3k Amicon centrifugal filter (Merck) according to manufacturer’s protocol 5000 rpm 1h and resuspension in 6M Urea buffer + protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). 50µg of protein lysates were reduced with DTT and digested with trypsin overnight.  All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC  (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 119.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 19.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 2.0 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 25.0 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6, MPI for Biochemistry) by searching the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot human reference proteome. Peptide and protein quantification was conducted using the label-free quantitation module of MaxQuant (MaxLFQ) with the default software settings. Normalization was performed using vsn and remaining missing values were classified in two categories as described in the MSnbase R package for further imputation. Differentially expressed proteins were identified using limma R package under the following condition (p-adjusted ≤ 0.05; 1  log2 fold change  -1). Only proteins reported/predicted as secreted were considered for further analysis (protein cellular locations from Uniprot and the Human Protein Atlas were extracted to accomplish this purpose).

### Publication Abstract
Microenvironmental bystander cells are essential for the progression of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). We have discovered previously that LYN kinase promotes the formation of a microenvironmental niche for CLL. Here we provide mechanistic evidence that LYN regulates the polarization of stromal fibroblasts to support leukemic progression. LYN is overexpressed in fibroblasts of lymph nodes of CLL patients. LYN-deficient stromal cells reduce CLL growth in vivo. LYN-deficient fibroblasts show markedly reduced leukemia feeding capacity in vitro. Multi-omics profiling reveals that LYN regulates the polarization of fibroblasts towards an inflammatory cancer-associated phenotype through modulation of cytokine secretion and extracellular matrix composition. Mechanistically, LYN deletion reduces inflammatory signaling including reduction of c-JUN expression, which in turn augments the expression of Thrombospondin-1, which binds to CD47 thereby impairing CLL viability. Together, our findings suggest that LYN is essential for rewiring fibroblasts towards a leukemia-supportive phenotype.

### Keywords
Hs-5, Lyn kinase, Bmsc, Stroma, Secretome, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
University of Cologne 
Department I for Interal Medicine 
University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and Cologne University Hospital, Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf, Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne; CECAD Center of Excellence on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander F. vom Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hallek
University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and Cologne University Hospital, Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf, Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne; CECAD Center of Excellence on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases, 50931 Cologne, Germany


