### Accession
PXD022099

### Title
C57BL/6J mice B and T cell LC-MSMS study

### Description
Proteome isolated from C57BL/6J mouse B and T cells are evluated for the presence of novel open reading frame products (nORFs). Translation products encoded by non canonical or novel open reading frame (ORF) genomic regions are generally considered too small to play any significant biological role, and dismissed as inconsequential. We conduct a systematic study of novel ORFs to gain new insights into normal biological and disease processes.

### Sample Protocol
Spleen from six male and six female C57BL/6J mice, age 12 weeks, were collected in cold 1x PBS (-Ca, -Mg) and gently crushed on a 40µM Nylon cell strainer (Fisherbrand, 22363547) using Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM, Sigma I3390), 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Sigma F9665), 1% antibiotic + antimicotic (Sigma A5955) media, 1% L-glutamine (Sigma G7513)) to isolate splenocytes. Samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 400 x g and pellet was resuspended in 1x MojoSort buffer (Biolegend 480017).Cells were incubated with 2ml of RBC Lysis Buffer (Biolegend, 420301) for 3 min, and then 8ml IMDM-10.Cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 400 x g, resuspended in 1x MojoSort buffer to a final density 400μL of buffer per 10⁸ total cells.To cells, 360μL of antibody cocktail of biotin-conjugated monoclonal anti-mouse antibodies from T cells isolation kit (Miltenyi,130-106-643) and  B cells isolation kit (Miltenyi, 130-090-862) were added at a final concentration of 100μl biotin antibody per 10e8 cells and incubated for 5 min in the refrigerator, then 1.08ml of cold 1x MojoSort buffer and 720μl of α-Biotin microbeads were added and incubated for 10 min in the refrigerator. Cells were diluted with 15ml 1x mojo buffer and centrifuged for 5 min at 400 x g. Pellets were resuspended in 1.44ml 1X MojoSort buffer and depleted by passing through LD columns (Milteny, 130-042-901) in magnetic field and flow-through was collected. Columns were washed twice with extra 1ml of buffer.To cells, 1μl antibody each of CD4-FITC, CD25-PE-Vio770 (PE-Cy7), CD44-APC, CD62L-PE was added for individual flow channels. Controls were prepared using 1μl of Streptavidin-V450, and a negative control with no antibody in cells. Antibodies and cells were incubated on ice for 20 min, then 850μl 1x mojosort buffer was added. Cells were centrifuged at 2000 rpm, for 5 min and resuspended in 500 μl buffer then processed through flow cytometer. We obtained 95% CD4+ cells that were live, single cells and streptavidin negative. CD25 channel filter removed 0.3% cells further, resulting in about 94% cells. A CD62+ and CD44+ gates resulted in 73 - 80% (CD4+ CD25- CD62+ CD44-) cells. For B cells, >99% of population processed through FACS sorter were selected for naive B cells (CD45R (B220)+).  Cells were lysed in buffer (6M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 5mM Magnesium Acetate, 30mM Tris pH 8.0), and 15μg protein in 5x Laemmli buffer with 5% b-mercaptoethanol was loaded on Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Gels (BioRad). Gel lanes were cut into three sections for peptide extraction. Gel sections were cut into 1-2mm cubes, washed with 50% Acetonitrile and 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate solution until blue stain is washed. Gel pieces were treated with 100% Acetonitrile, and then reduced with 10mM DTT in 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate for reduction at 56℃ for 1 hour, and alkylated with 55mM Iodoacetamide in 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate in dark for 45 min at room temperature.Gel pieces were washed with 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate, and then treated with 50% Acetonitrile followed by 100% Acetonitrile. Subsequently, gel pieces were treated with diluted trypsin (5ng/ul) enzyme for overnight at 37℃.Peptides were extracted, dried, and dissolved in 3% Acetonitrile with 0.1% Formic Acid. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2microm particle size, 100A pore size, 75microm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5microm particle size, 100A pore size, 300microm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 microL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes.The LC elutant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000 and was scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, NCE:25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500.  Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
Thermo mass spectrometry raw files were submitted to four databases search utilizing Proteome Discoverer v2.1 and Mascot 2.6. Briefly, an average of 383216 mass spectra were obtained from each sample. All mass spectra were initially searched independently against three amino acid databases - Uniprot database, sORF database (sORFs.org, SmProt), and altORFs (OpenProt.org) database and against the cRAP database of common contaminants. The spectra identification was performed with the following parameters: MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.8 Da, and the peptide mass tolerance set to 10ppm. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavages were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whilst variable modifications consisted of: oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine.  High confidence peptide identifications were determined using Percolator node, where false discovery rate estimation (FDR) < 0.01 was used. A minimum of two high confidence peptides per protein was required for identification.

### Publication Abstract
Uncharacterized and unannotated open-reading frames, which we refer to as novel open reading frames (nORFs), may sometimes encode peptides that remain unexplored for novel therapeutic opportunities. To our knowledge, no systematic identification and characterization of transcripts encoding nORFs or their translation products in cancer, or in any other physiological process has been performed. We use our curated nORFs database (nORFs.org), together with RNA-Seq data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Genotype-Expression (GTEx) consortiums, to identify transcripts containing nORFs that are expressed frequently in cancer or matched normal tissue across 22 cancer types. We show nORFs are subject to extensive dysregulation at the transcript level in cancer tissue and that a small subset of nORFs are associated with overall patient survival, suggesting that nORFs may have prognostic value. We also show that nORF products can form protein-like structures with post-translational modifications. Finally, we perform in silico screening for inhibitors against nORF-encoded proteins that are disrupted in stomach and esophageal cancer, showing that they can potentially be targeted by inhibitors. We hope this work will guide and motivate future studies that perform in-depth characterization of nORF functions in cancer and other diseases.

### Keywords
Spleen, Lc-msms, Mouse, B cells, T cells

### Affiliations
Prabakaran lab, Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Chaitanya Erady

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sudhakaran Prabakaran
Prabakaran lab, Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom


