### Accession
PXD017743

### Title
Molecular profiling of driver events in metastatic uveal melanoma

### Description
Uveal melanoma (UM) is a rare form of melanoma with a genetics and immunology that is different from skin melanoma. Previous studies have identified genetic driver events of early stage disease when the tumor is confined to the eye. In this study, we have characterized genomic events in UM metastases using whole-genome and RNA sequencing from thirty-two and twenty-eight patients, respectively, and profiled individual tumor infiltrating lymphocytes in a number of the metastases. We find that 91% of the patients have metastases carrying inactivating events in the tumor suppressor BAP1 and this coincided with somatic alterations in GNAQ, GNA11, CYSLTR2, PLCB4, SF3B1 and/or CDKN2A. Mutational signature analysis revealed a rare subset of tumors with prominent signs of UV damage, associated with outlier mutational burden. We study copy number variations (CNV) and find overrepresented events, some of which were not altered in matched primary eye tumors. A focused siRNA screen identified functionally significant genes of some of the segments recurrently gained. We reintroduced a functional copy of BAP1 into a patient-derived BAP1 deficient tumor cell line and found broad transcriptomic changes of genes associated with subtype distinction and prognosis in primary UM. Lastly, our analysis of the immune microenvironments of metastases revealed a presence of tumor-reactive T cells. However, a large fraction expressed the immune checkpoint receptors such as TIM-3, TIGIT and LAG3. These results provide an updated view of genomic events represented in metastatic UM and immune interactions in advanced lesions.

### Sample Protocol
filter-aided sample preparation, trypsin digestion, TMT10plex, basic revser-phase fractionation, nLC-MS/MS on Fusion Lumos equipped with a FAIMS source

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2, Mascot search engine, SwissProt Homo sapiens database, peptide tol. 5ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.6Da, only unique peptides used for quantification, protein FDR threshold of 1%

### Publication Abstract
Metastatic uveal melanoma is less well understood than its primary counterpart, has a distinct biology compared to skin melanoma, and lacks effective treatments. Here we genomically profile metastatic tumors and infiltrating lymphocytes. BAP1 alterations are overrepresented and found in 29/32 of cases. Reintroducing a functional BAP1 allele into a deficient patient-derived cell line, reveals a broad shift towards a transcriptomic subtype previously associated with better prognosis of the primary disease. One outlier tumor has a&#xa0;high mutational burden associated with UV-damage. CDKN2A deletions also occur, which are rarely present in primaries. A focused knockdown screen is used to investigate overexpressed genes&#xa0;associated withcopy number gains. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes are in several cases found tumor-reactive, but expression of the immune checkpoint receptors TIM-3, TIGIT and LAG3 is also abundant. This study represents the largest whole-genome analysis of uveal melanoma to date, and presents an updated view of the metastatic disease.

### Keywords
Uveal melanoma, Metastasis, Bap1

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


