### Accession
PXD026997

### Title
The human proteome project, C-HPP 18 chromosome project

### Description
The Russian part of C-HPP is aimed to identify proteins encoded by the 18 human chromosome. In this project, 3 liver tissue samples were studied by standart Shotgun and 2 dimensional liquid chromatography approach to enhance the sensitivity of the MS method. The total amount of proteins found in samples is 5022 and the proteins encoded by the 18 human chromosome is 64.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue was homogenized in the lysis buffer containing: 2M Urea, 1% Na deoxycholate, 147 mM NaCl, 100 mM PBS pH 7.2, 15% AcN, 5 mM TCEP. The homogenized tissue was sonicated for 10 cycles on ice. The solution was clarified by centrifugation 10000 g for 5 min. Cysteines were reduced by TCEP at 60 C for 30 min. After cooling the solution cysteines were alkylated by 2-CAA 50 mM for 30 min. The resulted solution was diluted 10 times by 100 mM TEA pH 8.0 to concentration 1 mg/ml of total protein. Trypsin was added to the solution in a 1:100 ratio and incubated for 4 hours at 38 C. After that one more aliqote of trypsin was added and incubated for 4 hours at 38 C. The digestion was stopped by the addition of concentrated formic acid to a final concentration of 3%. The digest was centrifuged at 4 C to clarify the solution. The peptide samples were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid solution.

### Data Protocol
The data was processed with MaxQuant software v1.6.3.4 by target/decoy method. Cleavage by trypsin, max number of missed cleavages - 2. Oxidation of M and Acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylaion was set as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
The data was acquired from 3 normal human liver tissues by LC-MS methods. The tissue liver samples from male subjects post mortem were obtained from ILSBio LLC (https://bioivt.com/). Liver tissue was frozen in liquid nitrogen, transported and shipped on dry ice. The proteins were extracted and purified followed up by trypsin hydrolysis. The peptide mixture was aliquoted and analyzed by different LC-MS approaches: one-dimensional shotgun LC-MS, two-dimensional LC-MS, two-dimensional SRM SIS (Selected Reaction Monitoring with Stable Isotope-labeled peptide Standards). The Shotgun assay resulted in a qualitative in-depth human liver proteome, and a semi-quantitative iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) value was calculated to show the relative protein content of the sample. Absolute quantitative concentrations of proteins encoded by human chromosome 18 using SRM SIS were obtained.

### Keywords
Human proteome project, C-hpp, Human liver tissue

### Affiliations
Department of proteomics and mass spectrometry, laboratory of systems biology, Institute of biomedical chemistry, Moscow, Russia.
IBMC (Institute of Biomedical Chemistry)

### Submitter
Nikita Vavilov

### Lab Head
Dr Victor G. Zgoda
Department of proteomics and mass spectrometry, laboratory of systems biology, Institute of biomedical chemistry, Moscow, Russia.


