### Accession
PXD043490

### Title
The phosphatase DUSP22/JKAP inhibits UBR2-mediated K63-ubiquitination and  activation of Lck in TCR signaling

### Description
DUSP22 (also named JKAP) is a dual-specificity phosphatase that inhibits T cell activation. Here we identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase UBR2 as an upstream activator of Lck during T-cell activation. JKAP dephosphorylated UBR2 at two residues, leading to ubiquitin-mediated UBR2 degradation. The SCF (SKP1-CUL1-βTrCP) complex induced UBR2 Lys48-linked ubiquitination at three lysine residues. Moreover, single-cell RNA sequencing analysis and UBR2 knockout showed that UBR2 increased proinflammatory cytokines. Remarkably, UBR2 induced Lys63-linked ubiquitination of Lck at two lysine residues and subsequent Lck Tyr394 phosphorylation/activation in TCR signaling. Conversely, TCR-induced Lck activation and JKAP knockout-enhanced inflammatory phenotypes were attenuated by UBR2 knockout. Consistently, the UBR2- Lck interaction and Lck Lys63-linked ubiquitination were induced in peripheral blood T cells of human SLE patients. Collectively, UBR2 protein stability and UBR2-induced Lck ubiquitination/activation are inhibited by JKAP, leading to attenuation of T-cell activation and T-cell-mediated inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
To search for novel regulators that regulate JKAP protein levels, anti-Myc-JKAP immunocomplexes from transfected HEK293T cells were precipitated and then subjected to proteomics. The E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase UBR2 was identified as a JKAP-interacting protein.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography — mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) For the identification of JKAP-interacting proteins, immunocomplexes of Myc-tagged JKAP were immunoprecipitated with anti-Myc agarose beads (clone 9E10, Sigma Aldrich) from lysates of HEK293T cells transfected with vector or Myc-JKAP plasmid. For the identification of JKAP-induced UBR2 Lys48-linked ubiquitination residues, immunocomplexes of Flag-tagged UBR2 were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody (clone M2, Sigma-Aldrich) from lysates of HEK293T cells co-transfected with Flag-UBR2 and Lys48-only ubiquitin (K48-UB) with or without Myc-JKAP, followed by treatment with or without 25 μM MG132 for 4 h. For the identification of the UBR2-interacting proteins, immunocomplexes of Flag-tagged UBR2 were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody (clone M2, Sigma-Aldrich) from lysates of HEK293T cells transfected with vector or Flag-UBR2 plasmid. For identification of the UBR2 dephosphorylation sites by JKAP, Flag-tagged UBR2 were immunoprecipitated from Flag-UBR2-transfected HEK293T cells with or without Myc-JKAP. For the identification of UBR2-induced Lck ubiquitination residues, immunocomplexes of Flag tagged Lck were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag antibody (clone M2, Sigma-Aldrich) from lysates of Jurkat T cells co-transfected with Myc-UBR2 and Flag-Lck. Protein bands with higher molecular weights (> 150 kDa) and lower molecular weights (< 150 kDa) were collected from Instant Blue (GeneMark)-stained SDS-PAGE gels. Gel extracted proteins were digested with trypsin and subjected to LC–MS/MS analyses by LTQ-OrbitrapElite hybrid mass spectrometer (for identifying JKAP-interacting proteins and UBR2-interacting protein)or LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion hybrid mass spectrometer (for mapping UBR2 phosphorylated residues, UBR2 ubiquitinated residues, and Lck ubiquitinated residues) using approaches described previously50, 51. The peptide data were analyzed by MASCOT MS/MS Ions Search (Matrix Science) under the following condition: peptide mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment MS/MS tolerance, 0.6 Da; allow up to one missed cleavage; peptide charge, 2+, 3+, and 4+.

### Publication Abstract
DUSP22 is a dual-specificity phosphatase that inhibits T cell activation by inactivating the kinase Lck. Here we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase UBR2 is a positive upstream regulator of Lck during T-cell activation. DUSP22 dephosphorylates UBR2 at specific Serine residues, leading to ubiquitin-mediated UBR2 degradation. UBR2 is also modified by the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase complex via Lys48-linked ubiquitination at multiple Lysine residues. Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis and UBR2 loss of function experiments showed that UBR2 is a positive regulator of proinflammatory cytokine expression. Mechanistically, UBR2 induces Lys63-linked ubiquitination of Lck at Lys99 and Lys276 residues, followed by Lck Tyr394 phosphorylation and activation as part of TCR signalling. Inflammatory phenotypes induced by TCR-triggered Lck activation or knocking out DUSP22, are attenuated by genomic deletion of UBR2. UBR2-Lck interaction and Lck Lys63-linked ubiquitination are induced in the peripheral blood T cells of human SLE patients, which demonstrate the relevance of the UBR2-mediated regulation of inflammation to human pathology. In summary, we show here an important regulatory mechanism of T cell activation, which finetunes the balance between T cell response and aggravated inflammation.

### Keywords
Hek293t

### Affiliations
NHRI
Immunology Research Center, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas

### Submitter
ying chun shih

### Lab Head
Dr Tse-Hua Tan
Immunology Research Center, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas


