### Accession
PXD039472

### Title
Ninety-six–hour starved peripheral blood mononuclear cell supernatant inhibited LA7 breast cancer stem cells induced tumor

### Description
The microenvironment of solid tumors such as breast cancer is heterogeneous and complex, containing different types of cell, including cancer stem cells and immune cells. We previously reported the immunoregulatory behavior of the human immune cell in a solid tumor microenvironment-like culture under serum starvation stress for 96 h. Here, we examined the effect of this culture-derived solution on breast cancer development in rats.

### Sample Protocol
HPLC separation was done using an EASY-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific, USA) system with the following columns and chromatographic settings: The peptides were applied to a C18 column (Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column, C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 75 μm Nanoviper, Thermo Scientific, USA) and subsequently separated using an analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75μm ID, PepMap C18 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific, USA) by applying a linear gradient (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN) at a flow rate of 280 nl/minute. The gradient used was: 1-25% B in 120 minutes, 25-50%B in 10 minutes, 84% B10 minutes. Mass-spectrometric analysis was done on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass-spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) which was coupled online to the HPLC-system. The mass spectrometer was operated in the so-called “data-dependent” mode where after each global scan the five most intense peptide signals are chosen automatically for MS/MS analysis. Nano-LC HPLC separation and online coupled ESI-MS/MS measurement were performed according to the valid versions of the SOPs:P-EXT-011 „Auftrennung und Analyse von Peptidmischungenmit der nanoflow-HPLCAnlageEksigentNanoLC-Ultra “P-EXT-012 „MS/MS Analyse von Peptidenmit dem Massenspektrometer Orbitrap XL “

### Data Protocol
To identify the protein components of the 96 h-SPS solution, we used LC-ESI-MS/MS data for database search with the software Mascot using human sequences from SwissProt database (20 259 sequences). Peptide mass tolerance was set to 50ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to o.6 Da, a significance threshold p<0.05 was used. Oxidation at methionine was set as variable modification for the searches. Peptides with up to 1 missed cleavage site were searched. An ion score cut-off of > 26 (individual ion score greater than 26 indicate identity or extensive homology) was applied for the peptide identification. 294 significantly expressed proteins were identified in the solution.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunohistochemistry, Cancer development, La7, Serum starvation, Nano-lc-esi-ms/ q11 ms, Adaptive immunity, Breast cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Grosshadern, LMU University, 81377 Munich, Germany
Jena University Hospital

### Submitter
Reza Gheitasi

### Lab Head
Dr Behnam Kalali
Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Grosshadern, LMU University, 81377 Munich, Germany


