### Accession
PXD035048

### Title
Contraction of brain pericytes in response to Islet Amyloid PolyPeptide is reversed by pramlintide.

### Description
The islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP), a pancreas-produced peptide, has beneficial functions in its monomeric form. However, IAPP aggregates, related to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), are toxic not only for the pancreas, but also for the brain. In the latter, IAPP is often found in vessels, where it is highly toxic for pericytes, cells that have contractile properties and regulate capillary blood flow. The aim of this study is to assess whether IAPP oligomers alter the morphology and contractility of pericytes using an in vitro brain vasculature model and evaluate the association between IAPP and capillary contraction in human brain tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Collected human brain vascular pericytes were lysed in RIPA, and proteins precipitated in 90 % EtOH. Proteins were treated with dithioreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA) and trypsinated. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on a fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB human database (UP000005640).

### Publication Abstract
The islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP), a pancreas-produced peptide, has beneficial functions in its monomeric form. However, IAPP aggregates, related to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), are toxic not only for the pancreas, but also for the brain. In the latter, IAPP is often found in vessels, where it is highly toxic for pericytes, mural cells that have contractile properties and regulate capillary blood flow. In the current study, we use a microvasculature model, where human brain vascular pericytes (HBVP) are co-cultured together with human cerebral microvascular endothelial cells, to demonstrate that IAPP oligomers (oIAPP) alter the morphology and contractility of HBVP. Contraction and relaxation of HBVP was verified using the vasoconstrictor sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) and vasodilator Y27632, where the former increased, and the latter decreased, the number of HBVP with round morphology. Increased number of round HBVP was also seen after oIAPP stimulation, and the effect was reverted by the IAPP analogue pramlintide, Y27632, and the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin. Inhibition of the IAPP receptor with the antagonist AC187 only reverted IAPP effects partially. Finally, we demonstrate by immunostaining of human brain tissue against laminin that individuals with high amount of brain IAPP levels show significantly lower capillary diameter and altered mural cell morphology compared to individuals with low brain IAPP levels. These results indicate that HBVP, in an in vitro model of microvasculature, respond morphologically to vasoconstrictors, dilators, and myosin inhibitors. They also suggest that oIAPP induces contraction of these mural cells and that pramlintide can reverse such contraction.

### Keywords
Vasculopathy, Blood-brain barrier, Amylin, Lc-ms/ms, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden
Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Malin Wennström
Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden


