### Accession
PXD007697

### Title
Proteomics analysis of skeletal muscle from leptin-deficient ob/ob mice reveals adaptive remodeling of metabolic characteristics and fiber type composition

### Description
Skeletal muscle insulin resistance, an early metabolic defect in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes, may be a cause or consequence of altered protein expressions profiles. Proteomics technology offers enormous promise to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying pathologies, however, the analysis of skeletal muscle is challenging. Using a state-of-the-art mass spectrometry (MS) based workflow, we performed a global proteomics analysis of skeletal muscle from leptin-deficient, obese, type 2 diabetic (ob/ob) and lean mice, identifying more than 6,000 proteins with 118 proteins differentially regulated in obesity. This included protein kinases, phosphatases, and secreted and fiber type associated proteins. Enzymes involved in lipid metabolism in skeletal muscle from ob/ob mice were increased, providing evidence against reduced fatty acid oxidation in lipid-induced insulin resistance. Mitochondrial and peroxisomal proteins, as well as components of pyruvate and lactate metabolism were likewise increased. Finally, the skeletal muscle proteome from ob/ob mice displayed a shift towards the ‘slow fiber type’. This detailed characterization of obese rodent models of type 2 diabetes demonstrates an efficient workflow for skeletal muscle proteomics, which may easily be adapted to other complex tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Quadriceps muscle and differentiated C2C12 cells were lysed in buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.1 M DTT and 4% SDS), and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Quadriceps muscles were homogenized with an Ultra Turbax blender (IKA). Lysates were sonicated using a Branson type sonicator and clarified by centrifugation (16,100 x g for 10 min). Muscle and C2C12 lysates were processed according to the MED-FASP (multiple enzymes digestion with filter-aided sample preparation) protocol using endoproteinase LysC and trypsin. Peptides originated from trypsin, and LysC digestion were purified on C18 StageTips before measuring on LCMS instruments.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.4.3.2(http://www.maxquant.org). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (integrated into MaxQuant) against the decoy UniProt-mouse database (Version June 2012, 59,345 entries) supplemented with 262 frequently observed contaminants and forward and reverse sequences. In the main Andromeda search precursor, mass and fragment mass were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. MS runs from skeletal muscle and C2C12 myotubes were analyzed with or without the ‘match between runs’ option. For matching, a retention time window of 30 sec was selected. When all identified peptides were shared between two proteins, results were combined and reported as one protein group. Proteins matching to the reverse database were excluded. Protein quantification was based on the Max LFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle insulin resistance, an early metabolic defect in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (T2D), may be a cause or consequence of altered protein expression profiles. Proteomics technology offers enormous promise to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying pathologies, however, the analysis of skeletal muscle is challenging. Using state-of-the-art multienzyme digestion and filter-aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) and a mass spectrometry (MS)-based workflow, we performed a global proteomics analysis of skeletal muscle from leptin-deficient, obese, insulin resistant (ob/ob) and lean mice in mere two fractions in a short time (8 h per sample). We identified more than 6000 proteins with 118 proteins differentially regulated in obesity. This included protein kinases, phosphatases, and secreted and fiber type associated proteins. Enzymes involved in lipid metabolism in skeletal muscle from ob/ob mice were increased, providing evidence against reduced fatty acid oxidation in lipid-induced insulin resistance. Mitochondrial and peroxisomal proteins, as well as components of pyruvate and lactate metabolism, were increased. Finally, the skeletal muscle proteome from ob/ob mice displayed a shift toward the "slow fiber type." This detailed characterization of an obese rodent model of T2D demonstrates an efficient workflow for skeletal muscle proteomics, which may easily be adapted to other complex tissues.

### Keywords
Obesity, Mouse skeletal muscle, Lcmsms, C2c12 muscle cells, Diabetes

### Affiliations
4The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Clinical Proteomics, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Copenhagen University

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Matthias Mann
4The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Clinical Proteomics, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.


