### Accession
PXD026252

### Title
Label-free proteomics of immuno-purified SYP61-trans-Golgi Network compartment in control condition and upon sphingolipid acyl-chain length reduction by metazachlor.

### Description
The trans-Golgi Network (TGN) in plants is a main sorting hub for proteins and lipids. The lipid composition at the TGN is instrumental to the polar sorting of the auxin efflux carrier PIN2 from TGN to the apical membrane. Here, we immuno-purified the full and intact TGN using the TGN-resident syntaxin SYP61 to identify and quantify TGN-proteins which abundance at TGN is dependent on the acyl-chain length of very-long chain fatty acids-containing lipids such as sphingolipids.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis plants expressing SYP61-CFP were grinded in a detergent-free extraction buffer (HEPES 50 mM pH 7.5, 0.45 M sucrose, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.5% polyvinylpyrrolidone, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) and loaded on a sucrose gradient (38%-33%-8%). The total extract of membrane was collected and incubated with magnetic beads coated with anti-CFP antibodies to immuno-precipitate SYP61-CFP compartments. Immuno-precipitated samples were eluted in 1% SDS, 0.3 μL of 2M dithiothreitol, 2.3 μL of 1M iodoacetamide, and 6.9 μL of 5x Laemmli buffer sequentially with an incubation for 30 min at 37 oC. The protein amounts of the eluted samples were equilibrated using the Stain-Free protein visualization system. The equilibrated samples were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and deposited onto SDS-PAGE gel for concentration and cleaning purposes. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the gel and subsequently cut into 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile (ACN), rinsed twice in ultrapure water, and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, the gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with trypsin solution (10 ng/µL in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 oC for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 oC. Gel pieces were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/CAN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to a final volume of 100 µL. Digests were finally acidified by addition of 2.4 µL of formic acid (5% v/v).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discover 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against Araport v11 protein database. Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) was considered as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as fixed modification. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm77 and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level. For label-free quantitative data analysis, raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics). Data processing includes the following steps: (i) features detection. (ii) features alignment across the samples to compare, (iii) volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) normalization on features ratio median, (v) import of sequence information, (vi) calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides), (vii) a Wilcox rank sum test to compare each group and filtering of proteins based on p-value <0.05. Only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Active thermogenesis in the brown adipose tissue (BAT) facilitating the utilization of lipids and glucose is critical for maintaining body temperature and reducing metabolic diseases, whereas inactive BAT accumulates lipids in brown adipocytes (BAs), leading to BAT whitening. Although cellular crosstalk between endothelial cells (ECs) and adipocytes is essential for the transport and utilization of fatty acid in BAs, the angiocrine roles of ECs mediating this crosstalk remain poorly understood. Using single-nucleus RNA sequencing and knock-out male mice, we demonstrate that stem cell factor (SCF) derived from ECs upregulates gene expressions and protein levels of the enzymes for de novo lipogenesis, and promotes lipid accumulation by activating c-Kit in BAs. In the early phase of lipid accumulation induced by denervation or thermoneutrality, transiently expressed c-Kit on BAs increases the protein levels of the lipogenic enzymes via PI3K and AKT signaling. EC-specific SCF deletion and BA-specific c-Kit deletion attenuate the induction of the lipogenic enzymes and suppress the enlargement of lipid droplets in BAs after denervation or thermoneutrality in male mice. These data provide insight into SCF/c-Kit signaling as a regulator that promotes lipid accumulation through the increase of lipogenic enzymes in BAT when thermogenesis is inhibited.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Immuno-purification, Metazachlor, Sphingolipid, Trans-golgi network, Free proteomics, Acyl-chain length

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Bonneu M
Plateforme Proteome, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France


