### Accession
PXD007233

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa proteome under hypoxic stress conditions mimicking the cystic fibrosis lung

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a Gram-negative, opportunistic bacterium and a major etiological agent in monogenic disease cystic fibrosis (CF). High density colonies of P. aeruginosa are often isolated from hypoxic mucus plugs in respiratory tract of CF patients, indicating high adaptive capacities of the bacterium. Despite the high prevalence and related patient mortality, the protein machinery enabling the bacterium to adapt to this hypoxic environment remains to be fully elucidated. We investigated this by performing both SWATH mass spectrometry and data-dependent SPS-MS3 of TMT labelled peptides to profile the proteomes of two P. aeruginosa CF isolates, PASS2 and PASS3, and a laboratory reference strain, PAO1, grown under hypoxic stress (O2<1%) and aerobic conditions in media that mimics the nutrient components of the CF lung. 3,967 P. aeruginosa proteins were quantitated (FDR <1%) across all three strains, reflecting approximately 71% of predicted ORFs in PAO1 and representing the most comprehensive proteome of clinically relevant P. aeruginosa to date. Comparative analysis revealed 735, 640 and 364 proteins were altered by two-fold or more when comparing low oxygen to aerobic growth in PAO1, PASS2 and PASS3 respectively. Strikingly, under hypoxic stress, all strains showed concurrent increased abundance of proteins required for both aerobic (cbb3-1 and cbb3-2 terminal oxidases) and anaerobic denitrification and arginine fermentation, with the two clinical isolates showing higher relative expression of proteins in these pathways. Additionally, functional annotation revealed that clinical strains portray a unique expression profile of replication, membrane biogenesis and virulence proteins during hypoxia which may endow these bacteria with a survival advantage. These protein profiles illuminate the diversity of P. aeruginosa mechanisms to adapt to low oxygen and shows that CF isolates initiate a robust molecular response to persist under these conditions.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa strains PASS2, PASS3 and PAO1 (ATCC 15692), were grown in synthetic cystic fibrosis medium (SCFM) under hypoxic condition (oxygen=0.8-1%) and aerobic condition (oxygen~21%) (n=3). Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), 1% SDS (w/v), 8M urea, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail lysed by glass bead beating. Subsequently, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide. Samples were then methanol-chloroform precipitated and protein pellet was reconstituted in 8M urea in 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8) and diluted with 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8). Equal amounts of proteins were digested with LysC protease followed by trypsin, finally desalted with Stage tip and vacuum dried. For SWATH-MS, each sample was analysed in two stages; information-dependent acquisition-MS (IDA-MS) analysis for ion library generation, followed by SWATH-MS for label-free quantification. For IDA-MS, pooled tryptic peptides sample was separated by reverse phase liquid chromatography (RP-LC) with a linear gradient of 120 min at a flow rate of 600 nL/min using a nano-LC system in conjunction with a TripleTOF™ 5600 (SCIEX) using positive nanoflow electrospray analysis. MS1 spectra were collected in the range 350-1500 m/z for 200ms. MS/MS spectra (using CID fragmentation) of 20 most intense m/z values exceeding a threshold >150 counts per second (cps) with charge stages between 2+ and 4+ were collected. For SWATH-MS, peptides of the individual sample were separated over 60 min RP-LC linear gradient using the same LC and MS instruments as specified above with positive nanoflow electrospray mode. SWATH-MS acquisition was performed in a 60 variable m/z window method over a range of 400–1250 m/z selected based on the intensity distribution of precursor m/z in the IDA data sets. For TMT-MS, peptide pellets were reconstituted in 200 mM EPPS buffer (pH 8) and labelled with corresponding TMT 6-plex reagent, finally respective samples were pooled. Each sample was fractionated using offline basic reversed-phase chromatography as six fractions. Fractionated peptide samples were analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid-MS (Thermo Scientific) equipped with LC unit (Proxeon). Peptides were separated on a 3hr RP gradient. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap. The subsequent MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted for top 10 most intense ions and fragmented by CID with following settings; collision energy of 35%, isolation window 0.5 Da with 40 seconds of dynamic exclusion. For the MS3 analyses, precursor isolation was performed using a 2.5 Da window and fragmented in the ion trap using CID with collision energy of 35%. Multiple fragment ions (SPS ions) were co-isolated and further fragmented by HCD. Selection of fragment ions was based on the previous MS2 scan and the MS2-MS3 was conducted using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology (McAlister, G. C, 2014). MS3 was performed using ion detection in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
For the identification of proteins in samples analysed on TripleTOF™ 5600 (SCIEX) and generation of ion library, ProteinPilot 5.0 with the Paragon algorithm (SCIEX) was used. MS/MS data were searched against the P. aeruginosa PAO1 protein sequence database (GenBank, release; December 2012) and in-house generated in-silico translated genome databases of PASS2-3. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was selected as a fixed modification. An Unused Score cut-off was set to 1.3 (95% confidence).For SWATH-MS quantification, ion libraries were imported into PeakView 2.1 software using the SWATH MicroApp 2.0 (SCIEX) and matched against individual replicates. After retention time alignment, data was processed using the following settings; maximum of 100 peptides per protein and 6 transitions per peptide, peptide confidence threshold of 99%, transition FDR<1%, 5 min extraction window, fragment extraction tolerance of 75 ppm and exclusion of modified peptides. Cumulative protein areas from extracted ion chromatograms were exported to Excel for further analysis. For the identification and quantification peptides labelled with TMT tags, first, RAW files were converted to the .mzxml format using In-house software tools. Correction of erroneous charge state and monoisotopic m/z values were performed using method previously detailed in Huttlin EL et al, 2010. Assignment of MS/MS spectra were made with the Sequest (Thermo Scientific) algorithm using a database generated by combining the PAO1 protein sequence database (GenBank, December 2012 release) and in-house databases of PASS2 and PASS3 strains prepared as per the target-decoy strategy. Data search were conducted using cysteine alkylation and TMT on the peptide N-termini and lysine residues as static modification, oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification, precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da (for CID). Sequest matches were filtered using linear discriminant analysis first to a dataset level error of 1% at the peptide level based on matches to reversed sequences. Protein rankings were generated by multiplying peptide probabilities and the dataset was finally filtered to 1% FDR at the protein level. The final peptide-level FDR fell well below 1% (~0.2% peptide level). A reductionist model was used for assignment of peptides to protein matches, where all peptides were explained using the least number of proteins. Quantitation of peptides using TMT reporter ions was performed as previously published (Ting, L 2011 and McAlister, G. C 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a ubiquitous Gram-negative pathogen known to inhabit hypoxic mucus plugs of cystic fibrosis (CF) patient lungs. Despite the high prevalence and related patient mortality, the protein machinery enabling the bacterium to adapt to low oxygen environment remains to be fully elucidated. We investigated this by performing both SWATH mass spectrometry and data-dependent SPS-MS3 of TMT-labeled peptides to profile the proteomes of two P. aeruginosa CF isolates, PASS2 and PASS3, and a laboratory reference strain, PAO1, grown under hypoxic stress (O<sub>2</sub> &lt; 1%) in media that mimic the nutrient components of the CF lung. Quantitated across all three strains were 3967 P. aeruginosa proteins, reflecting approximately 71% of predicted ORFs in PAO1 and representing the most comprehensive proteome of clinically relevant P. aeruginosa to date. Comparative analysis revealed 735, 640, and 364 proteins were altered by 2-fold or more when comparing low oxygen to aerobic growth in PAO1, PASS2, and PASS3, respectively. Strikingly, under hypoxic stress, all strains showed concurrent increased abundance of proteins required for both aerobic (cbb<sub>3</sub>-1 and cbb<sub>3</sub>-2 terminal oxidases) and anaerobic denitrification and arginine fermentation, with the two clinical isolates showing higher relative expression of proteins in these pathways. Additionally, functional annotation revealed that clinical strains portray a unique expression profile of replication, membrane biogenesis, and virulence proteins during hypoxia which may endow these bacteria with a survival advantage. These protein profiles illuminate the diversity of P. aeruginosa mechanisms to adapt to low oxygen and shows that CF isolates initiate a robust molecular response to persist under these conditions.

### Keywords
Tmt-ms, Cystic fibrosis, Hypoxia, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and biomolecular sciences, Australian Proteome Analysis facility, Sydney, Australia.
Macquarie university

### Submitter
Karthik Shantharam kamath

### Lab Head
Dr Mark P Molloy
Department of Chemistry and biomolecular sciences, Australian Proteome Analysis facility, Sydney, Australia.


