### Accession
PXD025243

### Title
RNA Polymerase II interactome in presence or absence of SPT6 in U2OS cells

### Description
SPT6 is a histone chaperone that tightly binds RNA polymerase II (POL2) during transcription elongation. However, its primary role in POL2 transcription is uncertain. We used targeted protein degradation to rapidly deplete SPT6 in human cells and analyzed defects in POL2 behavior by a multi-omics approach and mathematical modeling. Our data indicate that SPT6 is a crucial factor for POL2 processivity and is therefore required for the productive transcription of protein-coding genes. Unexpectedly, SPT6 also has a vital role in POL2 termination, as acute depletion induced readthrough transcription for thousands of genes. Long-term depletion of SPT6 induced cryptic intragenic transcription, as observed earlier in yeast. However, this phenotype was not observed upon acute SPT6 depletion and therefore can be attributed to accumulated epigenetic perturbations in the absence of SPT6. In conclusion, targeted protein degradation of SPT6 allowed the temporal discrimination of its function as an epigenetic safeguard and POL2 elongation factor.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation: IP for soluble chromatin fraction was carried out by incubating with 80ul of HA-coupled magnetic beads (Pierce Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 200 units of bezonase at 4°C for 3h with rotation. After the IP, beads were washed thrice with IP washing buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 150 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol) added with 0.1% Triton X-100, followed by two washes without Triton X-100. Proteins complexes on the beads were eluted in 100 μl 1x LDS Sample Buffer (NuPAGE Thermo Fisher Scientific) by incubating for 30 min at 37°C, 400 rpm on thermoshaker. 50 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to the eluates and samples were heated at 95°C for 5 min.  In-Solution Digestion: Proteins in NuPAGE sample buffer (Invitrogen) were reduced in 50 mM DTT for 10 min at 70 °C, and alkylated with 120 mM iodoactamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein precipitation was performed overnight at -20°C with fourfold  volume of acetone. Pellets were washed four times with acetone at -20°C.  Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 µl 4 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and  digested with 0.25 µg Lys-C (Wako) for two hours at 30°C followed by overnight digestion with 0.25 µg trypsin at 37°C. Prior to trypsin digest the samples were diluted to 2 M urea by adding 100 µl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptides were desalted using C-18 Stage Tips [1]. Each Stage Tip was prepared with three discs of C-18 Empore SPE Discs (3M) in a 200 µl pipet tip. Peptides were eluted with 60 % acetonitrile in 0.3 % formic acid, dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf), and stored at -20 °C.  Peptides were dissolved in 2 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.  [1] Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M. (2003). Anal. Chem. 75: 663–70.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis: NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a 120-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nl/min.  Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 7,500 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied.  A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 seconds was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 90 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 [1]. Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in the utilized version of MaxQuant. The search was performed against the against the UniProt human reference proteome database (download date: 2020-08). Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (FDR; <1% FDR on protein and PSM level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln) and oxidation (Met). Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. LFQ intensities were used for protein quantitation. Proteins with less than two razor/unique peptides were removed. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5% quantile of the combined log10-transformed LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. For the identification of significantly enriched proteins, median log2 transformed protein ratios were calculated from the three replicate experiments and boxplot outliers were identified in intensity bins of at least 300 proteins. Log2 transformed protein ratios of sample versus control with values outside a 1.5x (significance 1) or 3x (significance 2) interquartile range (IQR), respectively, were considered as significantly enriched in the individual replicates.   [1] Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech 26, 1367–1372 (2008).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Auxin, U2os, Rna polymerase ii, Spt6, Aid, Supt6h

### Affiliations
Lehrstuhl für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie Biozentrum Am Hubland 97074 Würzburg
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg

### Submitter
Ashwin Narain

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Elmar Wolf
Lehrstuhl für Biochemie und Molekularbiologie Biozentrum Am Hubland 97074 Würzburg


