### Accession
PXD017509

### Title
White body nanoLC ESI-MS/MS analysis in the cephalopod Sepia officinalis

### Description
Cephalopods, like other Protostomes, lack an adaptive immune system and only rely on an innate immune system. The main immune cells are haemocytes, able to respond to pathogens and external attacks. First reports based on morphological observations suggested that the white body located in the optic sinuses of cuttlefish was at the origin of haemocytes. We performed a shotgun analysis of the proteome of the white body in cutllefish in order to confirm haematopoietic function and explore additional function.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted in phosphate buffered saline with a cocktail of protease inhibitors and reduced, alkylated and hydrolysed by trypsin. NanoLC separation of resulting peptide samples was performed. ESI-MS experiments were carried out on an TIMS-TOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) with a modified nano electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
The fragmentation pattern was used to determine the sequence of each peptide. Database searching on the white body transcriptome was performed using Peaks X software.

### Publication Abstract
Cephalopods, like other protostomes, lack an adaptive immune system and only rely on an innate immune system. The main immune cells are haemocytes (Hcts), which are able to respond to pathogens and external attacks. First reports based on morphological observations revealed that the white body (WB) located in the optic sinuses of cuttlefish was the origin of Hcts. Combining transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, we identified several factors known to be involved in haematopoiesis in vertebrate species in cuttlefish WB. Among these factors, members of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway were identified, some of them for the first time in a molluscan transcriptome and proteome. Immune factors, such as members of the Toll/NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathway, pattern recognition proteins and receptors, and members of the oxidative stress responses, were also identified, and support an immune role of the WB. Both transcriptome and proteome analyses revealed that the WB harbors an intense metabolism concurrent with the haematopoietic function. Finally, a comparative analysis of the WB and Hct proteomes revealed many proteins in common, confirming previous morphological studies on the origin of Hcts in cuttlefish. This molecular work demonstrates that the WB is multifunctional and provides bases for haematopoiesis regulation in cuttlefish.

### Keywords
White body, Cuttlefish, Esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Proteogen platform
2Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA), Université de Caen-Normandie, MNHN, SU, UA, CNRS, IRD, 14032 Caen Cedex, France

### Submitter
benoit bernay

### Lab Head
Dr Céline Zatylny-Gaudin
2Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et Ecosystèmes Aquatiques (BOREA), Université de Caen-Normandie, MNHN, SU, UA, CNRS, IRD, 14032 Caen Cedex, France


