### Accession
PXD026053

### Title
human circRNA binding proteins in neuroblastoma

### Description
Circular RNAs (circRNAs), a noncoding RNA class originating from alternative splicing, are highly abundant in neural tissues and were shown to regulate gene expression e.g. by interacting with microRNAs and RNA-binding proteins. Neuroblastoma is an embryonal neoplasia, which arises from undifferentiated neural crest cells. Here, we aimed to explore, whether circRNAs influence the pathogenesis of high-risk neuroblastoma. We performed whole-transcriptome sequencing of 104 primary neuroblastoma samples of all risk-groups and identified 5,203 unique circRNAs involving 2,302 genes. Candidate circRNA expression did not correlate with host gene expression, indicating independent regulatory mechanisms. circRNAs were significantly downregulated in the MYCN-amplified high-risk tumors. These findings were independently reproduced in a tetracycline-inducible MYCN-overexpression system based on a non MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cell line, suggesting that MYCN drives this global circRNA repression. We identified the RNA helicase DHX9 as a mediator of this global suppressive effect of MYCN on circRNAs. Comparing our RNA sequencing data with other cancers and controls revealed a circRNA subset specifically upregulated in neuroblastoma that included a circRNA derived from the ARID1A tumor suppressor gene. Specific circARID1A knockdown resulted in reduced proliferation, cell numbers and viability, prompted apoptosis and induced a differentiated phenotype. Neither knockdown, nor overexpression of circARID1A influenced ARID1A mRNA and protein levels significantly. To dissect the potential mode of function, we performed a pulldown assay with subsequent mass spectrometry. We identified the RNA-binding protein KHSRP as an interaction partner that participates in the mechanism of action of circARID1A. In summary, this study highlights an important role of circRNAs in neuroblastoma biology and may establish this RNA class as a future therapeutic target and biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown with a biotinylated probe specific for the head-to-tail junction of circARID1A was performed. A scrambled probe served as a control. Cells were UV-crosslinked. Enriched proteins were isolated and subjected to mass spectrometry. After tryptic digestion, samples were desalted, measured with Q Exactive Plus in data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4. LFQ normalization was applied. Bioinformatic data analyses was done with Perseus software package.

### Publication Abstract
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a regulatory RNA class. While cancer-driving functions have been identified for single circRNAs, how they modulate gene expression in cancer is not well understood. We investigate circRNA expression in the pediatric malignancy, neuroblastoma, through deep whole-transcriptome sequencing in 104 primary neuroblastomas covering all risk groups. We demonstrate that MYCN amplification, which defines a subset of high-risk cases, causes globally suppressed circRNA biogenesis directly dependent on the DHX9 RNA helicase. We detect similar mechanisms in shaping circRNA expression in the pediatric cancer medulloblastoma implying a general MYCN effect. Comparisons to other cancers identify 25 circRNAs that are specifically upregulated in neuroblastoma, including circARID1A. Transcribed from the ARID1A tumor suppressor gene, circARID1A promotes cell growth and survival, mediated by direct interaction with the KHSRP RNA-binding protein. Our study highlights the importance of MYCN regulating circRNAs in cancer and identifies molecular mechanisms, which explain their contribution to neuroblastoma pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Imr-5, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Proteomics Unit, BIH@Charite, Robert Roessle Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Proteomics Unit, BIH@Charite, Robert Roessle Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


