### Accession
PXD031668

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 Nsp1 N-terminal and linker regions as a platform for host translational shutoff_CLMS_DSSO_dataset

### Description
In the early stages of SARS-CoV-2 infection, non-structural protein 1 (Nsp1) inhibits the innate immune response by inserting its C-terminal helices into the mRNA entry channel of the ribosome and promoting mRNA degradation. However, the mechanism by which Nsp1 achieves host translational shutoff while allowing for viral protein synthesis remains unclear. As the conserved N-terminal domain (NTD) and linker region has been implicated with this process, we set out to characterize the interactome of Nsp1 and its topology by crosslinking mass spectrometry. The distance restraints allowed us to derive an integrative model of full-length Nsp1 on the 40S subunit. We find that Nsp1 is in contact with 40S proteins lining the mRNA entry channel and the G subunit of the eIF3 complex. We further show that Nsp1 predominantly binds to initiating ribosomes by affinity purification mass spectrometry and sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. Our results point towards a potential mechanism by which Nsp1 is preferentially recruited to host-translating ribosomes, leading to selective inhibition of canonical initiation intermediates and subsequent mRNA degradation.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of DSSO crosslinked sample was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany), which were operated under Tune 3.4, SII for Xcalibur 1.6 and Xcalibur 4.4. Fractions from peptide SEC were resuspended in 1.6% ACN 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto an EASY-Spray column of 50 cm length (Thermo Scientific) running at 300 nl/min. Gradient elution was performed using mobile phase A of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic. For each SEC fraction, we used an optimized elution gradient (from 2–18% mobile phase B to 37.5-46.5% over 90 min, followed by a linear increase to 45–55 and 95% over 2.5 min each). Each fraction was analyzed in duplicates. The settings of the mass spectrometer were as follows: Data-dependent mode with 2.5s-Top-speed setting; MS1 scan in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution over 400 to 1500 m/z with 250% normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target; MS2 scan trigger only on precursors with z = 3–7+, AGC target set to “standard”, maximum injection time set to “dynamic”; fragmentation by HCD employing a decision tree logic with (Giese et al., 2017) optimized collision energies; MS2 scan in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000; dynamic exclusion was enabled upon a single observation for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
For later identification of crosslinks the following parameters were applied. Raw files from crosslinking-MS acquisitions were converted to mgf-file format using MSconvert and were recalibrated to account for mass shifts during measurement. Recalibrated files were analysed using xiSearch 1.7.5.1 (Mendes et al., 2019)) with the following settings: MS1/MS2 error tolerances 2 and 4 ppm, allowing up to 2 missing isotope peaks (Lenz et al., 2018); tryptic digestion specificity with two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) as fixed and oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da) as variable modification, losses: –CH3SOH/ –H2O / –NH3, DSSO (158.0037648 Da linkage mass) with variable crosslinker modifications (“DSSO-NH2” 175.03031 Da, “DSSO-OH” 176.01433 Da). Additionally the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide was set to 1 and the additional loss masses were defined accounting for its cleavability (“A” 54.01056 Da, “S” 103.99320 Da, “T” 85.98264). Defined crosslink sites for DSSO were allowed for side chains of Lys, Tyr, Ser, Thr and the protein N-terminus. The database was composed of 400 Swiss-Prot annotated entries for Homo sapiens (Human) (taxon identifier 9606) with the highest abundance with the addition of the sequence of Nsp1. Results were filtered prior to FDR to matches having a minimum of three matched fragments per peptide, a delta score of > 10% of the match score and a peptide length of at least five amino acids. Additionally, spectral matches were prefiltered before FDR estimation to only those that had cleaved crosslinker peptide fragments for both peptides. Results were then to an estimated false-discovery rate (FDR) of 2% on residue-pair-level using xiFDR (version 2.1.5.2) (Mendes et al., 2019). The resulting estimated protein-protein interaction FDR was 6%. Self- and heteromeric-crosslinks were handled separately for FDR estimation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ap-ms, Nsp1, Protein-protein interaction, Fdr, Crosslinking, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Biotechnology, Bioanalytics, 13355 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Fabian Schildhauer 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Biotechnology, Bioanalytics, 13355 Berlin, Germany


