### Accession
PXD028137

### Title
Exopalaemon carinicauda in response to alkalinity stress

### Description
In this study, an integrative analysis of the gill-specific proteome at 0 h, 12 h and 36 h after alkalinity stress was performed to identify important regulators and pathways involved in alkalinity adaption of Exopalaemon carinicauda. This study reveals the first time-course, gill-specific, combined proteomic profiling associated with alkalinity adaption of E. carinicauda and provides new insights into the mechanisms underlying the molecular response to alkalinity stress in shrimp.

### Sample Protocol
We sampled the gills subject to treatment for 0 h, 12 h and 36 h, and frozed them in liquid nitrogen as well as stored them at -80℃ for extracting protein. Gills from three shrimp were pooled into one biological replicate and six biological replicates for each time point were prepared.  In brief，total protein was extracted from gill by using a urea lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 1% SDS) with a protease  inhibitor. Protein concentrations were detected with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce,Thermo, USA). Following reduction, cysteine alkylation, and digestion, samples were labeled with iTRAQ Reagents (Applied Biosystems, 4390812) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After being desalted with a C18 solid-phase extraction, peptides were used for Nano Liquid Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The thresholds of fold change (>1.2 or <0.83) and P-value <0.05  were used to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs）. Annotation of all identified proteins was performed using GO and KEGG pathway. DEPs were further used to for GO and KEGG enrichment analysis.  Protein-protein interaction analysis was performed using the String v10.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exopalaemon carinicauda, Proteomic, Alkalinity stress, Adaption mechanism

### Affiliations
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Qingdao
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
Qianqian Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Jitao Li
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences


