### Accession
PXD024017

### Title
Ultra-sensitive proteomics using second generation micro pillar array LC technology with Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 and FAIMS

### Description
In the light of the ongoing single-cell revolution, scientific disciplines are combining forces with the ultimate goal to retrieve as much relevant data as possible from trace amounts of biological material. For single cell proteomics, this implies optimizing the entire workflow from initial cell isolation down to sample preparation, LC separation, MS/MS data acquisition and data analysis. To demonstrate the potential for single cell and limited sample proteomics, we report on a series of benchmarking experiments where we combine LC separation on a new generation of micro pillar array columns with state-of-the-art Orbitrap MS/MS detection and FAIMS. As compared to the currently commercially available pillar array columns, this dedicated limited sample column has a reduced cross section (factor of 2) and micro pillar dimensions that have been further downscaled (also by a factor of 2; 2.5 µm instead of 5 µm diameter), resulting in improved chromatography at reduced void times. A dilution series ranging from 5 to 0.05 ng/µL was prepared using trace amounts of PEG in the sample solvent to reduce adsorptive effects in the autosampler vial, sample stability up to 24h after dilution was demonstrated. Comparative processing of the MS/MS data with different database search algorithms (with and without second search feature activated and with and without rescoring based on fragmentation pattern prediction) pointed out the benefits of using Sequest HT together with INFERYS  when analyzing samples at a concentration below 1 ng/µL. On average (data from quadruplicate runs), we were able to successfully identify 2855 unique protein groups from just 1 ng of HeLa lysate and this using a 60 min non-linear LC solvent gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, hereby increasing detection sensitivity as compared to a previous contribution by a factor well above 10 (2436 proteins identified from 10 ng of HeLa lysate in 2019). By successfully identifying 1486 and 2210 proteins (average values, quadruplicates) from as little as 250 and 500 pg of HeLa lysate respectively, we demonstrate outstanding sensitivity with great promise for use in limited sample proteomics workflows.

### Sample Protocol
A dilution series of HeLa cell lysate was prepared to obtain a final concentration of 0.25, 0.5, 1, 5 and 10 ng/ul.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra from raw data acquired at various concentrations of HeLa lysate were imported to Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). All database search engines were operated with identical parameter settings. First MS/MS spectra were recalibrated in the PD node “Spectrum Files RC” using the human Swissprot database (homo sapiens; release 2019_06, 20.339 sequences, 11360750 residues) and a database of common contaminants (372 sequences, 145187 residues). Recalibration was performed for fully tryptic peptides applying an initial precursor tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.1 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification in the recalibration step. Database searches were performed using the same FASTA databases as described above. Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme, cleaving after lysine (K) and arginine (R) except when followed by proline (P) and up to one missed cleavage was considered. Mass tolerance was limited to 10 ppm at the precursor and 0.02 Da at the fragment level. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (M) as well as loss of methionine at the protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Identified spectra were rescored using Percolator as implemented in PD and filtered for 1% FDR at the peptide spectrum match and peptide level. Based on this set of common search parameters several database search engines were evaluated for their performance of identifying spectra from low sample amounts, namely MS Amanda, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.2. MS Amanda and Sequest HT were evaluated with and without their “second-search” feature activated, allowing for the identification of multiple peptides from single mixed MS/MS spectra. Furthermore, the novel INFERYS rescoring based on fragmentation pattern prediction was evaluated.

### Publication Abstract
In the light of the ongoing single-cell revolution, scientific disciplines are combining forces to retrieve as much relevant data as possible from trace amounts of biological material. For single-cell proteomics, this implies optimizing the entire workflow from initial cell isolation down to sample preparation, liquid chromatography (LC) separation, mass spectrometer (MS) data acquisition, and data analysis. To demonstrate the potential for single-cell and limited sample proteomics, we report on a series of benchmarking experiments where we combine LC separation on a new generation of micropillar array columns with state-of-the-art Orbitrap MS/MS detection and high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS). This dedicated limited sample column has a reduced cross section and micropillar dimensions that have been further downscaled (interpillar distance and pillar diameter by a factor of 2), resulting in improved chromatography at reduced void times. A dilution series of a HeLa tryptic digest (5-0.05 ng/&#x3bc;L) was used to explore the sensitivity that can be achieved. Comparative processing of the MS/MS data with Sequest HT, MS Amanda, Mascot, and SpectroMine pointed out the benefits of using Sequest HT together with INFERYS when analyzing sample amounts below 1 ng. Here, 2855 protein groups were identified from just 1 ng of HeLa tryptic digest hereby increasing detection sensitivity as compared to a previous contribution by a factor well above 10. By successfully identifying 1486 protein groups from as little as 250 pg of HeLa tryptic digest, we demonstrate outstanding sensitivity with great promise for use in limited sample proteomics workflows.

### Keywords
Low-input proteomics, Single sell proteomics, Micro pillar

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pathologie GmbH Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1 1030 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pathologie GmbH Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1 1030 Vienna Austria


