### Accession
PXD038493

### Title
Proteomics of novel iPSC-derived vascular endothelial cells reveal extensive similarity with an immortalized human endothelial cell line

### Description
The vascular endothelium constitutes the inner lining of the blood vessel and is directly involved in the control of blood fluidity, vascular tone, platelet aggregation, regulation of immunity, inflammation, and angiogenesis. Malfunction and injuries of the endothelium can cause cardiovascular diseases, which are the leading causes of death globally. The impairment of the endothelium is a hallmark in other diseases as well such as sepsis, stroke, tumor growth, insulin resistance, venous thrombosis, and chronic kidney failure. Generation of effective sources to replace injured endothelial cells (ECs) could have significant clinical impact and somatic cell sources like peripheral or cord blood cannot credibly supply enough endothelial cell progenitors for multitude of treatments. Pluripotent stem cells are a promising source for a reliable EC supply that have the potential to repair, reconstruct, replace damaged cells, and revascularize ischemic areas in order to restore tissue function and treat vascular diseases. We have developed methods to differentiate induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) efficiently and robustly across multiple iPSC lines into non-tissue-specific pan vascular ECs (iECs) with high purity. These iECs present with canonical endothelial cell markers and exhibit measures of endothelial cell functionality with uptake of acetylated low-density lipoprotein (Dil-Ac-LDL) and tube formation. Using proteomic analysis, we revealed the iECs are more proteomically similar to established umbilical vein ECs (HUVECs) than to iPSCs. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) were most shared between HUVECs and iECs, and potential targets for increasing the proteomic similarity of iECs to HUVECs were identified. PTM analysis can be used in the future to glean additional insights and generate novel hypotheses. Here we demonstrate an efficient robust method to differentiate iPSCs into functional ECs, and for the first time provide a comprehensive protein expression profile of iECs, which indicates their similarities with a widely used immortalized HUVECs, allowing for further mechanistic studies of EC development, signaling and metabolism for future regenerative applications.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed using 8 M UREA/5% SDS with 100mM DTT. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay and 50ug of protein per sample was aliquoted for further processing. Protein aliquots were processed, digested, and cleaned using the S-TRAP system (Protifi). Peptides were dried following elution from the S-TRAP columns, and dried peptides were resuspended at a concentration of 1µg/µL for injection onto MS. Four micrograms of protein per sample, suspended in 20 µL total loading volume, were injected onto a 15 cm Phenomenex Omega Polar C18 3 µm 100A 150 x 0.3 mm column and separated on a 4-45% gradient of Acetonitrile in 0.1% FA water at 7 µl / min flow rate over 60 minutes total separation time. Eluting peptides were ionized at the source of a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer operating in Data Independent Acquisition mode. The instrument cycled continuously between 1) an intact MS1 scan of all peptides between 400-1600 m/z in the orbitrap detector at resolution 120K, accumulation time of 50ms and target AGC of 400K and 2) 40 subsequent MS2 scans systematically isolating all ions within 15mz range intervals from 400-1000 m/z and analyzing high energy induced collision (CE 30%) induced fragments between 200-2000 m/z from each window in the orbitrap at 30K resolution, maximum injection time of 54 per scan and target AGC set to 500K. Total cycle time to progress through each MS1 and 40 MS2 scan series was 3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using the DIA-Neural Network platform (PMC 6949130), with files searched using a ‘library-free’ strategy via two approaches: Total protein analysis was done by searching files against an in silico digested protein FASTA sequence database (Uniprot Reviewed and Canonical human sequences); for PTM analysis, a library of detectable peptides was generated using the FragPipe workflow wherein the same raw files used for total protein analysis were used to generate pseudospectra that are then searched for presence of pre-specified PTMs. In this study, we interrogated phosphorylation of Threonine, Serine, and Tyrosine (T,S,Y), acetylation of lysines (K) and N-termini, and mono- and di- methylation of arginines (R) and lysines. High confident (FDR <1%) Pseudospectra identifications were consolidated into a library that was then used to perform a second round of DIA-Umpire quantitative extraction26, and the quantified peak areas for each protein with identification q value < 1% FDR were analyzed for differential abundance between cell types using Fragger27. For PTM analyses, an additional filter was applied to include only peptides with >0.8 MS1 correlation score, meaning that the MS1 chromatogram correlated in co-elution and shape with the MS2 fragments, thus minimizing chances that a called PTM peptide could be in reality the product of the unmodified form erroneously identified by any overlapping fragment patterns (not all of which may carry the mass shift for a given PTM).

### Publication Abstract
The vascular endothelium constitutes the inner lining of the blood vessel, and malfunction and injuries of the endothelium can cause cardiovascular diseases as well as other diseases including stroke, tumor growth, and chronic kidney failure. Generation of effective sources to replace injured endothelial cells (ECs) could have significant clinical impact, and somatic cell sources like peripheral or cord blood cannot credibly supply enough endothelial cell progenitors for multitude of treatments. Pluripotent stem cells are a promising source for a reliable EC supply, which have the potential to restore tissue function and treat vascular diseases. We have developed methods to differentiate induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) efficiently and robustly across multiple iPSC lines into nontissue-specific pan vascular ECs (iECs) with high purity. These iECs present with canonical endothelial cell markers and exhibit measures of endothelial cell functionality with the uptake of Dil fluorescent dye-labeled acetylated low-density lipoprotein (Dil-Ac-LDL) and tube formation. Using proteomic analysis, we revealed that the iECs are more proteomically similar to established human umbilical vein ECs (HUVECs) than to iPSCs. Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) were most shared between HUVECs and iECs, and potential targets for increasing the proteomic similarity of iECs to HUVECs were identified. Here we demonstrate an efficient robust method to differentiate iPSCs into functional ECs, and for the first time provide a comprehensive protein expression profile of iECs, which indicates their similarities with a widely used immortalized HUVECs, allowing for further mechanistic studies of EC development, signaling, and metabolism for future regenerative applications.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> We have developed methods to differentiate induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) across multiple iPSC lines into nontissue-specific pan vascular ECs (iECs) and demonstrated the proteomic similarity of these cells to a widely used endothelial cell line (HUVECs). We also identified posttranslational modifications and targets for increasing the proteomic similarity of iECs to HUVECs. In the future, iECs can be used to study EC development, signaling, and metabolism for future regenerative applications.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ipsc, Acetylation, Methylation, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Department of Cardiology, Smidt Heart Institute and Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Sarah Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Parker
Department of Cardiology, Smidt Heart Institute and Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility


