### Accession
PXD011568

### Title
Resource misallocation as a mediator of fitness costs in antibiotic resistance

### Description
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) poses a threat to global health and the economy. Rifampicin resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis accounts for a third of the global AMR burden. Gaining the upper hand on AMR requires a deeper understanding of the physiology of resistance.  AMR often results in the erosion of normal cell function: a fitness cost. Identifying intervention points in the mechanisms underpinning the cost of resistance in M. tuberculosis could play a pivotal role in strengthening future treatment regimens. We used a collection of M. tuberculosis strains providing an evolutionary and phylogenetic snapshot of rifampicin resistance and subjected them to genome-wide transcriptomic and proteomic profiling to identify key perturbations of normal physiology.   We found that a rifampicin resistance-conferring mutation in RpoB imparts considerable gene expression changes, many of which are mitigated by a compensatory mutation in RpoC. However, our data also provide evidence for pervasive epistasis: the same resistance mutation imposed a different fitness cost and functionally unrelated changes to gene expression in clinical strains from unrelated genetic backgrounds. Rather than functional changes in specific pathways, our data suggest that the fitness cost of rifampicin resistance stems from a misallocation of resources: the greater the departure from the wild type baseline proteome investment, the greater the fitness cost of rifampicin resistance in a given strain. We summarize these observations in the “Burden of Expression” hypothesis of fitness cost and provide evidence that it can be used for suppressing the emergence of rifampicin resistance.

### Sample Protocol
We harvested 20 OD600 equivalents from mid-log phase (OD600 = 0.5 ± 0.1) bacterial cultures by centrifugation (3,000×g, 7 min, 4°C). We washed the bacterial pellet twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to remove residues of tyloxapol. We re-suspended the bacterial pellet in 500 μl of protein lysis buffer (8M Urea, 0.1 M Ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% RapiGest [Waters]) and transferred the suspension to a Lysing matrix B tube (MP Biomedicals). We disrupted the bacterial cells using a FastPrep24 homogeniser (40s, intensity setting 6.0, MP Biomedicals). We clarified the lysate by centrifugation (12,000×g, 5 min, 4°C), and sterilised the supernatant by passing it twice through a 0.22 μm syringe filters (Milipore). Following protein extraction for each sample, we used trypsin to digest proteins into peptides and then desalted them using C18 columns (The Nest Group). The cleaned up peptides were re-suspended in MS buffer (2% v/v acentonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid). Finally, the RT-kit (Biognosis) containing 11 iRT retention time normalization peptides was spiked in to every sample. We measured every sample in sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) mode, a data independent acquisition implementation, on a tripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex) coupled to a nano flow HPLC system with the gradient of one hour. The raw files acquired through a 64 variable width window precursor isolation scheme were centroid normalized using Proteowizard msconvert.

### Data Protocol
We used the Mtb spectral library described earlier to extract data using the OpenSWATH workflow. The processed data were filtered by MAYU to 1% protein FDR. R packages aLFQ and MSstats were used for protein quantification (Top3 peptides and top5 fragment ions) and differential expression analysis respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Systems biology, Transcriptomics, Genomics, Proteomics, Clinical isolates, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Amir Banaei-Esfahani

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


