### Accession
PXD000898

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveals the Role of Protein Phosphorylation in Initial Changes of Soybean Root Tip under Flooding Stress

### Description
Flooding has a severe negative effect on cultivation in the early stage of soybean growth. To understand the role of protein phosphorylation in early-stage soybean responding to flooding stress, quantitative phosphoproteomic technique was used.

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were treated without or with flooding for 3, 6, 12 and 24 h. Proteins were extracted from root tips of the soybean plants in a time-dependent manner. For proteomics, protein samples were cleaned up with chloroform/methanol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin. For phosphoproteomics, protein samples were cleaned up with chloroform/methanol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin, and then phosphopeptides was enriched by PolyMAC phosphopeptide enrichment reagent.

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nano LC system (Dionex), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and their separation and spraying were done using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm ID × 120 mm, nanoLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, NikkyoTechnos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over a mass range of 400-15,000 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass fUsing an Ultimate 3,000 nano LC system (Dionex), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and their separation and spraying were done using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm ID × 120 mm, nanoLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, NikkyoTechnos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over a mass range of 400-15,000 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. The top ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Identification of proteins was performed by MASCOT search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) using soybean peptide database (54175 sequences) obtained from the soybean genome database (Phytozome version 9.0, http://www.phytozome.net/soybean). DTA files were generated from acquired raw data files and then converted to Mascot generic files using Discover Daemon software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Parameters used in Mascot searches were follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. For peptides after phosphopeptide enrichment, phosphoST, phosphoY, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. For both normal peptides and peptides after phosphopeptide enrichment, trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charges were set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot results were filtered with Mascot percolator to improve accuracy and sensitivity in the peptide identification (Brosch et al., 2009). False discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were less than 1.5%. Peptides with more than 13 (p<0.05) percolator ion score were used for protein identification. The Mascot results were exported as XML format for SIEVE analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Flooding has severe negative effects on soybean growth. To explore the flooding-responsive mechanisms in early-stage soybean, a phosphoproteomic approach was used. Two-day-old soybean plants were treated without or with flooding for 3, 6, 12, and 24 h, and root tip proteins were then extracted and analyzed at each time point. After 3 h of flooding exposure, the fresh weight of soybeans increased, whereas the ATP content of soybean root tips decreased. Using a gel-free proteomic technique, a total of 114 phosphoproteins were identified in the root tip samples, and 34 of the phosphoproteins were significantly changed with respect to phosphorylation status after 3 h of flooding stress. Among these phosphoproteins, eukaryotic translation initiation factors were dephosphorylated, whereas several protein synthesis-related proteins were phosphorylated. The mRNA expression levels of sucrose phosphate synthase 1F and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4 G were down-regulated, whereas UDP-glucose 6-dehydrogenase mRNA expression was up-regulated during growth but down-regulated under flooding stress. Furthermore, bioinformatic protein interaction analysis of flooding-responsive proteins based on temporal phosphorylation patterns indicated that eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4 G was located in the center of the network during flooding. Soybean eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4 G has homology to programmed cell death 4 protein and is implicated in ethylene signaling. The weight of soybeans was increased with treatment by an ethylene-releasing agent under flooding condition, but it was decreased when plants were exposed to an ethylene receptor antagonist. These results suggest that the ethylene signaling pathway plays an important role, via the protein phosphorylation, in mechanisms of plant tolerance to the initial stages of flooding stress in soybean root tips.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Flooding stress, Soybean, Root tip

### Affiliations
University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization


