### Accession
PXD040481

### Title
Malonylation of Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase 1 Promotes Hepatic Steatosis and Is Attenuated by Ketogenic Diet in NAFLD

### Description
Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) participate in important bioactive regulatory processes and therefore can help elucidate the pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Here, we investigate the involvement of PTMs in ketogenic diet (KD)-improved fatty liver by multi-omics and reveal a core target of lysine malonylation, acetyl-CoA carboxylase 1 (ACC1). ACC1 protein levels and Lys1523 malonylation are significantly decreased by KD. It is discovered that a malonylation-mimic mutant in ACC1 increases its enzyme activity and stability to promote hepatic steatosis, whereas the malonylation-null mutant upregulates the ubiquitination degradation of ACC1. A customized Lys1523ACC1 malonylation antibody confirms the increased malonylation of ACC1 in the NAFLD samples. Overall, the lysine malonylation of ACC1 is attenuated by KD in NAFLD and plays an important role in promoting hepatic steatosis. Malonylation is critical for ACC1 activity and stability, highlighting the anti-malonylation effect of ACC1 as a potential strategy for treating NAFLD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis The proteins in liver samples from C57BL/6 mice with different dietary intervention were extracted using lysis buffer (8 mol/L of urea, 1 % of protease inhibitor cocktail, 3 μmol/L of trichostatin A, and 50 mmol/L of nicotinamide), followed by sonication using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz Biotechnology, Ningbo, China) and centrifugation. The protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Affinity enrichment of malonylated peptides and LC-MS/MS analysis The liver tissue samples were lysed in lysis, followed by sonication and centrifugation. The protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit. To enrich malonylated peptides, proteins were digested with trypsin and then dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mmol/L of NaCl, 1 mmol/L of EDTA, 50 mmol/L of Tris-HCl, 0.5% of NP-40, pH 8.0). The tryptic peptides were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads using 0.1 % of trifluoroacetic acid followed by vacuum drying. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) and subjected to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis 4D LFQ proteomics analysis, including trypsin digestion, liquid chromatography-MS/MS analysis and data analysis were provided by Jingjie PTM Bio-Labs. After tryptic digestion, peptide samples were dissolved in 2 % of acetonitrile/ 0.1% of formic acid. The peptides were separated using a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) and subjected to a capillary source followed by timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) mass spectrometry. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse concatenated with a reverse decoy database. To determine differentially expressed proteins, the fold change was calculated as the average of comparisons between biological replicates. Proteins with a fold change >1.5 and P < 0.05 were considered to be significantly differentially expressed.  Affinity enrichment of malonylated peptides and LC-MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm internal diameter). The peptides were separated using gradient elution in solvent B (0.1 % of formic acid in acetonitrile; 6–22% for 44 min, 22–30% for 12 min, 80% for 2 min, and 80% for an additional 2 min) at a flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA). The peptides were then subjected to a capillary source, followed by timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA). The electrospray voltage was 1.60 kV. The precursors and fragments were analyzed using the TOF detector with an MS/MS scan ranging from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states of 0 – 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 24 s. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to four missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the first search and 20 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and acetylation on the protein N-terminus, oxidation on Met, and malonylation on Lys were specified as variable modifications. The false-discovery rate was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) participate in important bioactive regulatory processes and therefore can help elucidate the pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Here, we investigate the involvement of PTMs in ketogenic diet (KD)-improved fatty liver by multi-omics and reveal a core target of lysine malonylation, acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) carboxylase 1 (ACC1). ACC1 protein levels and Lys1523 malonylation are significantly decreased by KD. A malonylation-mimic mutant of ACC1 increases its enzyme activity and stability to promote hepatic steatosis, whereas the malonylation-null mutant upregulates the ubiquitination degradation of ACC1. A customized <sup>Lys1523</sup>ACC1 malonylation antibody confirms the increased malonylation of ACC1 in the NAFLD samples. Overall, the lysine malonylation of ACC1 is attenuated by KD in NAFLD and plays an important role in promoting hepatic steatosis. Malonylation is critical for ACC1 activity and stability, highlighting the anti-malonylation effect of ACC1 as a potential strategy for treating NAFLD.

### Keywords
Lysine malonylation; hepatic steatosis; acetyl-coa carboxylase 1; ketogenic diet.

### Affiliations
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P.R. China 510630

### Submitter
Hancheng Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Fen Xu
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P.R. China 510630


