### Accession
PXD025193

### Title
Single-minded homolog 2 resides in the chromatin protein network of androgen receptor and modulates gene expression in prostate cancer cells Single-minded homolog 2 resides in the chromatin protein network of androgen receptor and modulates gene expression in prostate cancer cells

### Description
We investigated  the composition of chromatin protein network around endogenous androgen receptor (AR) in VCaP castration resistant prostate cancer cells using recently developed chromatin-directed proteomic approach called ChIP-SICAP . The androgen-induced AR chromatin protein network contained expected TFs, e.g. HOXB13, chromatin remodeling proteins, e.g. SMARCA4, and several novel candidates not previously associated with AR, e.g. prostate cancer biomarker SIM2. Based on these findings, the role of SMARCA4 and SIM2 was further characterized at AR chromatin domains . Silencing of SIM2 altered chromatin accessibility at a similar number of AR-binding sites as SMARCA4, an established ATPase subunit of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex, often aberrantly expressed in prostate cancer. Despite the wide co-occurrence on chromatin of SMARCA4 and AR, depletion of SMARCA4 influenced chromatin accessibility and expression of a restricted set of AR target genes, in particular those involved in cell morphogenetic changes in epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Silencing of SIM2, in turn, affected the expression of a much larger group of androgen-regulated genes, e.g. those involved in cellular responses to external stimuli and steroid hormone stimulus. The silencing also reduced proliferation of VCaP cells and tumor size in chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane assay, further suggesting the importance of SIM2 in the regulation prostate cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
VCaP cells were maintained in SILAC-mediums for at least ten doubling cycles to ensure the incorporation of labeled amino acids into proteins (see details in Supplementary methods). Then cells were divided 9 × 106 cells on 15 cm culture dish and cultured 72 h. For the last hour 10 nM R1881 was added to heavy-labelled (Arg10, Lys8) cells and ethanol as a vehicle control for light-labelled (Arg0, Lys0) cells. The chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of SILAC-labelled VCaP was performed as described in (66). As a modification to the protocol, the chromatin was incubated overnight with αAR (67) followed by 3 h incubation with G-protein coupled magnetic DynaBeads (Invitrogen) rotating in 4 °C. ChIP protocol was then followed by SICAP protocol from (17, X ). Briefly, 3’-ends of sheared DNA were in vitro biotinylated through terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (ThermoFisher Scientific EP0161) and used as bait in streptavidin pull down with protease-resistant streptavidin beads (prS, refX). Beads were then conditioned in ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) 50mM. Samples were subjected to reduction with DTT 7mM final at 55°C for 30min, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide 12mM at RT for 40min in the dark. Reaction was quenched with DTT and proteins were digested on prS beads with a Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega, V5071) at 37°C for 16h. Digested peptides were desalted with 2μL of SP3 para-magnetic beads as previously described (Hughes C. S. et al. 2014; Rafiee et al. 2016; Hughes C. S. et al. 2019 , refX ). Peptides were eluted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in H2O, loaded on a trap column (PepMap100 C18 Nano-Trap 100µm x 2cm) and separated over a 25cm analytical column (Waters nanoEase BEH, 75 μm x 250 mm, C18, 1.7 μm, 130 Å,) using the Thermo Easy nLC 1200 nanospray source (Thermo EasynLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 8% in 4 minutes, then increased to 10% in 2 minutes, to 32% in 68 minutes, to 50% in 12 minutes and finally to 100% in a further 1 minute and went down to 3% for the last 11 minutes. Peptides were analyzed on a Tri-Hybrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in positive (+2kV) data dependent acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. The MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap and ion trap, respectively with a total cycle time of 3sec. MS1 detection occurred at 120000 resolution, AGC target 1E6, maximal injection time 50 ms and a scan range of 375-1500 m/z. Peptides with charge states 2 to 4 were selected for fragmentation with an exclusion duration of 40s. MS2 occurred with CE 33%, detection in topN mode and scan rate was set to Rapid. AGC target was 1E4 and maximal injection time allowed of 50 ms. Data were recorded in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.6 based on the Andromeda search (71,72) and peptide identification was performed using Uniprot database of Human (canonical  ). Protein and peptide FDRs were set to 1 %. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Match between runs, second peptide and re-quantify options were active and both Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and intensity-Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) scores were calculated. Only proteins with at least 1 unique peptide in both replicates of AR pulldown were used for further processing steps. Additionally, common contaminants such as keratins were removed before further processing. R1881-induced chromatin protein network of AR was discriminated from total ChIP-SICAP data with moderated t-statistics with linear model analysis (limma ref (22)) in R by using adjusted p-value < 0.05 and LogFC (R1881/EtOH) > 0 as cut-off values. Data was illustrated with ggplot in R-studio version 1.2.5033 and R v3.6.0, and Adobe Illustrator 2020 version 24.1.1. Only a master protein of MS identified protein groups  was used for visualization purposes. The complete list of R1881-induced interactors and MS group composition is reported in Supplementary Table 1.

### Publication Abstract
Treatment of prostate cancer confronts resistance to androgen receptor (AR)-targeted therapies. AR-associated coregulators and chromatin proteins hold a great potential for novel therapy targets. Here, we employed a powerful chromatin-directed proteomics approach termed ChIP-SICAP to uncover the composition of chromatin protein network, the chromatome, around endogenous AR in castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) cells. In addition to several expected AR coregulators, the chromatome contained many nuclear proteins not previously associated with the AR. In the context of androgen signaling in CRPC cells, we further investigated the role of a known AR-associated protein, a chromatin remodeler SMARCA4 and that of SIM2, a transcription factor without a previous association with AR. To understand their role in chromatin accessibility and AR target gene expression, we integrated data from ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, ATAC-seq and functional experiments. Despite the wide co-occurrence of SMARCA4 and AR on chromatin, depletion of SMARCA4 influenced chromatin accessibility and expression of a restricted set of AR target genes, especially those involved in cell morphogenetic changes in epithelial-mesenchymal transition. The depletion also inhibited the CRPC cell growth, validating SMARCA4's functional role in CRPC cells. Although silencing of SIM2 reduced chromatin accessibility similarly, it affected the expression of a much larger group of androgen-regulated genes, including those involved in cellular responses to external stimuli and steroid hormone stimulus. The silencing also reduced proliferation of CRPC cells and tumor size in chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane assay, further emphasizing the importance of SIM2 in CRPC cells and pointing to the functional relevance of this potential prostate cancer biomarker in CRPC cells. Overall, the chromatome of AR identified in this work is an important resource for the field focusing on this important drug target.

### Keywords
Chip-sicap, Chromatin accessibility, Chromatin, Castration-resistant prostate cancer cell, Smarca4, Androgen signaling, Sim2, Gene expression, Protein-protein interactions, Chromatin-mediated interaction

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland
DKFZ

### Submitter
Gianluca Sigismondo

### Lab Head
Dr Jorma J Palvimo
Institute of Biomedicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland


