### Accession
PXD022112

### Title
Harnessing machine learning to unravel protein degradation in Escherichia coli

### Description
Degradation   of   intracellular   proteins   in   Gram-negative   bacteria   regulates   various   cellular processes  and  serves  as  a  quality  control  mechanism  by  eliminating  damaged  proteins.  To understand  what  causes  the  proteolytic  machinery  of  the  cell  to  degrade  some  proteins  while sparing others, we employed a quantitative pulsed-SILAC (Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture) method followed by mass spectrometry analysis to determine the half-lives for  the  proteome  of  exponentially  growing Escherichia  coli,  under  standard  conditions.  We developed  a  likelihood-based  statistical  test  to  findactively  degraded  proteins,  and  identified dozens  of  novel  proteins  that  are  fast-degrading. Finally,  we  used  structural,  physicochemical and  protein-protein  interaction  network  descriptorsto train  a  machine-learning  classifier  to discriminate fast-degrading proteins from the rest of the proteome. Our combined computational-experimental approach provides means for proteomic-based discovery of fast degrading proteins in bacteria and the elucidation of the factors determining protein half-livesand have implications for  protein  engineering.  Moreover,  as  rapidly  degraded  proteins  may  play  an  important  role  in pathogenesis, our findings could identify new potential antibacterial drug targets

### Sample Protocol
All  chemicals  were  purchased  from  Sigma-Aldrich  unless  otherwise noted. Cell pellets were lysed with 5% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl. Lysates were incubated at 96°C for  5  min,  followed  by  six  cycles  of  30  s  of  sonication  (Bioruptor  Pico,  Diagenode,  USA). Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA) and a total of 30 μg protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s  instructions.  In  brief,  after  loading,  samples  were  washed  with  90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonateanddigested with LysC (1:50 protease/protein) for 1.5 h at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted with50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated overnight with trypsin at 37°C. Two additional elutions were performed using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dry. Samples were kept at −80 °C until analysis. Liquid chromatography. ULC/MSgrade solvents were used for all the chromatographic steps. Each  sample  was  loaded  using  split-less  nano-Ultra  Performance  Liquid  Chromatography  (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: (A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid  and  (B)  acetonitrile  +  0.1%  formic  acid.  Desaltingof  the  samples  was  performed  online using  a  reversed-phase  Symmetry  C18  trapping  column  (180  μm  internal  diameter,  20  mm length, 5 μm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated on a T3 high strength silica nano-column  (75  μm  internal  diameter,  250  mm  length,  1.8  μm  particle  size;  Waters)  at  0.35 μL/min.  Peptides  were  eluted  from  the  column  into  the  mass  spectrometer  using  the  following gradient: 4% to 25% buffer B in 155 min, 25% to 90% buffer B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. Mass spectrometry. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New  Objective;  Woburn,  MA,  USA)  to  a  quadrupole  orbitrap  mass  spectrometer  (Q  Exactive HF,  Thermo  Scientific)  using  a  FlexIon  nanospray  apparatus  (Proxeon).  Data  were  acquired  in .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. It is made available under aThe copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted October 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.04.325795doi: bioRxiv preprint  7data  dependent  acquisition  (DDA)  mode,  using  a  Top20  method.  MS1  resolution  was  set  to 120,000 (at 400 m/z), mass range of 375-1650 m/z, automatic gain control of 3E6 and maximum injection  time  was  set  to  60  msec. MS2  resolution  was  set  to  15,000,  quadrupole  isolation  1.7 m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 45 sec and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw  data  were  processed  with  MaxQuant  version  1.6.0.16  (Cox  &  Mann, 2008). The data were searched with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011) against the Uniprot E.  coliK-12  proteome  database  (UP000000625)  appended  with  common  lab  protein contaminants   and   the   following   modifications:   Carbamidomethylation   of   C   as   a   fixed modification  and  oxidation  of  M  and  deamidation  of  N  and  Q  as  variable  ones.  Labeling  was defined as H-heavy K8, M –medium K4 and L –light K0. The match between runs option was enabled  as  well  as  the  re-quantify  function.  The  rest  of  the  parameters  were  used  as  default. Decoy  hits  were  filtered  out  using  Perseus  version  1.6.0.7  (Tyanova et  al,  2016),  as  well  as proteins  that  were  identified  on  the  basis  of  a  modified  peptide  only.  The  H/L,  H/M  and  M/L ratios  and  raw  intensities  in  the  “proteinGroups”  file  were  used  for  further  calculations

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Machine learning, Proteomics, Silac

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Shmunis School for Biomedicine and Cancer Research, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Tal Pupko
Shmunis School for Biomedicine and Cancer Research, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel


