### Accession
PXD026576

### Title
Perturbations of the proteome in primary astrocytes from the hSOD1(G93A) ALS mouse model

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease whose pathophysiology is largely unknown. Despite motor neuron death is recognized as the key event in ALS, astrocytes dysfunctionalities and neuroinflammation were demonstrated to accompany and probably even drive motor neuron loss. Nevertheless, the mechanisms priming astrocyte failure and hyperactivation are still obscure. In this work, altered pathways in ALS astrocytes were unveiled by investigating the proteomic profile of primary spinal-cord astrocytes derived from transgenic ALS mouse model overexpressing the human (h)SOD1(G93A) protein, in comparison with the transgenic counterpart expressing hSOD1(WT) protein. In this research, we showed that hSOD1(G93A) astrocytes present a profound alterations in the expression of proteins involved in proteostasis and glutathione metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Astrocytes were lysed in 60 µL of a buffer containing glycerol 10% (w/v), sodium dodecylsulphate (SDS) 2% (w/v), Tris-HCl 62.5 mM, pH 6.8, and cocktails of protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and centrifuged (10 min, 14,000 x g, 4 °C) to remove cell debris. Protein concentration was determined in the supernatants with a Lowry assay kit. Protein extracts from three cultures of hSOD1(WT) and hSOD1(G93A) primary astrocytes were processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP). Briefly, protein extracts (50 μg in 50 μL) were mixed with 200 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Samples were then loaded in filters with a molecular weight cut-off of 10 kDa, and centrifuged (15 min, 14,000 x g, 25°C). Disulphide bonds were reduced and alkylated using 200 μL of 25 mM DTT (45 min, 55°C) and, after centrifugation, 200 μL of 55 mM iodoacetamide (45 min in the dark, RT) (both diluted in 100 mM TEAB), respectively. After removal of the solution by centrifugation, protein digestion was carried out by incubating filters (18 h, 37°C) with a sequencing grade modified trypsin solution (90 uL in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) to a final enzyme:protein ratio of 1:25 (w/w). The released peptides were collected by centrifugation (10 min, 14,000 × g). To improve recovery, filters were washed with 50 μL of 100 mM TEAB and centrifuged again. To perform quantitative MS, peptides were labelled with 6-plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) reagents, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To this purpose, peptide samples from three hSOD1(WT) and three hSOD1(G93A) biological replicates were labelled with six TMT reporter ions (with m/z of 126.1, 127.1, 128.1 and 129.1, 130.1, 131.1 Th, respectively). Samples were then equally mixed, desalted using C18 spin columns, and eluted into five fractions by strong cation exchange fractionation (SCX) by increasing the ammonium formate concentration (i.e. 100 mM, 200 mM, 300 mM, 400 mM, 500 mM). SCX fractions were then purified by means of C18 spin columns using a standard protocol and dried using a stream of nitrogen at room temperature. To proceed with MS analysis, the dried fractions were resuspended in 100 μL of water containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). MS analysis was performed using a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap Q‐Exactive mass spectrometer, coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system. Aliquots containing 5 µg of digested proteins (10 µL) were separated on a reversed phase analytical column (C18, 150 × 2.1 mm, 2.6 μm) kept at 30 °C. The mobile phases were water (A), and acetonitrile (B), both containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Peptide separation was carried out at a flow rate of 200 μL/min using the following gradient: from 0 to 1 min the composition of mobile phase (A:B) was kept constant at 97.5:2.5. Then the composition was changed linearly to reach 30:70 at 20 min, and changed again to reach 50:50 at 24 min. Finally, the composition was increased linearly to 5:95 at 26 min and kept unchanged until 30 min to wash the column. The system was re-equilibrated to the initial condition (97.5:2.5) in 0.5 min and maintained for 4.5 min until the end of the chromatographic run (35 min). Each SCX fraction was analysed twice to increase the number of identified peptides, by applying a static exclusion list (containing peptides identified in the first run) that was applied to the second UHPLC‐HRMS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analysed with a MudPIT protocol using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software interfaced to a SEQUEST HT search engine. Spectra were searched against the UniProt Mus musculus database. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Peptide and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. TMT 6-plex (N-term and Lys) and carbamidomethyl-cysteine were set as fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation was selected as variable modification. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification purposes, which was performed directly by the software, setting the tolerance of the reporter mass to 20 ppm. By using the algorithm Percolator proteins were considered correctly identified if at least 2 unique peptides were quantified with high confidence (q-value < 0.05). Principle of maximum parsimony was applied to grouped proteins. The quantification was performed by the software normalizing the intensity of each reporter ion to that of the hSOD1(WT) sample (126.1 Th). Sample distribution was visualized by performing principal component analysis analysis, while the determination of altered proteins was performed as follows: data were exported in an Excel spreadsheet and used for further analysis. The fold-change of a given protein was estimated as the mean ratio of hSOD1(G93A)-to-hSOD1(WT) values and subjected to a two-tailed T-test (p ≤ 0.05). A ratio of hSOD1(G93A)-to-hSOD1(WT) >1.33 or < 0.77, was set as the threshold for increased and decreased abundance, respectively. The graphical visualization of altered proteins was allowed by plotting each protein in a Volcano plot and using the log2 of ratio values (for the x axis), and the –log10 of p-value (for the y-axis).  Clusterization of astrocytes samples was performed by the construction of the heat map with hierarchical clustering based on the Pearson correlation with average linkage using normalized area values of the 38 altered proteins (MeV software package, version 4.9.0).

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease whose pathophysiology is largely unknown. Despite the fact that motor neuron (MN) death is recognized as the key event in ALS, astrocytes dysfunctionalities and neuroinflammation were demonstrated to accompany and probably even drive MN loss. Nevertheless, the mechanisms priming astrocyte failure and hyperactivation are still obscure. In this work, altered pathways and molecules in ALS astrocytes were unveiled by investigating the proteomic profile and the secreted metabolome of primary spinal cord astrocytes derived from transgenic ALS mouse model overexpressing the human (h)SOD1(G93A) protein in comparison with the transgenic counterpart expressing hSOD1(WT) protein. Here we show that ALS primary astrocytes are depleted of proteins-and of secreted metabolites-involved in glutathione metabolism and signaling. The observed increased activation of Nf-kB, Ebf1, and Plag1 transcription factors may account for the augmented expression of proteins involved in the proteolytic routes mediated by proteasome or endosome-lysosome systems. Moreover, hSOD1(G93A) primary astrocytes also display altered lipid metabolism. Our results provide novel insights into the altered molecular pathways that may underlie astrocyte dysfunctionalities and altered astrocyte-MN crosstalk in ALS, representing potential therapeutic targets to abrogate or slow down MN demise in disease pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Lc-hrms/ms, Spinal cord astrocytes, Mouse, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

### Affiliations
Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie
Department of Biomedical Sciences University of Padova via Ugo Bassi, 58b - 35130 - Padova - Italy

### Submitter
Roberto Stella

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Bertoli
Department of Biomedical Sciences University of Padova via Ugo Bassi, 58b - 35130 - Padova - Italy


