### Accession
PXD000696

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteome of ecto-ATP synthase blockade in lung cancer cells

### Description
ATP synthase is crucial for ATP synthesis in living cells. Recently, ATP synthase was found not only in mitochondria but also on the extracellular surface, named as ectopic ATP synthase (ecto-ATP synthase). ATP synthase inhibitor is a potential drug candidate to fight cancer by blocking the ecto-ATP synthase of cancer cells. In this study, we applied dynamic phosphoproteomics to elucidate the molecular responses to ecto-ATP synthase blockade.

### Sample Protocol
To profile the phosphorylation changes of downstream ecto-ATP synthase blockade in global scale, the extracted proteins from different samples were digested with trypsin and processed to stable-isotope dimethyl labeling for quantitation. Phosphopeptides were enriched with TiO2 and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS with biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 for peak detection and quantitation. Peptide identification was performed using Andromeda search engine against Swiss-Prot human database version 87. The search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY), and allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. A minimum of 6 amino acids in peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. Using a decoy database strategy (149), peptide identification was accepted based on the posterior error probability (PEP) with a false discovery rate of 1%. Precursor masses of already identified peptides were further searched and re-calculated using the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Citreoviridin, one of toxic mycotoxins derived from fungal species, can suppress lung cancer cell growth by inhibiting the activity of ectopic ATP synthase, but has limited effect on normal cells. However, the mechanism of citreoviridin triggering dynamic molecular responses in cancer cells remains unclear. Here, we performed temporal phosphoproteomics to elucidate the dynamic changes after citreoviridin treatment in cells and xenograft model. We identified a total of 829 phosphoproteins and demonstrated that citreoviridin treatment affects protein folding, cell cycle, and cytoskeleton function. Furthermore, response network constructed by mathematical modeling shows the relationship between the phosphorylated heat shock protein 90 &#x3b2; and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. This work describes that citreoviridin suppresses cancer cell growth and mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling by site-specific dephosphorylation of HSP90AB1 on Serine 255 and provides perspectives in cancer therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Lung cancer cells, Phosphoproteome, Ecto-atp synthase

### Affiliations
System biology lab, Department of life science, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
Institute of molecular and cellular biology

### Submitter
Chia-Wei Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
System biology lab, Department of life science, National Taiwan University, Taiwan


