### Accession
PXD035496

### Title
Eggerthella lenta DSM 2243 alleviates bile acid stress response in Clostridium ramosum and Anaerostipes cacae by transformation of bile acids

### Description
Bile acids are not only crucial for the uptake of lipids, but also have widespread systematic ef-fects and shape the gut-microbiome composition. Bile acids can directly shape the gut-microbiome and can be modified by bacteria such as Eggerthella lenta which in turn plays a crucial role in host metabolism and immune response.  We cultivated eight strains that represent a simplified human intestinal microbiome and inves-tigated the molecular response to bile acids, co-culturing with Eggerthella lenta and the combina-tion. We observed growth inhibition of particularly gram-positive strains during bile acid stress, which could be alleviated through co-culturing with Eggerthella lenta. The inhibition of growth was related to a decrease in membrane integrity and genotoxic effects of bile acids, which we investigated using zeta potential measurements in combination with proteomic and metabolomic analyses. Co-culturing with Eggerthella lenta alleviated stress through formation of oxidized and epimer-ized bile acids and the molecular response to co-culturing was seen to be strain specific. We also note that we could detect the recently described Microbial Bile Salt Conjugates in our cultures. This study highlights the significance of a potent bile acid modifier and how in-depth molecular analyses are required to decipher cross-communication between gut and host.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial pellets were harvested from 2 mL of culture and resuspended in CH3OH / H2O / CHCL3 (2:1:1, v:v:v). Following resuspension samples were incubated on ice for 10 min and were then sonicated and centrifuged (1,700 x g; 10 min; 4°C). Samples were then dried in a speed vac and resuspended in UT buffer (8 M Urea; 2 M thiourea). Protein con-centration was determined on a NanoDrop 2000c (Thermo Scientific, USA) 4 µg of protein in UT-solution was filled with up to 20 µL with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by addition of 2 µL of 25 mM dithiothreitol solution for disulfide re-duction and the samples were incubated via Thermoshaker (60°C; 1 h; 1,400 rpm). This was followed by alkylation by adding 14 µL of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 4 µL of 100 mM 2-iodoacetamide and incubation at 37°C for 30 min at 1,400 rpm. Overnight enzymatic digestion was performed with trypsin or Asp-N (Promega, USA) at 37°C. Ex-tracted peptides were purified by SOLAµ (Thermo Scientific, USA) as per the manufactur-er’s recommendation. After evaporation peptides were resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% FA

### Data Protocol
For each LC−MS run, 1μg of peptides was injected into a Nano-HPLC (UltiMate3000, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped for 3 min on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm×2 cm, particle size 3μM, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by separation on a C18-reverse phase analytical col-umn (Acclaim PepMap100, 75μm x 25 cm, particle size 3μM, nanoViper, ThermoFisher Scientific). A two-step gradient was used with A: 0.01% FA in H2O and B: 80% ACN in H2O and 0.01% FA in mobile phases. First step of the gradient was 90 min where B went from 4% to 30%, then 30 min where B went from 30% to 55%. Followed by 30 min where B went from 55% back to 4%, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35°C. The peptides that were eluted, got ionized by a nano ion source (Advion Triversa Nanomate, Ithaca, NY,USA) and detected via a Q Exactive HF-MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the following set-tings: MS resolution 120 000, MS automatic gain control (AGC) target 3 000 000 ions, maximum injection time for MS 80 ms, intensity threshold for MS/MS of 17 000 ions, dy-namic exclusion 30 s, TopN = 20, isolation window 1.6m/z, MS/MS resolution 15 000, MS/MS AGC target 50 000 ions, maximum injection time for MS/MS 120 ms. Mass spectrometric data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.5, Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA) with SequestHT search engine. Search settings were set to trypsin (Full), or Asp-N (Full), max. missed cleavage sites 2, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined using Per-colator. The searches against SequestHT was done with a constructed proteome database containing the reference proteomes downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org).  Data from the searches were further processed by inhouse written R-scripts as previously described. Protein intensities were converted to relative abundances by dividing the intensity of the protein with the summed intensities of all proteins from the same species detected in the sample. Protein functions and pathway assignment were done using Ghostkoala webapplication from KEGG

### Publication Abstract
Bile acids are crucial for the uptake of dietary lipids and can shape the gut-microbiome composition. This latter function is associated with the toxicity of bile acids and can be modulated by bile acid modifying bacteria such as <i>Eggerthella lenta</i>, but the molecular details of the interaction of bacteria depending on bile acid modifications are not well understood. In order to unravel the molecular response to bile acids and their metabolites, we cultivated eight strains from a human intestinal microbiome model alone and in co-culture with <i>Eggerthella lenta</i> in the presence of cholic acid (CA) and deoxycholic acid (DCA). We observed growth inhibition of particularly gram-positive strains such as <i>Clostridium ramosum</i> and the gram-variable Anaerostipes cacae by CA and DCA stress. <i>C. ramosum</i> was alleviated through co-culturing with <i>Eggerthella lenta</i>. We approached effects on the membrane by zeta potential and genotoxic and metabolic effects by (meta)proteomic and metabolomic analyses. Co-culturing with <i>Eggerthella lenta</i> decreased both CA and DCA by the formation of oxidized and epimerized bile acids. <i>Eggerthella lenta</i> also produces microbial bile salt conjugates in a co-cultured species-specific manner. This study highlights how the interaction with other bacteria can influence the functionality of bacteria.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Bile acids, Metaproteomics, Eggerthella lenta, Gut microbiome, Host-gut interaction

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Kristian Jensen Pedersen
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstrasse 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


