### Accession
PXD003584

### Title
Dimethyl-Labelling of wild-type yeast treated with hydrogen peroxide LC-MS/MS

### Description
Changes of protein abundance upon H2O2 treatment of wild-type yeast cells

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells of strain YPH499 grown in 2% galactose medium to mid-log phase were split up. One part was left untreated and the other was treated with 1 mM H2O2 for 30 min. Proteins were extracted and digested by trypsin. Tryptic peptides were labeled by with heavy (H2O2) or light (control) isotope versions of formaldehyde/cyanoborohydride. Light and heavy samples were mixed 1:1 based on total protein amount. Mixed samples were fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography. Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data of dimethyl labelled samples were jointly processed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.12 (Cox and Mann, 2008). For protein identification spectra were correlated with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein database (UniProtKB Yeast Isoform, release 01.10.2015, 6,740 entries) using Andromeda. N-terminal and lysine dimethylation were set as light (+ 28.03 Da) and heavy (+ 34.06 Da) labels respectively. Trypsin/P was set as the enzyme in specific digestion mode allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Oxidation of methionine was included as variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Minimum peptide length was kept at 7. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied on both peptide and protein lists using the decoy mode “Revert”. For protein quantification the option “Re-quantify” was checked and the option “Match between runs” was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7 min. Minimum ratio count for protein quantification was set to two and only unique peptides were considered for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is inevitably linked to life. However, the precise role of ROS in signalling and specific targets is largely unknown. We perform a global proteomic analysis to delineate the yeast redoxome to a depth of more than 4,300 unique cysteine residues in over 2,200 proteins. Mapping of redox-active thiols in proteins exposed to exogenous or endogenous mitochondria-derived oxidative stress reveals ROS-sensitive sites in several components of the translation apparatus. Mitochondria are the major source of cellular ROS. We demonstrate that increased levels of intracellular ROS caused by dysfunctional mitochondria serve as a signal to attenuate global protein synthesis. Hence, we propose a universal mechanism that controls protein synthesis by inducing reversible changes in the translation machinery upon modulating the redox status of proteins involved in translation. This crosstalk between mitochondria and protein synthesis may have an important contribution to pathologies caused by dysfunctional mitochondria.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Dimethyl-labelling

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg


