### Accession
PXD005752

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes in C.elegans embryo as a result of pig-1 mutation

### Description
Comparison of the proteome and phosphoproteome of wild type C.elegans embryos compared to pig-1 mutant embryos

### Sample Protocol
The embryos were harvested and washed prior to homogenisation and lysis. Proteins were extracted in urea lysis buffer, reduced and alkylated using TCEP and iodoacetamide before being subjected to double digestion using Lys-C and trypsin. The digested peptides were desalted and fractionated using HILIC.  5% of the HILIC fractions were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-exactive orbitrap using 4 hour linear gradient.  95% of the HILIC fractions were phospho-enriched using magnetic titanium IMAC beads (Mag-Resyn) on an automated magnetic bead handling robot (KingFisher, ThermoFisher). The peptides were then analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-excative plus orbitrap using

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant suite (v.1.5.2.8). Proteins were identified by seraching against uniprot C.elegans proteome downloaded in March 2016 and e'Coli proteome using andromeda as asearch engine.  Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as a fixed modification.  The following variable modifications were used for the search:N and Q deamidation, methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, Gln-pyro glu conversion and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine. Match between runs was used with matching time window of 0.7 minutes. The FDR was set to 5%. Proteins wre quantified using LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Asymmetric cell divisions are required for cellular diversity and defects can lead to altered daughter cell fates and numbers. In a genetic screen for C. elegans mutants with defects in dopaminergic head neuron specification or differentiation, we isolated a new allele of the transcription factor HAM-1 [HSN (Hermaphrodite-Specific Neurons) Abnormal Migration]. Loss of both HAM-1 and its target, the kinase PIG-1 [PAR-1(I)-like Gene], leads to abnormal dopaminergic head neuron numbers. We identified discrete genetic relationships between ham-1, pig-1 and apoptosis pathway genes in dopaminergic head neurons. We used an unbiased, quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach to characterise direct and indirect protein targets and pathways that mediate the effects of PIG-1 kinase loss in C. elegans embryos. Proteins showing changes in either abundance, or phosphorylation levels, between wild-type and pig-1 mutant embryos are predominantly connected with processes including cell cycle, asymmetric cell division, apoptosis and actomyosin-regulation. Several of these proteins play important roles in C. elegans development. Our data provide an in-depth characterisation of the C. elegans wild-type embryo proteome and phosphoproteome and can be explored via the Encyclopedia of Proteome Dynamics (EPD) - an open access, searchable online database.

### Keywords
Embryo, Development, Phosphoproteome, C.elegans

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Professor of Genetics, Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Dalila Bensaddek

### Lab Head
Dr Anton Gartner
Professor of Genetics, Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


