### Accession
PXD011279

### Title
Autophagy lipidation machinery regulates microtubule dynamics to maintain axonal homeostasis

### Description
Axon integrity is crucial for neuronal function. To maintain axonal homeostasis neurons have evolved a unique organization of the microtubule (MT) cytoskeleton, which supports axonal morphology and provides tracks for intracellular transport. Although abnormal MT-based trafficking highlights the pathology of neurodegenerative diseases, the exact mechanism regulating MT dynamics in the axon remains enigmatic. Here we report on a novel regulation of MT dynamics by autophagy, the pathway, which previously has been linked to lysosomal degradation. We find that AuTophaGy(ATG)-related proteins required for LC3 lipid conjugation regulate MT stability via controlling the abundance of MT-binding protein CLASP2. This function of ATGs is independent of their role in protein degradation and requires the active zone protein ELKS1. Our results highlight a novel role of autophagy in neurons and suggest that pharmacological activation of autophagy may not only promote the degradation of bulk cytoplasmic material, but also impair axonal integrity via altering the MT stability.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from Co-IP samples were seperated by SDS-PAGE, and processed using an in-gel digestion approach with trypsin. Peptides were extracted and desalted using SDB-RP StageTips. All samples were analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS utilizing an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC coupled to Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometers, operated using default settings.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot mouse database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively.The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification.Oxidation (M) was included as variable modification.The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Neurons maintain axonal homeostasis via employing a unique organization of the microtubule (MT) cytoskeleton, which supports axonal morphology and provides tracks for intracellular transport. Abnormal MT-based trafficking hallmarks the pathology of neurodegenerative diseases, but the exact mechanism regulating MT dynamics in axons remains enigmatic. Here we report on a regulation of MT dynamics by AuTophaGy(ATG)-related proteins, which previously have been linked to the autophagy pathway. We find that ATG proteins required for LC3 lipid conjugation are dispensable for survival of excitatory neurons and instead regulate MT stability via controlling the abundance of the MT-binding protein CLASP2. This function of ATGs is independent of their role in autophagy and requires the active zone protein ELKS1. Our results highlight a non-canonical role of ATG proteins in neurons and suggest that pharmacological activation of autophagy may not only promote the degradation of cytoplasmic material, but also impair axonal integrity via altering MT stability.

### Keywords
Neuron, Axonal homoeostasis, Microtubule dynamics, Autophagy, Lc3

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Frese
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


