### Accession
PXD016706

### Title
Oats comparison under Fusarium graminearum infection

### Description
Infection of Belinda and Argamak oat varieties with Fusarium

### Sample Protocol
Collected plant material was ground into a fine powder and for protein extraction, 300 mg of the sample powder was mixed with 0.04% SDS and 5% sodium hydroxide and incubated under rotation for two hours at 60 degrees C. After centrifugation supernatants were separated by SDS_PAGE before in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis using a 120 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML and MGF using ProteoWizard. MGF files were searched X!tandem and Mascot against Belinda and Argamak transcriptome assembly databases and F graminearum proteins in UniProt as of 2014-06-24 with 7 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment tolerance. Peptide spectrum matches passing a primary FDR threshold of 1% or the same peptide identified in other samples were matched with MS1 features extracted by Dinosaur (v1.0.0) within the Proteios Software Environment, followed by feature matching between samples.

### Publication Abstract
Fusarium species are cereal pathogens that cause the Fusarium Head Blight (FHB) disease. FHB can reduce yield, cause mycotoxin accumulation in the grain and reduce germination efficiency of the harvested seeds. Understanding the biochemical interactions between the host plants and the pathogen is crucial for controlling the disease and for the development of cultivars with improved tolerance to FHB. Here, we studied morphological and proteomic differences between the susceptible oat variety Belinda and the more resistant variety Argamak using variety-specific transcriptome assemblies as references. Measurements of deoxynivalenol toxin levels confirmed the partial resistance in Argamak and the susceptibility in Belinda. To jointly investigate the proteomics- and sequence data, we developed an RShiny-based interface for interactive exploration of the dataset using univariate and multivariate statistics. When applying this interface to the dataset, quantitative protein differences between Belinda and Argamak were detected, and eighteen peptides were found uniquely in Argamak during infection, among them several lipoxygenases. Such proteins can be developed as markers for Fusarium resistance breeding. In conclusion, this study provides the first proteogenomic insight on molecular Fusarium-oat interactions at both morphological and molecular levels and the data are openly available through an interactive interface for further inspection. SIGNIFICANCE: Fusarium head blight causes widespread damage to crops, and chronic and acute toxicity to human and livestock due to the accumulation of toxins during infection. In the present study, two oat varieties with differing resistance were challenged with Fusarium to understand the disease better, and studied both at morphological and molecular levels, identifying proteins which could play a role in the defense mechanism. Furthermore, a proteogenomics approach allows joint profiling of expression and sequence level differences to identify potentially functionally differing mutations. Here such analysis is made openly available through an interactive interface which allows other scientists to draw further findings from the data. This study may both serve as a basis for understanding oat disease response and developing breeding markers for Fusarium resistant oat and future proteogenomic studies using the interactive approach described.

### Keywords
Oat, Fusarium

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Lund University

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Lund University


