### Accession
PXD006825

### Title
First insights into the pleiotropic role of vrf (yedF), a newly characterized  gene of Salmonella Typhimurium

### Description
Salmonella Typhimurium is an enteric food-borne pathogen responsible for causing salmonellosis associated with acute diarrhea. The bacterial invasion initially requires flagellar motility to reach the intestinal lumen and to cross the mucus layer of the intestinal epithelia and subsequent adhesion to the host cell, mainly mediated by fimbriae .The key genes involved in the pathogenic process are encoded within highly conserved regions of the bacterial genome called Salmonella Pathogenicity Islands (SPIs). The key regulator HilA, which is positively regulated by HilC and HilD, is located in SPI-1;however, other virulence-related regulators, such as RtsA, are encoded outside this island . During the invasion, proteins encoded by the prgHIJK, spaMNOPQRS, and invABCEFGH SPI-1 operons constitute a Type-3 Secretion System. Effector proteins,such as SipA and SipC (encoded in SPI-1) and SigD/SopB (encoded in SPI-5), translocate to the host cytosol through this system causing intracellular changes and inducing the immune response . The survival and replication of intracellular Salmonella inside Salmonella-containing vacuoles (SCVs) is mainly mediated by the genes located in SPI-2. The immune response is activated through the recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by specific receptors expressed on the surface and/or inside different cell types. The most important PAMPs are flagellin (monomers comprising the flagella filaments), particularly the FliC subunit, which is highly expressed on the bacterial surface, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS).Oxygen availability is limited in the inflamed gut whereas other compounds, such as hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and H2 are abundantly produced by the colonic bacteria. In addition, nutrients are also limited inside the SCV, while reactive oxygen as wellas nitrogen species may be found . In anaerobic conditions, Salmonella is able to survive by using alternative energy sources, such as nitrate or fumarate, through the use of specific enzymes: nitrate and nitrite reductases, fumarate reductase , DMSO reductase and respiratory hydrogenases.In a previous study, we compared transcriptomes of a clinical isolate of S. Typhimurium (strain 50-wt) and its derivative-multidrug-resistant mutant (strain 50-64) using microarrays . In addition to showing antimicrobial resistance, strain was also less invasive. In the present study, we focused on the genes of unknown function that showed impaired expression. We further selected those genes with a putative role in the acquired resistance phenotype or in the observed repressed virulence observed. Here, 4 putative membrane proteins and the yedF of unknown function were investigated to evaluate their involvement inthese two phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein digestion    4 protein samples from Salmonella Thyphimurium SL1344 (C1, C2, C3, C4) and ΔyedF (M1, M2, M3, M4) strains (4 biological replicates per strain in total) were quantified using Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) and 70 µg of each sample were digested with trypsin using the FASP  digestion approach. Briefly, samples were diluted to 450 µL with 500 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)/8M urea solution and pH checked (8.0-8.5). Immediately, samples were reduced with TCEP 5mM (90 min, 32oC), and alkylated with iodoacetamide 30mM (RT, 30 minutes in the dark). Afterwards, samples were loaded onto the Amicon Ultra (filter 10KDa, 0.5 mL, Millipore) to remove interfering compounds and substances by 3 rounds of centrifugations (12000 g, 30 min, RT) and washes with TEAB, and then digested with a porcine trypsin in 400 µL of the same exchange buffer plus 1M urea (Sequence grade modified Trypsin, Promega; 1.2µg trypsin/sample; 37oC, pH 8.5, 16h). The resulting peptide mixture was recovered by centrifuging the filter, and by 3 rounds of centrifugation/washes with 2 x 300 µL 500 mM TEAB and 1x 300µL 20 % acetonitrile (ACN)/ 500 mM TEAB. The recovered peptide solution was acidified with formic acid (FA) (1% final concentration) was dried down on a SpeedVac vacuum system, and desalted in a C18 tip (P200 Toptip, PolyLC), as per manufacturer's indications. Finally, the peptide solution was dried in a SpeedVac system and kept at -20 oC until its use in subsequent steps.   2. Peptide labeling   Samples were then resuspended in 30 μL 500 mM TEAB, to perform iTRAQ labeling (iTRAQ™ 8plex Multiplex kit) according to the product specifications. Briefly, 70 µl of isopropanol were added to each vial of iTRAQ labeling reagent. The contents of the label vials were transferred to the each sample tube, and sample-iTRAQ mixtures were mixed and incubated at room temperature for 2 h to allow the iTRAQ labeling reaction. Samples (4 biological replicates per strain) were labeled with the isobaric tag reporters as follows: C1/113, C2/114, C3/115, C4/116, M1/117, M2/118, M3/119, and M4/121. Reaction mixtures were diluted with 100 µl of water to quench the reaction. Finally, labeled samples were combined and dried down in a speed-vacuum centrifuge.   3. Sample clean-up and fractionation   Before LC-MSMS analysis, the combined iTRAQ-labelled sample was cleaned up in two steps and fractionated into 10 fractions with a high pH reversed phase spin column: first clean-up step  with a C18 tip (reverse phase, P200 toptip C18 PolyLC Inc.); and the second clean up with a  strong cationic exchange tip (P200 toptip, PolySULFOETHYL A PolyLC Inc.). Finally, were dried down in SpeedVac. The sample was then subjected to high pH fractionation with a high pH reversed phase peptide fractionation kit. (Pierce, ref.84868) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly the samples were loaded onto a spin column in 0.1% TFA, washed and buffer exchanged with high pH buffer and then eluted in 9 fractions of increasing acetonitrile (ACN) concentration (f1=10%ACN; f2=12.5%ACN; f3=15%ACN; f4=17.5%ACN; f5=20%ACN; f6=22.5%ACN; f7=25%ACN; f8=50%ACN; f9=75%ACN). Flow through and wash fractions were pooled and also analyzed as FT-wash fraction. The fractions were dried down in a speed-vacuum centrifuge. 4. LC-MSMS analysis   The dried-down fractions were analyzed in a nanoAcquity HPLC (Waters) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Tryptic labeled peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN/1% FA solution and an aliquot (500 ng) was injected for their chromatographic separation. Peptides were trapped on a Symmetry C18TM trap column (5µm 180µm x 20mm; Waters), and were separated using a C18 reverse phase capillary column (75 μm Øi, 25 cm, nano Acquity, 1.7μm BEH column; Waters). The gradient used for the elution of the peptides was 2 to 35 % B in 155 minutes, followed by gradient from 35% to 45% in 20 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: 100% ACN, 0.1%FA), with a 250 nL/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization in an emitter needle (PicoTipTM, New Objective) with an applied voltage of 2000V. Peptide masses (m/z 300-1800) were analyzed in data dependent mode where a full Scan MS in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM at 400m/z was obtained. Up to the 10 most abundant peptides (minimum intensity of 2000 counts) were selected from each MS scan and then fragmented in the HCD (Higher Energy Collision Dissociation) cell, using nitrogen as collision gas (40% normalized collision energy).  Following, the MS/MS fragmented peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 7,500 FWHM at 400 m/z. The scan time settings were:  Full MS 250 ms (1 microscan) and MSn 300 ms (2 microscans).  Generated raw data files (raw format) were collected with Thermo Xcalibur (v.2.2).

### Data Protocol
To perform the protein identification a Uniprot database of Salmonella (06/2015) was used, adding the common laboratory contaminant proteins. Using the .raw files obtained in the mass spectrometry analyses, the database search was accomplished by the Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4.1.14) software with Sequest HT as the search engine. The database searching was made against both target and a decoy database in order to obtain a false discovery rate (FDR), and thus estimate the number of incorrect peptide-spectrum matches that exceed a given threshold. Additionally, to improve the sensitivity of the database searching, Percolator algorithm (semi-supervised learning machine) was used in order to aid the discrimination of correct and incorrect peptide spectrum matches. Percolator assigns a q-value to each spectrum, which is defined as the minimal FDR at which the identification is deemed correct. These q values are estimated using the distribution of scores from decoy database search. Regarding the quantification, a method for iTRAQ™ 8-plex mass tags analysis-optimized by Thermo Scientific Instruments- was applied to obtain the reporter ion intensities, generating a quantitation file.  The following search parameters were applied in the quantitation process:  Database/Taxonomy: Uniprot Salmonella plus  contaminants  Enzyme:  Trypsin  Missed cleavage:  2 Fixed modifications : Carbamidomethyl of cystein,  iTRAQ8plex (N-term) Variable modifications: oxidation of methionine,  iTRAQ8plex (Y), iTRAQ8plex (K) Peptide tolerance: 10 ppm and  0.1 Da (respectively for MS and MS/MS spectra)   Percolator: Target FDR (Strict): 0.01; Validation based on: q-Value<0.01  6. Quantitative analysis   Reporter intensities from Proteome Discoverer quantitation file were used to perform iTRAQ quantitation. Reporter ion intensities of each individual peptide were summed from 10 injected fractions (LC-MS run), log2 transformed and then LOESS normalized between biological replicates (i.e C1/M1, C2/M2, C3/M3, and C4/M4). Protein abundance was defined as the mean of the normalized intensities values belonging to the given protein for each reporter.  Data validation and normalization was performed by R v3.1.2 (free software programming language and software environment for statistical computing and graphics; R Development Core Team, http://www.r-project.org/) and Inferno RND software v 1.0 (graphical front-end to R for common data analysis; Pacific Northwest National Laboratory; US Department of energy).

### Publication Abstract
Salmonella possesses virulence determinants that allow replication under extreme conditions and invasion of host cells, causing disease. Here, we examined four putative genes predicted to encode membrane proteins (ydiY, ybdJ, STM1441 and ynaJ) and a putative transcriptional factor (yedF). These genes were identified in a previous study of a S. Typhimurium clinical isolate and its multidrug-resistant counterpart. For STM1441 and yedF a reduced ability to interact with HeLa cells was observed in the knock-out mutants, but an increase in this ability was absent when these genes were overexpressed, except for yedF which phenotype was rescued when yedF was restored. In the absence of yedF, decreased expression was seen for: i) virulence-related genes involved in motility, chemotaxis, attachment and survival inside the host cell; ii) global regulators of the invasion process (hilA, hilC and hilD); and iii) factors involved in LPS biosynthesis. In contrast, an increased expression was observed for anaerobic metabolism genes. We propose yedF is involved in the regulation of Salmonella pathogenesis and contributes to the activation of the virulence machinery. Moreover, we propose that, when oxygen is available, yedF contributes sustained repression of the anaerobic pathway. Therefore, we recommend this gene be named vrf, for virulence-related factor.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Virulence, Yedf, Vrf

### Affiliations
Parc Cientific de Barcelona
Universitat de Barcelona. Parc Cientific de Barcelona. Proteomics Lab.

### Submitter
Ramon Díaz

### Lab Head
Dr De Oliveira, Eliandre
Universitat de Barcelona. Parc Cientific de Barcelona. Proteomics Lab.


