### Accession
PXD012202

### Title
Development of a method for the quantification of tyrosine 39 phosphorylated alpha-synuclein in human cerebrospinal fluid

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder caused by dopaminergic neuronal deaths. For a proper treatment of PD, biomarkers that would enable us to monitor disease progression or responses to a disease-modifying agent, or that can be used as a presymptomatic marker are critical. In addition, a biomarker that could be used to distinguish between the various diseases that manifest with PD-like symptoms would greatly enhance patient care and management of future clinical trials. Previous research indicates that c-Abl is overactive in PD patients resulting in an increased phosphorylation of the tyrosine 39 residue of alpha-synuclein (a-syn) (pY39 a-syn) and eventually dopaminergic neuronal death via a-syn aggregation. For this reason, monitoring pY39 a-syn will enable us to diagnose presymptomatic PD, monitoring disease progression and monitoring the response disease-modifying agents. We hypothesized that this increased phosphorylation on Y39 of a-syn (pY39 a-syn) will be reflected in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of PD patients and monitoring pY39 a-syn level in CSF will enable us to monitor pY39 a-syn level in the brain.  Mass spectrometry has been widely used for the detection of phosphorylated peptides using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) and we utilized the PRM mass spectrometry for the detection of pY39 a-syn. However, pY39 a-syn was not detected even after immunoprecipitation of a-syn, phosphopeptide enrichment or phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment from a practical volume. For this reason, we have developed a two-step enrichment method in which pY39 a-syn was first enriched with an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody followed by a further enrichment of phosphopeptides with titanium oxide (TiO2) beads to remove non-phosphopeptides. Accurate quantification was obtained by including a synthetic pY39 a-syn peptide labeled with heavy lysine that was added before an enzyme digestion. To detect pY39 α-syn peptide in CSF lower than 10 femtomolar concentration, experimental parameters were optimized. Comparison of pY39 a-syn to total a-syn in CSF from PD patients and controls reveals that pY39 a-syn levels are significantly elevated in the CSF of PD patient versus controls. This optimized two-step enrichment PRM detection method may be of value as a biomarker to monitor c-Abl activation in PD patients for future diagnostic studies as well as a pharmacodynamic marker for c-Abl therapeutic trials in PD. Furthermore, this developed method can be applicable to quantifying other phosphotyrosine peptides with low abundance in biological samples.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation of cerebrospinal fluids for mass spectrometry analysis For the quantification of pY39 a-syn peptides from PD patients and control samples, 20 fmol of heavy pY39 a-syn peptide was added to CSF. As a digestion control, 1 µg of FabI E.coli protein was added to the cerebrospinal fluid. Cerebrospinal fluid proteins were lysed in 4 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) followed by a reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at RT and alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. The proteins were then digested with an endoproteinase Lys-C (1:100; Wako Chemical) by incubating at room temperature for three hours. Sequentially trypsin digestion was conducted by diluting the urea concentration to 2 M by adding the 1 volume of 50 mM TEAB followed by adding a sequencing-grade trypsin (1:50; Promega) and incubating at 37oC overnight. The peptide samples were desalted with C18 Sep-Pak (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and freeze-dried.  Enrichment of pY39 a-syn peptide Endogenous pY39 a-syn peptide was enriched by performing a phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment with PTMScan pY1000 antibody according to manufacturer’s instruction with slight modifications (Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, the CSF peptides that are equivalent amount to 1 ml of CSF were reconstituted in 200 µl of immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4 and 50 mM NaCl). The peptide solution was cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 10,000 x g at 4oC and the supernatant was subject to the phosphotyrosine enrichment. After washing 20 µl phosphotyrosine agarose beads with PBS three times, the peptide solution was added to the beads followed by incubating at 4oC for 2 h with rotation. The peptide solution after the incubation was removed from the peptide-bead mixture followed by washing with ice-cold water once. The phosphotyrosine peptides were eluted by adding 55 µl of 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid and incubating at RT for 10 min. After incubation, the tube was centrifuged at 2000 x g for 1 min and the solution was transferred to a new tube. This elution was repeated once again with 50 µl 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid. The elution solution was dried at a SpeedVac. The phosphotyrosine peptides were further enriched with TiO2 phosphopeptide method as described in Tan et al [9]. Briefly, 0.6 mg of TiO2 beads (Titansphere) were resuspended in 40 µl of Binding buffer (65% acetonitrile (ACN) and 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) added to the peptides from the phosphotyrosine enrichment. The peptide and bead mixture are incubated at RT for 20 min with shaking at 1,400 rpm. The peptide was transferred to a C8 StageTip and centrifuged at 2000 x g for 2 min. Two hundred µl of the washing buffer (65% ACN and 0.1% TFA) was added and centrifuged at 2000 x g for 5 min. This washing was repeated once again. The phosphopeptides were eluted by adding 40 µl of elution buffer (1% NH4OH and 40% ACN) and centrifuging at 200 x g for 2 min. The eluted peptides were dried at SpeedVac followed by a reconstitution in 15 µl of 0.1% formic acid before mass spectrometry analysis.   Detection of total alpha-synuclein For the normalization of pY39 a-syn peptide quantity by the total a-syn quantify, total a-syn quantity was measured. 20 fmol of heavy a-syn peptide and 20 fmol of HBA2 peptide were added to 5 µg of CSF peptides. The CSF peptide and standard peptide mixture were subject to a desalting with C18 StageTip followed by LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The quantification of relative peptide abundance was conducted in Skyline software. The quantity of pY38 a-syn was normalized by total alpha-synuclein. To estimate a-syn contamination from blood, hemoglobin quantify was measured.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enrichment, Parkinson's disease, Phosphotyrosine, Parallel reaction monitoring, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Neurology Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Chan-Hyun Na
Department of Neurology Institute for Cell Engineering Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


