### Accession
PXD027172

### Title
Effects of BAFASAL on human microbiome

### Description
This project aims to examinw the effects of an anti-Salmonella bacteriophage preparation, BAFASAL, on ex vivo human gut microbiome composition and function using a multi-omics approach

### Sample Protocol
Microbial pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of 8 M urea and 4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) plus Roche cOmplete™ Mini tablets. Lysis was completed with sonication (Q700 Qsonica, USA). Supernatants were transferred to new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and proteins were precipitated with 5X volume of ice-cold protein precipitation buffer (acidified acetone/ethanol) and were resuspended in 100 µL of 6M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; pH 8.0).  For each sample, 50 μg of protein was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated in the dark with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 45 min, followed by 10X dilution into 50 mM ABC (pH 8.0) and tryptic digestion at 37°C for 20 hr with shaking using 1 μg of trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ) per 50 µg protein. Trypsin digestion was stopped by addition of 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA) to pH 2-3. Acidified, digested peptides were desalted using 10 μm C18 column beads and dried via vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Metaproteomic protein identification and quantification were performed using Metalab software tool suite. MetaLab automates an iterative database search strategy called MetaPro-IQ, described in Zhang et al. (2016). The MetaPro-IQ search was based on a human gut microbial gene catalog containing 9,878,647 sequences from http://meta.genomics.cn/.Then the peptide and protein lists were generated by applying strict filtering based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, and quantitative information for proteins was obtained with the maxLFQ (label-free quantification) algorithm on MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. The matching between runs option was used.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Salmonella</i> infections (salmonellosis) pose serious health risks to humans, usually via food-chain contamination. This foodborne pathogen causes major food losses and human illnesses, with significant economic impacts. Overuse of antibiotics in the food industry has led to multidrug-resistant strains of bacteria, and governments are now restricting their use, leading the food industry to search for alternatives to secure food chains. Bacteriophages, viruses that infect and kill bacteria, are currently being investigated and used as replacement treatments and prophylactics due to their specificity and efficacy. They are generally regarded as safe alternatives to antibiotics, as they are natural components of the ecosystem. However, when specifically used in the industry, they can also make their way into humans through our food chain or exposure, as is the case for antibiotics. In particular, agricultural workers could be repeatedly exposed to bacteriophages supplemented to animal feeds. To our knowledge, no studies have investigated the effects of such exposure to bacteriophages on the human gut microbiome. In this study, we used a novel in-vitro assay called RapidAIM to investigate the effect of a bacteriophage mixture, BAFASAL<sup>&#xae;</sup>, used in poultry farming on five individual human gut microbiomes. Multi-omics analyses, including 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomic, revealed that ex-vivo human gut microbiota composition and function were unaffected by BAFASAL<sup>&#xae;</sup> treatment, providing an additional measure for its safety. Due to the critical role of the gut microbiome in human health and the known role of bacteriophages in regulation of microbiome composition and function, we suggest assaying the impact of bacteriophage-cocktails on the human gut microbiome as a part of their safety assessment.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Microbiome assay, Phage

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


