### Accession
PXD011833

### Title
The Amino-Terminal Part of Human Filaggrin-2 is a Component of Cornified Envelopes

### Description
Filaggrin-2 (FLG2), a member of the S100-fused type protein family, is a 250 kDa protein mainly expressed in differentiated keratinocytes of the epidermis (Wu et al., 2009; Hsu et al., 2011). Its expression is reduced in atopic dermatitis (Pellerin et al., 2013), and heterozygous non-sense mutations of its gene are associated with a more persistent form of the disease in Afro-American populations (Margolis et al., 2014). Homozygous mutations of its gene are responsible for a rare skin disease called peeling skin syndrome type A (Bolling et al., 2018; Mohamad et al., 2018). However, the exact role of FLG2, a multi-domain protein, is not well known. Its COOH-tail exhibits anti-microbial activity (Hansmann et al., 2015), whereas its B domain is suspected to be involved in the hydration of the upper part of the epidermis, the cornified layer. Here, on the basis of immunological, global proteomics and in vitro enzymatic analysis we demonstrated that its amino-terminal domain is cross-linked to the cornified envelope, a pericellular resistant structure that replaces the plasma membrane during the last step of keratinocyte differentiation. In addition, depletion of FLG2 in reconstructed 3D human epidermis induced a marked fragility of cornified envelopes. These data suggest that FLG2 is important for proper mechanical strength of the cornified layer. They may explain the epidermal fragility observed in peeling skin syndrome type A patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cornified envelopes were purified from plantar stratum corneum obtained from two normal individuals (MS1 and MS2), as previously described (Simon et al., 1996). The envelopes (105 per individual) were incubated in 100 μl of proteolysis buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 0.5% SDS, 10% glycerol and 0.1 mg/ml of endoproteinase V8) during 48h at 37°C. Thirty μl of 5X Laemmli sample buffer (20 mM DDT final) were then added for protein reduction during 30 min at 56 ° C. Samples were finally alkylated in 60 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Reduced/alkylated samples were loaded on a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and the electrophoretic migration was stopped as soon as the protein sample entered the gel. The gel was briefly stained using Instant Blue (Expedeon, San Diego, CA). A single slice containing the whole sample was excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Charbonnières les Bains, France) at 20 ng/μl, as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 1996). The dried peptide extracts obtained were dissolved in 14 μl of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by online nanoLC using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for data-dependent CID fragmentation experiments. Five μl of the peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 μm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 pre-column (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 μm ID x 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) equilibrated in 95% of buffer A (0.2% formic acid), with a gradient of 5 to 25% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) for 80 min then 25% to 50% for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software (version 2.0 SR2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap on the 350–1,800 m/z mass range with the resolution set to a value of 60,000. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 2 m/z for subsequent data-dependent CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). The normalized collision energy was set to 30%. To prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide, the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. For internal calibration the ion at 445.120025 m/z was used as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fischer Scientific) for database search with the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) combined with the Percolator algorithm (version 2.05) for peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) search optimization.  The following parameters were set for creation of the peak list: parent ions in the mass range 300-5000 and no grouping of MS/MS scans. Peak list was searched against the homo sapiens taxonomy (20,259 sequences) of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and, methionine oxidation and glutamine, asparagine and arginine deamidation as variable modifications. Up to three missed trypsin/P cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Mascot results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at the same size. The Percolator algorithm was used to calculate a q-value for each peptide-spectrum matches (PSM), peptides and PSM were validated based on Percolator q-values at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) set to 1%. Then, the peptide identifications were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and filtered to 1% FDR

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Corneocyte, Proteomics, Keratinocyte, Epidermis, Transglutaminase, Terminal differentiation

### Affiliations
UDEAR,INSERM U1056,University of Toulouse III,UPS,Toulouse,France
IPBS-CNRS

### Submitter
Carine Froment

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Simon
UDEAR,INSERM U1056,University of Toulouse III,UPS,Toulouse,France


