### Accession
PXD030971

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus isolates from the gut and the blood are ‘separated’ by host barrier integrity

### Description
The opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus aureus is carried asymptomatically by about one-third of the human population. Body sites known to be colonized by S. aureus are the skin, nasopharynx and gut. In particular, the mechanisms that allow S. aureus to pass the gut epithelial barrier and to invade the bloodstream are poorly understood. Therefore, our present study was aimed at investigating possible differences between gut-colonizing and bacteremia isolates of S. aureus. To this end, 74 gut-colonizing isolates from healthy individuals and 144 blood-culture isolates were characterized by whole-genome sequencing. Subsequently, the cellular and extracellular proteomes of six representative isolates were examined by mass spectrometry. Lastly, the virulence potential of these isolates was evaluated using infection models based on human gut epithelial cells, blood cells, and a small animal infection model. Intriguingly, our results show that gut-colonizing and bacteremia isolates with the same sequence type (ST1 or ST5) are very similar at the genomic and proteomic levels. Nonetheless, they display differences in virulence, but gut-colonizing isolates may be more virulent than bacteremia isolates and vice versa. Importantly, we show that the main decisive factor preventing infection of gut epithelial cells in vitro is the presence of a tight barrier. Based on our present observations, we propose that the integrity of the gut epithelial layer, rather than the pathogenic potential of a gut-colonizing S. aureus strain, is the main decisive factor that determines whether this colonizer will become an invasive pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultivation Six representative S. aureus BI and GI isolates with ST1 (denoted BI-ST1-8, GI-ST1-7 and GI-ST1-9) or ST5 (denoted BI-ST5-1, GI-ST5-4, GI-ST5-6) were characterized by mass spectrometry (MS)-based analyses of the cellular and extracellular proteomes and infection experiments.  Sample preparation for MS/MS Analysis of proteome samples S. aureus strains were grown overnight at 37°C in TSB under vigorous shaking (250 rpm). The cultures were then diluted into 25 mL pre-warmed RPMI medium to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.1 and cultivation was continued at 37°C under vigorous shaking (115 rpm) in a water bath. At an OD600 of ~0.5, cultures with exponentially growing bacteria were diluted into 100 mL of fresh pre-warmed RPMI medium to a final OD600 of 0.1. The bacterial cultivation was continued until an OD600 of ±1.2 was reached, which corresponds to the stationary growth phase. The bacterial cells were then separated from the growth medium by centrifugation. For analysis of the extracellular proteome, proteins in the growth medium were enriched by primed affinity bead purification with StrataClean beads (Agilent) and subsequently eluted from the beads by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) using 4-20% Criterion TGX gels (Bio-Rad, Feldkirchen, Germay) (Bonn et al. 2014). For analysis of the cellular proteome, the collected cells were washed once with TE buffer (10mM Tris, 5mM EDTA, pH7.5). Subsequently, the cells were resuspended in TE buffer and disrupted with glass beads using a Precellys24 bead beater (Bertin Technologies, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France). Lastly, cellular debris was removed by centrifugation and the cellular proteins in the supernatant fraction were collected and purified by PAGE using 4-20% Criterion TGX gels.  Following PAGE with a 1-cm separating distance for extracellular proteins and complete distance for cellular samples, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega) and prepared for MS/MS analyses as previously described (Bonn et al. 2014). Briefly, gel lanes were cut resulting in one or ten gel pieces per sample for extracellular or cellular proteins, respectively. Gel pieces were sliced into smaller blocks and transferred into low binding tubes where samples were destained and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before being covered with trypsin solution. Digestion was carried out at 37 °C overnight before peptides were eluted in water by ultrasonication. The peptide-containing supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube and desiccated in a vacuum centrifuge. The peptides were then resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid for mass spectrometric analyses. MS/MS Analysis of proteome samples Tryptic peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography (LC) system using self-packed analytical columns (OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The peptides were eluted using a binary nonlinear gradient of 5 - 99% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 151 min (secreted proteins) or 76 min (cellular proteins) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Subsequently, peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization-based MS/MS with an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to identify secreted proteins, or with an LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to identify cellular proteins. After a survey scan at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap using lockmass correction, the five most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. Singly charged ions, as well as ions without detected charge states, were not selected for MS/MS analysis. Collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed for 30 ms with a normalized collision energy of 35, and the fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis The raw MS data for extracellular and cellular proteins were processed separately using MaxQuant (1.6.17.0)(Tyanova, Temu, and Cox 2016). Database searches against a non-redundant database of S. aureus isolates containing 10,771 entries with common contaminants added by MaxQuant and reverse entries. The maximum number of allowed missed cleavages was 2 and precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm. Methionine oxidation and acetylation (protein N-termini) were set as variable modifications for both datasets. Match between runs was applied and protein abundances were calculated based on label-free quantification intensities (LFQ) using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014). Identified protein groups were analyzed with Perseus (version 1.6.14.0)(Tyanova et al. 2016). A protein was only considered for further analysis if a minimum of two unique peptides per protein was identified and if the protein was quantified in at least two out of three biological replicates. Proteins were considered as differentially expressed with a p-value <0.01 and a fold change |0.8|.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S. aureus; gut colonization; bacteremia; wgs; proteome; barrier

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany


