### Accession
PXD023136

### Title
Optic Atrophy-associated TMEM126A is an assembly factor for the ND4-module of Mitochondrial Complex I

### Description
Mitochondrial disease is a debilitating condition with a diverse genetic aetiology. Here, we report that TMEM126A, a protein that is mutated in patients with autosomal recessive optic atrophy, participates directly in the assembly of mitochondrial complex I. Using a combination of genome editing, interaction studies and quantitative proteomics, we find that loss of TMEM126A results in an isolated complex I deficiency and that TMEM126A interacts with a number of complex I subunits and assembly factors. Pulse-labelling interaction studies reveal that TMEM126A associates with the newly synthesised mtDNA-encoded ND4 subunit of complex I. Our findings indicate that TMEM126A is involved in the assembly of the ND4 distal membrane module of complex I. Importantly, we clarify that the function of TMEM126A is distinct from its paralogue TMEM126B, which acts in assembly of the ND2-module of complex I, helping to explain the differences in disease aetiology observed between these two genes.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC and pulse-chase SILAC, samples were solubilized in 1% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.1, 40 mM chloroacetamide and 10 mM TCEP, vortexed, and heated for 5 minutes at 99 °C with shaking at 1400 rpm and sonicated room temperature for 15 minutes. Protein digestion was performed by the addition of 1 µg Trypsin for overnight at 37 °C. Supernatants were mixed with Ethyl acetate (99%) and TFA (1%), then transferred to 3x 14G 3M™ Empore™ SDB-RPS stage tips and centrifuged at 3000 g at room temperature, washed with 99% ethyl acetate with 1% TFA, and 99% ethyl acetate and 0.2% TFA. Samples were eluted with 80% ACN and 1% NH4OH. For affinity enrichment samples, elutions were precipitated using five volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubated at -20 °C overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and pellet was solubilized in 8 M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, sonicated in a water bath at room temperature for 15 min before addition of 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 50 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated at 37 °C while shaking. The sample was then treated with ammonium bicarbonate to dilute the urea to a final concentration of 2 M. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (1 µg; Promega; V5113) was added to the sample before incubation overnight at 37 °C. After this the sample was acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Stage tips were generated with two plugs of 3 M™ Empore™ SDB-XC Extraction Disks (Fisher Scientific) that were activated with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) via centrifugation. All spins were performed at 1800 × g. The tips were washed with 0.1% TFA, 2% ACN three times. The sample was added to the stage tip and eluted with 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA. The eluates were subsequently dried down using a SpeedVac. Samples were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for mass-spectrometry analysis Peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and transferred to autosampler vials for analysis by online nano-HPLC/electrospray ionization-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Q Exactive plus, Elite or Eclipse instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC.

### Data Protocol
For SILAC and AE-MS data, raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant platform version 1.6.5.0 searching against the UniProt human database containing reviewed, canonical entries (January 2019) and a database containing common contaminants. Parameters used in the SILAC and LFQ (AE-MS) searches are described in Formosa, et al. (Formosa LE, et al. (2020) Dissecting the Roles of Mitochondrial Complex I Intermediate Assembly Complex Factors in the Biogenesis of Complex I. Cell reports 31(3):107541.). Statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus platform version 1.6.7.0 as described in Formosa, et al. 2020. Log2-transformed median SILAC ratios were mapped on homologous subunits of the respiratory chain complexes. For the pulse-chase SILAC data, raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.10.43) and searched against the UniProt human database (November 2019) using default settings for a SILAC experiment with ‘multiplicity’ set to ‘2’ and ‘Heavy labels’ selected to ‘Arg10’ and ‘Lys8’, ‘label min. ratio count’ set to 1 and match between runs and re-quantify enabled. From the proteinGroups.txt output file, mitochondrial DNA encoded proteins were filtered by gene name and protein entries identified by a single peptide and samples containing less than 70% valid values were removed prior to data analysis using the Perseus software package (version 1.6.10.43). Heavy intensities were log2 transformed and normalised to the maximum value detected in the WT cell line at 4h pulse. The means were plotted over time using Prism along with the standard deviation (SD) in Prism (version 8.4.3, GraphPad). Statistical significance was performed in Prism using t-test with the two-stage step-up method of Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli and False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Assembly factor, Tmem126a, Complex i

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, 3000, Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, 3000, Melbourne, Australia


