### Accession
PXD030857

### Title
Unstable Atherosclerotic Plaque Proteome

### Description
The rupture of unstable atherosclerotic plaques, leading to debilitating or fatal thrombotic events, is a major health burden worldwide. Limited understanding as to the molecular drivers of plaque instability and rupture hinders efforts in diagnosis and treatment prior to thrombotic events. Utilising an advanced pre-clinical mouse model (Tandem stenosis (TS) model), which presents human-like unstable atherosclerotic disease, we apply high-end omic methods to characterize the molecular signatures associated with plaque instability in atherosclerotic arteries. Through quantitative proteomic profiling, we depict unique proteome signatures of unstable plaques compared to stable plaques and healthy arteries. Coupled with single-cell RNA-sequencing of leukocytes, we describe the heterodimer complex S100a8/S100a9 as unique to unstable plaque, with neutrophils implicated as the transcriptional drivers of S100a8/a9 expression. We confirm S100a9 expression in human carotid atherosclerotic plaques and we further utilise the TS pre-clinical model to pharmacologically inhibit S100a8/S100a9, resulting in plaque stabilisation. Thus, we establish the TS model as a sophisticated translational tool for the profiling of unstable atherosclerotic plaques and demonstrate that unstable and stable atherosclerosis are highly different disease entities.

### Sample Protocol
ApoE-/- mice on a C57BL/6J background that had received TS surgery and kept on a high fat diet (HFD) were euthanized and perfused with PBS, then vessel segments (unstable plaque right carotid, healthy plaque-free left carotid and stable plaque aortic arch) were dissected from animals. Specific tissue sections homogenized (4% SDS and 0.1 M dithioerythritol (DTE)), extracted and lysates quantified by Bradford, gel-based fractionation. Samples were reduced (10 mM DTE), alkylated (54 mM Iodoacetamide ), and digested with trypsin at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio for 16h at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed as described using MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Mus musculus (mouse) reference proteome (UP000000589; 59,345 entries) supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters included carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites. The search tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, at less than 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant, with match between runs active,  was used to obtain quantification intensity values. Perseus was used to quantify proteins whose expression was identified in at least 80% in at least one group. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed after removing contaminants and reverse identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerotic plaque rupture leading to myocardial infarction is a major global health burden. Applying the tandem stenosis (TS) mouse model, which distinctively exhibits the characteristics of human plaque instability/rupture, we use quantitative proteomics to understand and directly compare unstable and stable atherosclerosis. Our data highlight the disparate natures and define unique protein signatures of unstable and stable atherosclerosis. Key proteins and pathway networks are identified such as the innate immune system, and neutrophil degranulation. The latter includes calprotectin S100A8/A9, which we validate in mouse and human unstable plaques, and we demonstrate the plaque-stabilizing effects of its inhibition. Overall, we provide critical insights into the unique proteomic landscape of unstable atherosclerosis (as distinct from stable atherosclerosis and vascular tissue). We further establish the TS model as a reliable preclinical tool for the discovery and testing of plaque-stabilizing drugs. Finally, we provide a knowledge resource defining unstable atherosclerosis that will facilitate the identification and validation of long-sought-after therapeutic targets and drugs for plaque stabilization.

### Keywords
Mouse, Atherosclerosis, Therapeutic, Proteome, Plaque

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Aus

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, Aus


