### Accession
PXD030363

### Title
SMNDC1 links chromatin remodeling and splicing to regulate pancreatic hormone expression

### Description
Insulin expression is restricted to the pancreatic beta cells, which are physically or functionally depleted in diabetes. Identifying targetable pathways repressing insulin in non-beta cells, particularly in the developmentally related glucagon-secreting alpha cells, is an important aim of regenerative medicine. Here, we performed an RNA interference screen in the murine alpha cell line, alphaTC1, to identify silencers of insulin expression. We discovered that knockdown of the splicing factor Smndc1 (Survival Motor Neuron Domain Containing 1) triggered a global repression of alpha cell gene-expression programs in favor of increased beta cell markers. Mechanistically, Smndc1 knockdown upregulated the key beta cell transcription factor Pdx1, by modulating the activities of the BAF and Atrx families of chromatin remodeling complexes. SMNDC1’s repressive role was conserved in human pancreatic islets, its loss triggering enhanced insulin secretion and PDX1 expression. Our study identifies Smndc1 as a key factor connecting splicing and chromatin remodeling to the control of insulin expression in human and mouse islet cells.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS of Smndc1 Co-IP  IP eluates were prepared with a FASP procedure (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) using a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (VIVACON 500; Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH). Proteins were digested with 1.25µg trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptides were recovered using 40μL of 50mM TEAB buffer followed by 50μL of 0.5M NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns (The Nest Group), and reconstituted in 5% formic acid.  LC-MS was performed on a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via nanoflex source interface. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100C18, 3μm, 5×0.3 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 10μL/min with 0.1% TFA. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 40 cm, 75µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3μm, Dr. Maisch). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. The flow rate was set to 230nL/min and a 90 min gradient used. For the MS/MS experiment, a top 10 data-dependent acquisition mode with a MS1 scan range of 375 to 1,650 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) was used. AGC was set to a target of 3×10E6 and a maximum injection time of 55ms. MS2-scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) with AGC settings of 1×10E5 and a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 1.6 Da and the HCD normalized collision energy (NCE) to 30% with a threshold for MS2 set to 1.8x10E4. Dynamic exclusion was 90 sec. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was used. All samples were analysed in duplicates, back-to-back replicates. XCalibur version 4.1.31.9 and Tune 2.9.2926 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0. platform, utilizing the Sequest HT database search engine and Percolator validation software node (V3.04) to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on PSM and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the mouse SwissProt database v2017.12 (25293 sequences and appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine was set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modifications. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.025 Da on the precursor and fragment ions (HCD), respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and 1% FDR peptide confidence. Protein ratios were generated using the non-nested approach and p-values calculation was performed applying t-test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Identification of significant interactors and fold changes for Smndc1 IP-MS results was done through Resource for Evaluation of Protein Interaction Networks (REPRINT) using SAINT scoring (https://reprint-apms.org/)(Mellacheruvu et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta cells, Splicing, Pancreatic islets, Chromatin remodelers, Smndc1, Alpha cells, Rnai screen, Insulin transcription

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine
Kubicek lab, Principal Investigator, Head of Molecular Discovery Platform, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Frédéric FONTAINE

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kubicek
Kubicek lab, Principal Investigator, Head of Molecular Discovery Platform, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria


