### Accession
PXD019729

### Title
Differential protein phosphorylation during stage conversion in Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
The intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii resides within a membrane bound parasitophorous vacuole and secretes an array of proteins to establish this replicative niche during acute stage of infection. When rapidly dividing tachyzoites convert to chronic stage bradyzoites, many secreted proteins are reported to dynamically redistribute as the cyst forms and secreted kinases are known to play a role in cyst formation. Using quantitative phosphoproteome and proteome analysis comparing tachyzoite and bradyzoite stages, we reveal widespread differential phosphorylation of secreted proteins. These data support a model in which secreted kinases and phosphatases are important to dynamically regulate parasite secreted proteins during stage conversion.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent Human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) monolayers were grown in 15 cm dishes and infected with T. gondii PruΔhxgprt. For tachyzoite samples three dishes were infected with 1.3E7 parasites and incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 27 hours. For bradyzoite samples three plates were infected with 1.1E7 parasites for 3.5 hours before extensive washing and the addition of switch media (RPMI with 1% FBS, pH 8.1). Bradyzoite infections were incubated at 37°C and ambient CO2 for 3 days with fresh switch media added daily. Cell lysis was performed in ice cold 8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, supplemented with protease (complete mini, Roche) and phosphatase (Phos Stop, Roche) inhibitors, followed by sonication to reduce sample viscosity (30% duty cycle, 3 x 30 seconds bursts, on ice). Protein concentration was measured using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). Lysates (1mg each) were subsequently reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56⁰C and alkylated in the dark with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at RT. Following iodoacetamide quenching with 5 mM DTT for 15 minutes in the dark, lysates were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to < 4M urea, and digested with LysC (Promega) for 2-3 hours at 37⁰C. Lysates were further diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to < 2M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37⁰C. After digestion, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). All insoluble material was removed by centrifugation, the supernatant was desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and the eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES and labelled using the 2.4 mg Tandem Mass Tag 10plex isobaric reagent kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After verifying labelling efficiency, the samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, vacuum dried and desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads (Titansphere, 5 µm GL Sciences Japan) and the supernatant from the TiO2 enrichment was desalted on Sep-Pak C18 prior to a second round of enrichment using the High Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Combined TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide eluates (phosphoproteome) as well as 100 µg of the post-enrichment supernatant (total proteome) were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were resuspended in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis using a U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Each peptide fraction was pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column before separation on a 50 cm, 75μm I.D. EASY-Spray Pepmap column over a 3-hour gradient. The instrument was run in data dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Two replicate injections were made for each phospho-enriched fraction with different fragmentation methods based on the MS2 HCD and MSA SPS MS3 strategies (Jiang et al. 2017). For proteome analysis the MS2 HCD method was used.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data was processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008) (version 1.5.2.8) and peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Toxoplasma gondii (ToxoDB, 2018) and Homo sapiens (UniProt, 2018) proteomes using Andromeda (Cox  et al. 2011) search engine. TMT based experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the ‘reporter ion MS2 or MS3’ built-in quantification algorithm with reporter mass tolerance set to 0.003 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-terminus, deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) were selected as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. ‘Match between runs’ option was enabled (time window 0.7 min) for fractionated samples. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability (PEP) to achieve a 1% false discovery rate on protein, peptide and site level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Phosphorylation, Stage conversion, Bradyzoites, Tachyzoites

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory,  The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK

### Submitter
Malgorzata Broncel

### Lab Head
Dr Moritz Treeck
Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory,  The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK


