### Accession
PXD010053

### Title
Mapping Proteome-Wide Targets of Protein Kinases in Response to Stresses

### Description
Protein kinases are major regulatory components in almost all cellular processes in eukaryotic cells. By adding phosphate groups, protein kinases regulate the activity, localization, protein-protein interactions and other profiles of their target proteins. It is known that protein kinases such as SNF1 related protein kinase 2 and 3 (SnRK2 and SnRK3), calcium dependent protein kinases (CDPKs), and mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are central components in plant response to environmental stresses such as drought, high salinity, cold and pathogen attack. Although the phosphorylation-dependent signaling plays critical roles in plant stress biology, only a few targets of these protein kinases have been identified. How these protein kinases regulate the downstream biological processes and mediate the stress responses are still largely unknown. In this study, we developed an isotope labeled protein kinase assay-based approach with enriched phosphoproteome as kinase-substrates pool to identify the putative substrates of 8 protein kinases that function in plant abiotic and biotic stress responses. As a result, we identified more than 5,081 putative targets of osmotic stress-activated SnRK2.4 and SnRK2.6, ABA activated protein kinases SnRK2.6 and Casein-Kinase Like 2 (CKL2), elicitor-activated protein kinase CDPK11 and MPK6, cold-activated protein kinase MPK6, H2O2-activated protein kinase OXI1 and MPK6, salt-induced protein kinase SOS1 and MPK6, as well as the low-potassium-activated protein kinase CIPK23. We also analyzed the conserved motif and functional ontology of these putative kinase targets. These results provide comprehensive information on the role of these protein kinases in the control of cellular activities and could be valuable resource for further study on the mechanism underlying plant response to environmental stresses.

### Sample Protocol
Plant tissues were ground with liquid nitrogen in mortar, and the ground tissues were lysed in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 8.5) with EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Madison, WI) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TECP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at 95 °C for 5 min. Alkylated proteins were subject to methanol-chloroform precipitation, and precipitated protein pellets were solubilized in 8 M urea containing 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Protein amount was quantified by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Protein extracts were diluted to 4 M urea and digested with Lys-C (Wako, Japan) in a 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 hours at 37 °C, and further diluted to a 1 M urea concentration. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to a final 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio overnight. Digests were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH ~2, and desalted using a 100 mg of Sep-pak C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched directly against Arabidopsis Thaliana database (TAIR10) with no redundant entries using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.4.1) with Andromeda search engine. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 p.p.m. and the final tolerance was set at 6 p.p.m., and ITMS MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0214 Da) and variable modifications of (1) oxidation (+15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, (2) acetylation (+42.011 Da) at N-terminus of protein, and (3) phosphorylation (+79.996 Da) on serine, threonine or tyrosine residues were searched. For identification of 18O-phosphopeptides, heavy phosphorylation (+85.979 Da) was added as a variable modification and the match between run function was enabled. Search was performed with Trypsin/P digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. The false discovery rates of proteins, peptides and phosphosites were set at 0.01. The minimum peptide length was six amino acids, and a minimum Andromeda score was set at 40 for modified peptides. A site localization probability of 0.75 was used as the cut-off for localization of phosphorylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinases are major regulatory components in almost all cellular processes in eukaryotic cells. By adding phosphate groups, protein kinases regulate the activity, localization, protein-protein interactions, and other features of their target proteins. It is known that protein kinases are central components in plant responses to environmental stresses such as drought, high salinity, cold, and pathogen attack. However, only a few targets of these protein kinases have been identified. Moreover, how these protein kinases regulate downstream biological processes and mediate stress responses is still largely unknown. In this study, we introduce a strategy based on isotope-labeled in vitro phosphorylation reactions using in vivo phosphorylated peptides as substrate pools and apply this strategy to identify putative substrates of nine protein kinases that function in plant abiotic and biotic stress responses. As a result, we identified more than 5,000 putative target sites of osmotic stress-activated SnRK2.4 and SnRK2.6, abscisic acid-activated protein kinases SnRK2.6 and casein kinase 1-like 2 (CKL2), elicitor-activated protein kinase CDPK11 and MPK6, cold-activated protein kinase MPK6, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-activated protein kinase OXI1 and MPK6, and salt-induced protein kinase SOS1 and MPK6, as well as the low-potassium-activated protein kinase CIPK23. These results provide comprehensive information on the role of these protein kinases in the control of cellular activities and could be a valuable resource for further studies on the mechanisms underlying plant responses to environmental stresses.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Plant kinase, Stress

### Affiliations
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr jian-Kang Zhu
Shanghai Center for Plant Stress Biology


