### Accession
PXD035655

### Title
Tear protein profile in eyes with keratoconus after one year of intrastromal corneal ring and corneal crosslinking: a pilot study

### Description
Keratoconus (KC) is a corneal ectasia characterized by structural changes, resulting in progressive thinning and biomechanical weakening that can lead to worsening visual acuity due to irregular astigmatism. Corneal collagen Crosslinking  (CXL) and Intracorneal Ring Segment (ICRS) are widely used treatments in KC  disease, but the alterations they cause in biomechanical mediators are still poorly  understood. The aim of this study was to analyze the tear proteome profile before and  after treatments to identify biomarkers altered by surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol was used for sample processing and digestion. Trypsin was added at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50,and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 ºC, dried in a RVC2 25 Speedvac concentrator (Christ) and resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA). The peptides obtained were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore).Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF: Bruker Daltonics), coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). This mass spectrometer takes advantage of a novel scan mode, termed parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF), whic multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss of sensitivity, and it has been proven  to provide outstanding analytical speed and sensitivity for proteomics analyses.  Samples (200 ng) were loaded directly onto a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18  analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nL/min. The column was heated to 50  ºC in an oven.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using the PEAKS software (Bioinformatics solutions). Searches against a database of canonical human Uniprot/Swissprot entries were performed (no isoforms considered), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Area-based label-free protein quantification was performed using the PEAKS Q module available in the PEAKS  software. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at a False Discovery Rate  (FDR) <1% and present in at least 70% of the samples from one of the experimental groups analyzed were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tear film, Keratoconus, Crosslinking, Intracorneal ring segment

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio (48160) Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio (48160) Spain


