### Accession
PXD038239

### Title
Assigning functionality to cysteines by base editing of cancer dependency genes

### Description
Chemical probes are lacking for most human proteins. Covalent chemistry represents an attractive strategy for expanding the ligandability of the proteome, and chemical proteomics has revealed numerous electrophile-reactive cysteines on diverse proteins. Determining which of these covalent binding events impact protein function, however, remains challenging. Here, we describe a base-editing strategy to infer the functionality of cysteines by quantifying the impact of their missense mutation on cell proliferation. We show that the resulting atlas, which covers >13,800 cysteines on >1,750 cancer dependency proteins, correctly predicts the essentiality of cysteines targeted by cancer therapeutics and, when integrated with chemical proteomic data, identifies essential, ligandable cysteines on >110 cancer dependency proteins. We finally demonstrate how measurements of reactivity in native versus denatured proteomes can further discriminate essential cysteines amendable to chemical modification from those buried in protein structures, providing a valuable resource to prioritize the pursuit of small-molecule probes with high function-perturbing potential.

### Sample Protocol
10 million cells (PC14 or KMS26) were collected for each condition or replicate after three PBS washes. Each frozen cell pellet was mixed with 300 ul PBS and was sonicated with 3*8 pulses on ice. The protein was then normalized to 1 mg in a total of 500 ul volume with different treatments (8M urea at 65°C for 15 min, 1% SDS at 95 °C for 5 min, or 1% SDS+2 mM TCEP at 95°C for 5min). The native groups were mock treated with PBS and were kept on ice before further use. After equilibrating to room temperature, the samples were then treated with 5 ul 10 mM stock of IA-DTB (SCBT) and were incubated at room temperature for 1 hr. To precipitate proteins, 500ul cold methanol and 200ul cold chloroform was added to each tube. The samples were vortexed and then centrifuged at 16,000g for 30 min at 4°C. After removing the liquid phase, the protein disk was washed with cold methanol and was centrifuged again at 16,000g for 30 min at 4°C. The liquid phase was then aspirated, and the pellet is frozen at -80°C for later use. The subsequent sample processing and LC-MS instrumentation is the same as the previously described protocol for cysteine ligandability profiling. Briefly, the protein pellets were reduced by DTT, alkylated by iodoacetamide, and digested by trypsin overnight. The peptides were then enriched using streptavidin, labeled with TMT tags, followed by desalting using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. The peptides were fractionated using high-pH HPLC methods and were then analyzed in Orbitrap Fusion™ Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
The MS2 and MS3 files were extracted from the raw data files using RAW Converter (version 1.1.0.22; available at http://fields.scripps.edu/rawconv/) and were uploaded to Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2). The data files were then processed using the ProLuCID program based on a reverse concatenated, non-redundant version of the Human UniProt database (release 2016-07). Cysteine residues were searched with a static modification for carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da). N-termini and lysine residues were searched with a static modification corresponding to the TMT tag (+229.1629 Da). To search for the cysteine IA-DTB labeling, a dynamic modification (+398.25292 Da) was used. The census output files from IP2 were further processed by aggregating TMT reporter ion intensities to obtain signals based on unique peptides that are further annotated with protein-cysteine residue numbers. The resulting data were then median normalized per TMT channel and log2 fold changes between the native versus denatured conditions were calculated for each cysteine. P values associated with quantified cysteines were obtained using two-sided Student’s t-tests and FDR values were calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Those cysteines with FDR>10% were excluded from further analysis. The denaturing/native L2FC summary scores were calculated per cysteine using available datasets based on both model cell lines (PC14 and KMS26) and different denaturants (SDS and urea). Substantial reactivity changes were defined as cysteines showing denaturing/native L2FC scores < -1.6 (reactive) or > 1.6 (unreactive).

### Publication Abstract
Covalent chemistry represents an attractive strategy for expanding the ligandability of the proteome, and chemical proteomics has revealed numerous electrophile-reactive cysteines on diverse human proteins. Determining which of these covalent binding events affect protein function, however, remains challenging. Here we describe a base-editing strategy to infer the functionality of cysteines by quantifying the impact of their missense mutation on cancer cell proliferation. The resulting atlas, which covers more than 13,800 cysteines on more than 1,750 cancer dependency proteins, confirms the essentiality of cysteines targeted by covalent drugs and, when integrated with chemical proteomic data, identifies essential, ligandable cysteines in more than 160 cancer dependency proteins. We further show that a stereoselective and site-specific ligand targeting an essential cysteine in TOE1 inhibits the nuclease activity of this protein through an apparent allosteric mechanism. Our findings thus describe a versatile method and valuable resource to prioritize the pursuit of small-molecule probes with high function-perturbing potential.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Cancer dependency, Ligandability, Base editing, Electrophile

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037 USA

### Submitter
Haoxin Li

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037 USA


