### Accession
PXD019015

### Title
Modulation of adipose stem cell neurotrophic capacity for neural tissue engineering applications

### Description
Treatment strategies of critical nerve injuries involving nerve gaps more than 3 cm are still not optimal. The need for an alternative to the standard autologous nerve grafts has led to the exploration of adipose derived stem cells (ASC) seeded in bioartificial nerve conduits for enhancement of peripheral nerve regeneration. ASC can be differentiated into Schwann cell like cells, which is believed to improve their neurotrophic potency. Nevertheless, the differentiation process requires several weeks and there is no evidence that the cells maintain their differentiated phenotype in vivo. Thus, the present study evaluated the synergistic effect of undifferentiated ASC with exogenously added growth factors  in vitro with the aim to improve the neurotrophic potency of undifferentiated ASC through short ex-vivo stimulation with growth factors. The study furthermore provides a comparative in vitro assay of the six well-known neurotrophic factors NGF, GDNF, BDNF, CNTF, NT3 and NT4. ASC were cultured and thus stimulated in the presence of the respective exogenous growth factor for three days and resulting conditioned medium was evaluated in an in vitro axonal outgrowth assay. In addition, also unstimulated ASC’s conditioned medium was tested in combination with the respective exogenous growth factor for the same assay, which was perfomed on dorsal root ganglion (DRG) explants from 10 days old embryonic chicken. DRG explants from most promising conditions were further analyzed for upregulated STAT-3 and GAP-43 by qRT-PCR. Furthermore, also proteomics and phosphoproteomics were performed for ASC and DRG explants using mass spectrometry. The quantity of selected proteins contained in the ASC’s conditioned medium was investigated by ELISA. Combination of ASC’s conditioned medium with growth factors generally resulted in significantly enhanced axonal outgrowth when compared with their control of DRG explants cultured with the respective growth factor only. Specifically, conditioned medium derived from NT3-stimulated as well as ASC’s conditioned medium supplemented with NT3 or BDNF elicited significant axonal outgrowth from DRG explants in contrast to all other experimental conditions. Significant upregulation of STAT-3 and GAP-43 was evidenced for DRG explants grown in NT3-stimulated ASC’s conditioned medium and to a certain extent also for DRG cultured in ASC’s conditioned medium supplemented with NT3.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly splitted ASC seeded at 50 – 60% confluency in 75 cm2 culture flasks were either stimulated by NT3 (NT3-ASC) or no growth factor (ASC) for 72 h. After incubation cells were deattached with 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA and subjected to 2 cycles of centrifugation for 5min at 1500 rpm and 4°C and PBS washing. After the last wash PBS was discarded and the cell pellet immediately transferred to 80°C for storage. For DRG samples the same experimental groups and culture conditions as for PCR experiments were applied. After 48 h incubation in the respective conditioned medium or media DRG were subjected to same treatment as described above for ASC, except of centrifugation which was performed at 900 rpm. A protein yield of at least 100 μg per experimental condition was required for phosphoproteomics. For protein extraction 80 μl urea lysis buffer was added to each sample containing 8 M Urea (Sigma, Art. No. U0631), 0.1M Ammoniumbicarbonate (Sigma, Art. No. A6141), phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma, Art. No. P5726 & P0044), 5 mM TCEP (Sigma, 646547-10x1ml). Samples were then sonicated samples using a Bioruptor (Dianode, Liège, Belgium) and a standard program (30 sec on, 30 sec off, 10 cycles = 10 min). 1 μl of 0.75 M chloroacetamide solution was then added to each sample and samples were mixed for 1 h at 600 rpm and 37°C. For protein digestion the sample mixtures were each diluted with 320 μl 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate buffer. The pH was checked with a pH-paper to be between 7 and 9. Trypsin was added to the samples to a final enzyme/protein ration of 1:50 and incubated at 37°C overnight. The next day, 100 μl of a 1:1 mix (v/v) of 5% TFA and 2M HCl was added. The pH was checked to be < 2.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT as above using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. The relative quantitative data obtained were normalized and statistically analyzed using our in-house script as above (PMID:27345528).

### Publication Abstract
We report on a potential strategy involving the exogenous neurotrophic factors (NTF) for enhancing the neurotrophic capacity of human adipose stem cells (ASC) in vitro. For this, ASC were stimulated for three days using NTF, i.e., nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin 3 (NT3), NT4, glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF). The resulting conditioned medium (CM) as well as individual NTF exhibited distinct effects on axonal outgrowth from dorsal root ganglion (DRG) explants. In particular, CM derived from NT3-stimulated ASC (CM-NT3-ASC) promoted robust axonal outgrowth. Subsequent transcriptional analysis of DRG cultures in response to CM-NT3-ASC displayed significant upregulation of STAT-3 and GAP-43. In addition, phosphoproteomic analysis of NT3-stimulated ASC revealed significant changes in the phosphorylation state of different proteins that are involved in cytokine release, growth factors signaling, stem cell maintenance, and differentiation. Furthermore, DRG cultures treated with CM-NT3-ASC exhibited significant changes in the phosphorylation levels of proteins involved in tubulin and actin cytoskeletal pathways, which are crucial for axonal growth and elongation. Thus, the results obtained at the transcriptional, proteomic, and cellular level reveal significant changes in the neurotrophic capacity of ASC following NT3 stimulation and provide new options for improving the axonal growth-promoting potential of ASC in vitro.

### Keywords
Phospho, Lcms

### Affiliations
PCF, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Swizerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
PCF, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Swizerland


