### Accession
PXD035171

### Title
Natural aging and ovariectomy induces parallel phosphoproteomic alterations 
in skeletal muscle of female mice

### Description
The loss of skeletal muscle strength mid-life in females is associated with the decline of estrogen. Here, we questioned how estrogen deficiency might impact the overall skeletal muscle phosphoproteome after contraction, as force production induces phosphorylation of several muscle proteins. Phosphoproteomic analyses of the tibialis anterior muscle after contraction in two mouse models of estrogen deficiency, ovariectomy (Ovariectomized [Ovx] vs Sham) and natural aging-induced ovarian senescence (Older Adult [OA] vs Young Adult [YA]), identified a total of 2,593 and 3,507 phosphopeptides in Ovx/Sham and OA/YA datasets, respectively. Further analysis of estrogen deficiency-associated proteins and phosphosites identified 66 proteins and 21 phosphosites from both datasets. Of these, 4 estrogen deficiency-associated proteins and 4 estrogen deficiency-associated phosphosites were significant and differentially phosphorylated or regulated, respectively. Comparative analyses between Ovx/Sham and OA/YA using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) found parallel patterns of inhibition and activation across IPA-defined canonical signaling pathways and physiological functional analysis, which were similarly observed in downstream GO, KEGG, and Reactome pathway overrepresentation analysis pertaining to muscle structural integrity and contraction, including AMPK and calcium signaling. IPA Upstream regulator analysis identified MAPK1 and PRKACA as candidate kinases and calcineurin as a candidate phosphatase sensitive to estrogen. Our findings highlight key molecular signatures and pathways in contracted muscle suggesting that the similarities identified across both datasets could elucidate molecular mechanisms that may contribute to skeletal muscle strength loss due to estrogen deficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, digestion, and phosphopeptide enrichment. TA muscles were pulverized into powder with a cryo-grinder (liquid nitrogen cooled mortar and pestle), lysed (10 µl lysis buffer per mg of tissue) in protein lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.4M Tris pH7.5, 20% acetonitrile, 4 mM TCEP) with 1X HALT Protease & Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL), and sonicated for 5 s using a probe sonicator (Branson Digital Sonifer, manufacturer, City, State) set at 30% amplitude. After sonication, a 160 µl aliquot of each lysate was placed in the Barocycler® NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences, South Easton, MA) at 37ºC, with pressure cycles set at 35,000 psi for 20 s, then 0 psi for 10 s for 60 cycles for further protein homogenization. Once pressure cycling was complete, samples were transferred to a new 1.5 ml Eppendorf protein LoBind tube and 200 mM chloroacetamide stock solution was added for a final concentration of 8 mM to alkylate proteins (1:24 dilution) and incubated for 15 min. Samples were spun down at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 18ºC. Aliquotsof supernatant were used to determine protein concentration determination using the Bradford assay. For trypsin digestion, 500 µg total protein was digested with 12.5 ug sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and incubated at 37ºC in a warm air incubator overnight (~ 16 h). Samples were acidified to 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and extracted using 1 cc Oasis HLB Solid Phase Extraction cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) for clean-up.  Briefly, 1cc HLB cartridges were equilibrated by passing 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA over the cartridge followed by passing 1 mL of 0.1% TFA.  The sample was passed over the cartridge followed by washing the sample with 1 mL 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA over the cartridge. Peptides were eluted with 0.5 mL 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and vacuum dried to remove acetonitrile. Lysates were stored at -80ºC until phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with the High-SelectTMTiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Eluted peptides were dehydrated using a speed-vac.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomics database search, phosphoprotein and phosphopeptide quantification. The raw MS files were processed by Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mus musculus database (55,474 entries, UniProt UP000000589, downloaded November 2019) with the Sequest HT search engine embedded in Proteome Discoverer v2.4. Parameters were set as follows: MS1 tolerance of 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance of 0.05 Da, trypsin (full) digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 6 and maximum of 144 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.02 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation (15.99 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (0.98 Da), acetylation of the N-terminus (42.01 Da), and phosphorylation of tyrosine, serine, and threonine (79.97 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-to-spectrum matches using the Percolator algorithm (v3.02.1) and for protein assignment. Phospho-localization scoring was performed with the IMP-ptmRS v2.0 node and only phosphopeptides with a localization score > 0.8 were used for quantification. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Precursor abundance quantification was based on area and normalized by total peptide amount. All peptides were used for normalization for protein quantification; however, only phosphorylated peptides were used for pairwise ratios and protein roll-up.   Label-free quantitation (LFQ) of phosphopeptides were performed with normalized abundances using the Proteome Discoverer LFQ algorithms. The protein ratio was calculated as the geometric median of the phosphopeptide group ratios, and the phosphopeptide group ratios were calculated as the geometric median of all combinations of phosphopeptide ratios from all the biological replicates in the study. Phosphopeptides that had a high 1% FDR confidence were used for further analysis. We applied a maximum p-value filter of 0.05 and a minimum relative fold change of phosphoprotein and phosphopeptide expression at 1.4 to the PD quantification results. Phosphoproteins and phosphopeptides were considered significantly and differentially regulated if they had a p-value < 0.05 and were defined as downregulated if they had a fold change ≤ -1.4 or upregulated if they had a fold change ≥ 1.4.

### Publication Abstract
The loss of skeletal muscle strength mid-life in females is associated with the decline of estrogen. Here, we questioned how estrogen deficiency might impact the overall skeletal muscle phosphoproteome after contraction, as force production induces phosphorylation of several muscle proteins. Phosphoproteomic analyses of the tibialis anterior muscle after contraction in two mouse models of estrogen deficiency, ovariectomy (Ovariectomized (Ovx) vs. Sham) and natural aging-induced ovarian senescence (Older Adult (OA) vs. Young Adult (YA)), identified a total of 2,593 and 3,507 phosphopeptides in Ovx/Sham and OA/YA datasets, respectively. Further analysis of estrogen deficiency-associated proteins and phosphosites identified 66 proteins and 21 phosphosites from both datasets. Of these, 4 estrogen deficiency-associated proteins and 4 estrogen deficiency-associated phosphosites were significant and differentially phosphorylated or regulated, respectively. Comparative analyses between Ovx/Sham and OA/YA using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) found parallel patterns of inhibition and activation across IPA-defined canonical signaling pathways and physiological functional analysis, which were similarly observed in downstream GO, KEGG, and Reactome pathway overrepresentation analysis pertaining to muscle structural integrity and contraction, including AMPK and calcium signaling. IPA Upstream regulator analysis identified MAPK1 and PRKACA as candidate kinases and calcineurin as a candidate phosphatase sensitive to estrogen. Our findings highlight key molecular signatures and pathways in contracted muscle suggesting that the similarities identified across both datasets could elucidate molecular mechanisms that may contribute to skeletal muscle strength loss due to estrogen deficiency.

### Keywords
And aging, Ovariectomy, Female

### Affiliations
University of MN
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Mina Peyton

### Lab Head
Dr Dawn Lowe
University of Minnesota


