### Accession
PXD006434

### Title
Advanced glycation end products as markers of ageing in plants: glycation hotspots in the plant proteome

### Description
Glycation is a post-translational modification underlied by the interaction of protein amino and guanidino groups with carbonyl compounds like reducing sugars and α-dicarbonyls. In the first steps of this process, the protein amino groups react with reducing carbohydrates yielding the corresponding keto- and aldimines, i.e. Amadori and Heyns compounds, respectively. Further degradation of these products results in the formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs). Alternatively, some representatives of this heterogeneous compound group can originate from α-dicarbonyl products of monosaccharide autoxidation or primary cellular metabolism. In mammals, AGEs are continuously formed during the life of the organism, and accumulate in the tissues, being well-known markers of ageing and impacting age-related stiffing of tissues, decrease of muscle performance, and atherosclerotic changes. However, although the role of AGEs in the ageing of animal tissues is well-studied, their impact in the age-related molecular alterations in plants is completely unknown. To fill this gap, we present here a comprehensive study of the age-related changes in the plant glycated proteome in terms of affected proteins and individual glycation sites therein. Thereby, we consider the qualitative and quantitative changes in glycation patterns in terms of the general metabolic background, pathways of AGE formation, and the status of plant anti-oxidative/anti-glycative defense.  Although the patterns of glycated proteins were only minimally influenced by plant age, the abundances of 96 advanced glycation sites in 71 proteins were significantly affected in an age-dependent manner and clearly indicate the existence of glycation hotspots in the plant proteome, the nature of which is discussed here in the sense of structural considerations.

### Sample Protocol
The seeds of wild type A. thaliana (Columbia 1092) were planted in soil-sand mixture. The plants grown in growth chambers at 22/18°C (day/night), 60% relative humidity, with an 8 h light (150±2.5 µmol photons m-2s-1)/16 h dark cycle for 12 weeks, were harvested for proteomic experiments at 7, 9 and 12 weeks (n=9 per time point pooled in groups of 3). The leaf rosettes were ground in liquid N2 by a Mixer Mill MM 400 ball mill (30 Hz, 2x1 min) in stainless steel grinding jar (25 ml) with stainless steel balls  (ø=25mm), and stored (-80ºC). The plant protein isolation was performed according to Bilova et al [1]. Briefly, frozen plant material (app. 200 mg) was combined with 1.5 ml of ice-cold isolation buffer (1mM MgCl2, 150mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA, 5mM DTT in 20mM K-phosphate buffer, pH 8.0). The suspension was vortexed (30 s) and centrifuged (10 min, 21,000 g). The supernatant (1.25 mL) was collected; the pellet was resuspended in the fresh isolation buffer (1.5 mL), vortexed (30 s), centrifuged (10 min, 21,000 g) and the supernatant (1.25 mL) was combined with the first portion. The extracts were purified by using protein desalting PD-10 columns (GE Healthcare Europe GmbH) equilibrated with 25 mM aq.NH4HCO3. The eluate (3.5 mL) was ultrafiltrated against the same buffer (3x2 ml) and concentrated by a Vivaspin sample concentrator (10000 molecular weight cutoff, Sartorius Mechatronics T&H GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) to a volume of 200 μL. The protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay and cross-validated by SDS-PAGE as described by Frolov et al., 2014 [2]. For tryptic digestion, two aliquots (with 100 µg of protein) of each purified extract, were supplemented with 50mM aq. ammonium acetate buffer to obtain a final volume of 90 µL. The protein aliquots were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested by incubation (37°C) with trypsin in the enzyme–protein ratios of 1:20 and 1:50 for 5 and 12 h, respectively as described by Bollineni et al., 2014 [3]. The digestion efficiency was verified by SDS-PAGE. For the early glycation product analysis, one of the digested 100 µg aliquots was subjected to boronic acid affinity chromatography (BAC) according to the established procedure [1,4]: m-Aminophenylboronic acid-agarose (1 mL) resuspended in washing buffer (aq. 250mM NH4CH3COO, 50mM Mg(CH3COO)2, pH 8.1) was packed in a 1-ml polypropylene column (85x7.5 mm; Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany). The 100 μg lyophilized tryptic digest was reconstituted in 20% (v/v) aq.CH3CN and diluted with washing buffer to a final volume of 500 μL. After washing out the unbound fraction with 13.5 ml of buffer, glycated peptides were eluted in two steps with aq. CH3COOH (0.1M, 8 mL; then 0.2M, 2 mL) at 37°C. Eluates were lyophilized and stored (-20°C). The BAC eluates and non-enriched digests were desalted by RP-SPE as described by Bilova et al., 2016 [1]. The obtained SPE eluates were lyophilized and reconstituted in aq. CH3CN containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (final CH3CN concentration of 3% v/v) to obtain a peptide concentration of 7 mg/L.  For the LC-MS/MS and LC-MS analyses, 10 µL of each sample were injected in a nanoAcquity UPLC system controlled by MassLynx X.4.1 software, and equipped with a nanoAcquity UPLC™ Symmetry® trap (C18, 180 μm x 20 mm, 5 µm, 100Å) and BEH130 separation (C18, 100 μm x 100 mm, 1.7 µm, 130Å) columns (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Both eluents A (H2O) and B (CH3CN) contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Sample peptides were separated in the following linear gradient mode: after 10- µL injection (full loop mode), the peptides were trapped (5 min) at 5 µL/min and, after a 5-min isocratic step at 3% eluent B, separated in sequential linear gradients to 40 and 85% eluent B in 45 and 2 min, respectively. After a 5-min wash at 85% eluent B, the column was re-equilibrated (10 min) at 3% eluent B. The separations were performed at 30°C and a flow rate was set to 0.4 µL/min. After separation on column peptides were detected on-line by an LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-ESI source (positive ion mode, ion spray voltage, 1.5 kV; capillary temperature, 200°C) and controlled by Xcalibur 2.0.7 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described by Bilova et al [1]. For identification of glycated peptides, the LC-MS/MS analyses relied on a survey Orbitrap scan (MS) followed by collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (MS/MS) in the LIT in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for the 6 most intense signals with charge states 2-5. The Orbitrap scans were acquired at m/z ranges of 400–600, 600–800, and 800–1500 at a resolution of 30,000. The LIT scans were acquired with 30% normalized collision energy. Label-free quantification of AGE-modified peptides relied on MS-only experiments.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequence analysis and identification of glycated proteins relied on the database search against an A. thaliana database (Arabidopsis thaliana proteome, Uniprot, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/refe-rence_proteomes, May 2014) using Sequest search engine performed by Proteome Discover 2.0. The positive hits were searched against a decoy database. The assignment of specific AGE and Amadori/Heyns modifications relied on characteristic m/z increments and appropriate search filters: false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, missed cleavage sites < 3, XCorr for AGE-peptides ≥ 2.2 for doubly- and 3.75 for triply-charged quasi-molecular precursor ions; the XCorr values for Amadori/Heyns-peptides were set as ≥ 1.90 and 2.50 for doubly- and triply-charged precursor ions, respectively. The search for unmodified peptides was performed with the same filters except of XCorr which value was specified as ≥ 1.50 for doubly- and triply-charged precursor ions (annotated with FDR of 0.01). Label-free quantification of individual glycation sites was performed by integration of the corresponding signals in specific extracted ion chromatograms (XICs, m/z ± 0.02) at characteristic tR using LCQUAN™ software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Based on our earlier validation study [2], one injection per each biological replicate was employed.

### Publication Abstract
Glycation is a post-translational modification resulting from the interaction of protein amino and guanidino groups with carbonyl compounds. Initially, amino groups react with reducing carbohydrates, yielding Amadori and Heyns compounds. Their further degradation results in formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs), also originating from &#x3b1;-dicarbonyl products of monosaccharide autoxidation and primary metabolism. In mammals, AGEs are continuously formed during the life of the organism, accumulate in tissues, are well-known markers of aging, and impact age-related tissue stiffening and atherosclerotic changes. However, the role of AGEs in age-related molecular alterations in plants is still unknown. To fill this gap, we present here a comprehensive study of the age-related changes in the <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> glycated proteome, including the proteins affected and specific glycation sites therein. We also consider the qualitative and quantitative changes in glycation patterns in terms of the general metabolic background, pathways of AGE formation, and the status of plant anti-oxidative/anti-glycative defense. Although the patterns of glycated proteins were only minimally influenced by plant age, the abundance of 96 AGE sites in 71 proteins was significantly affected in an age-dependent manner and clearly indicated the existence of age-related glycation hot spots in the plant proteome. Homology modeling revealed glutamyl and aspartyl residues in close proximity (less than 5 &#xc5;) to these sites in three aging-specific and eight differentially glycated proteins, four of which were modified in catalytic domains. Thus, the sites of glycation hot spots might be defined by protein structure that indicates, at least partly, site-specific character of glycation.

### Keywords
Plant proteomics, Ages, Glycation

### Affiliations
SPbSU
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Department of Bioorganic Chemistry

### Submitter
Nikita Shilyaev

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andrej Frolov
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Department of Bioorganic Chemistry


