### Accession
PXD011553

### Title
A novel DHHC5/Golga7b palmitoyl-transferase complex regulates desmosome assembly and cell adhesion.

### Description
Protein S-acylation, also known as palmitoylation, is the only fully reversible lipid post-translational modification of proteins however little is known about how the enzymes which mediate this modification are regulated and which cellular processes they control. DHHC5 is a plasma membrane localised palmitoyl acyltransferase (PAT) with important roles in the regulation of synaptic plasticity, massive palmitoylation-dependent endocytosis and cancer cell growth and invasion. Here we show that stabilisation of DHHC5 at the plasma membrane requires binding to and palmitoylation of an accessory protein Golga7b and that this interaction requires the palmitoylation of the C-terminal tail of DHHC5. We also found that blocking internalisation of DHHC5 from the plasma membrane is controlled by AP2-mediated clathrin endocytosis and that blocking this process traps DHHC5 at the plasma membrane. Affinity purification and mass spectrometry analysis of DHHC5-associated protein complexes uncovered a role for DHHC5 in demosomal formation and cell adhesion. We identified desmoglein-2 as a novel DHHC5 substrate and have demonstrated that DHHC5 is required for trafficking of desmoglein-2 to the plasma membrane and proper desmosomal patterning. This work has uncovered a novel mechanism of DHHC5 regulation by Golga7b and demonstrates a role for DHHC5 in the regulation of cell adhesion.

### Sample Protocol
Triple Flag tagged DHHC5 was used to purifiy DHHC5 complexes from Hela cells. FLAG peptide eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion was performed as reported previously (PMID: 28252024). Extracted peptides were re-suspended in 0.5% formic acid and analysed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano LC System (Dionex).

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry data was analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.6 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Data were searched against a human UniProt sequence databases (downloaded June 2015) using following search parameters: digestion set to Trypsin/P, methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and a 20 minute alignment time window, label free quantification was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2, minimum number of neighbours of 3 and an average number of neighbours of 6. PSM and protein match thresholds were set at 0.1ppm. A protein FDR of 0.01 and a peptide FDR of 0.01 were used for identification level cut offs. For immunoprecipitation data, protein groups file generated by MaxQuant were loaded into the Perseus platform (Tyanova et al., 2016) with the LFQ intensity from each individual run as main columns. The matrix was filtered to remove all proteins that were potential contaminants, only identified by site and reverse sequences. The LFQ intensities were then transformed by log2(x) and individual LFQ columns were grouped by experiment (e.g. all control experiments grouped, all DHHC5 pulldowns grouped etc.). Rows without valid values in 3 out of 4 runs in at least one of the groups were removed and all remaining missing values were replaced from the normal distribution with each column imputed individually. Following this, a two-tailed Student’s T-test with S0 set to 3 and a permutation based FDR of 0.05 was performed and all non-significant proteins were removed and the matrix was exported in a .txt format for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Palmitoylation, Dhhc5, Adhesion

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Science & Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics (CMIAD), Firth Court, Western Bank, University of Sheffield, S10 2TN, United Kingdom
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Mark Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Collins
Department of Biomedical Science & Centre for Membrane Interactions and Dynamics (CMIAD), Firth Court, Western Bank, University of Sheffield, S10 2TN, United Kingdom


