### Accession
PXD011472

### Title
Comparative analysis of CVF proteome composition during neoplastic transformation of cervix among females of reproductive age

### Description
The aim of this study is characterization of proteomic composition of the CVF for assessing the severity of HPV-associated intraepithelial neoplasias of the cervix among women of reproductive age.

### Sample Protocol
For CVF proteomic analysis samples were collected by aspiration of vagina and cervix with 5 mg of 0.9% sodium chloride solution. Samples were centrifuged at 2000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cell debris. The supernatants were stored at -80°С C until usage. For the preparation of samples for MS analysis, the ‘‘in-solution digestion’’ method was used. Proteins were reduced with 0.1 М DTT in 8 M Urea (pH 8.5); alkilation were carried out via 0.55M iodoacetamide and then precipitation in acetone with TFA was performed. For proteins digestion tripsin enzyme was used. Peptide mixtures were separated on a nano-HPLC Agilent 1100 system (Agilent Technologies, SantaClara, CA, USA) using on homemade capillary column (Fused-silica PicoTip emitters id 75 mm length 12cm nominal tip id 15 mm, filled with Reprosil-Pur Basic C18, 3 mm, 100 A; Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch- Entringen, Germany). The separation was carried out by a 120-min gradient (H2O/ACN containing 0.1% of formic acid) from 3% to 90% of ACN at flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mass-spectrometry analysis was carried out by -T LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) using a nanospray ion source (positive high voltage þ2.1 kV).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were preceded via the MaxQuant program against SwissProt database. The minimum peptide length for identification was set to seven amino acids; the match between the runs option was activated and the cutoff false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Proteins with more than two peptides and with at least one unique peptide were considered as identified. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications for the database search.

### Publication Abstract
Cervicovaginal fluid (CVF) is a valuable source of clinical information about the female reproductive tract in both nonpregnant and pregnant women. The aim of this study is to specify the CVF proteome at different stages of cervix neoplastic transformation by label-free quantitation approach based on liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method. The proteome composition of CVF from 40 women of reproductive age with human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated cervix neoplastic transformation (low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion [LSIL], high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion [HSIL], and CANCER) was investigated. Hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis (PCA) of the proteomic data obtained by a label-free quantitation approach show the distribution of the sample set between four major clusters (no intraepithelial lesion or malignancy [NILM], LSIL, HSIL and CANCER) depending on the form of cervical lesion. Multisample ANOVA with subsequent Welch's t test resulted in 117 that changed significantly across the four clinical stages, including 27 proteins significantly changed in cervical cancer. Some of them were indicated as promising biomarkers previously (ACTN4, VTN, ANXA1, CAP1, ANXA2, and MUC5B). CVF proteomic data from the discovery stage were analyzed by the partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) method to build a statistical model, allowing to differentiate severe dysplasia (HSIL and CANCER) from the mild/normal stage (NILM and LSIL), and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) area under the curve (AUC) were obtained on an independent set of 33 samples. The sensitivity of the model was 77%, and the specificity was 94%; AUC was equal to 0.87. CVF proteome proved to be reflect the stage of cervical epithelium neoplastic process.

### Keywords
Cvf, Lc-ms/ms, Cervical cancer, Hpv

### Affiliations
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology,
Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Alexander Brzhozovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Frankevich
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology, Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia


