### Accession
PXD000621

### Title
Platelet Activation Results in Modulation of miRNA, mRNA, and Protein Expression Profiles: New Insights into the Pathophysiology of Platelet Activation

### Description
Leucocytes-decontaminated platelet-rich plasma (PRP) from 15 healthy volunteers was collected and activated with collagen, or Thrombin Activator Receptor  Peptide (TRAP). Total protein extracts (75 microg protein/sample), coming from two biological replicates, were precipitated using 2-D Clean Up Kit (Amersham Bioscience). Total protein extracts were precipitated and dissolved into 20 microl of iTRAQ dissolution buffer. Protein alkylation, trypsin digestion and labeling of the resulting  peptides were performed according to manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems) followed by strong cation exchange fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis  of the peptides as previously described (Lietzén et al, PLoS Pathogens). Protein identification and relative quantitation were performed with Paragon search  algorithm using ProteinPilot 4 interface (Applied Biosystems). Database searches were performed against human protein sequences in UniProt database  (version 120813 with 20231 human entries). The search criteria were: cysteine alkylation with MMTS, trypsin digestion, biological modifications allowed, thorough  search and detected protein threshold of 95% confidence (Paragon Unused ProtScore > 1.3). Additionally, automatic bias correction was used to correct for  uneven protein loading.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Platelets carry megakaryocyte-derived mRNAs whose translation efficiency before and during activation is not known, although this can greatly affect platelet functions, both under basal conditions and in response to physiological and pathological stimuli, such as those involved in acute coronary syndromes. Aim of the present study was to determine whether changes in microRNA (miRNA) expression occur in response to activating stimuli and whether this affects activity and composition of platelet transcriptome and proteome. Purified platelet-rich plasmas from healthy volunteers were collected and activated with ADP, collagen, or thrombin receptor activating peptide. Transcriptome analysis by RNA-Seq revealed that platelet transcriptome remained largely unaffected within the first 2 hours of stimulation. In contrast, quantitative proteomics showed that almost half of &gt;&#x2009;700 proteins quantified were modulated under the same conditions. Global miRNA analysis indicated that reorganisation of platelet proteome occurring during activation reflected changes in mature miRNA expression, which therefore, appears to be the main driver of the observed discrepancy between transcriptome and proteome changes. Platelet functions significantly affected by modulated miRNAs include, among others, the integrin/cytoskeletal, coagulation and inflammatory-immune response pathways. These results demonstrate a significant reprogramming of the platelet miRNome during activation, with consequent significant changes in platelet proteome and provide for the first time substantial evidence that fine-tuning of resident mRNA translation by miRNAs is a key event in platelet pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Platelets, Itraq-labeling

### Affiliations
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head


