### Accession
PXD005760

### Title
A Proteomic View of Escherichia coli Metabolic Features

### Description
Escherichia coli is an important human pathogen, among others a cause of severe diarrhea diseases and urinary tract infections. The ability to distinguish different pathogenic E. coli subspecies is crucial for correct treatment of the infection. Characterization and quantification of clinical isolates proteomes can provide details of the organisms’ metabolism and specific virulence factors. We performed a systematic quantitative proteomic analysis on a representative selection of 16 pathogenic and 2 commensal E. coli strains, together with 5 pathogenic Shigella strains. The analysis yielded a dataset of more than 4 thousand proteins, with an average of 2 thousand proteins per strain and 980 proteins common to all strains. Statistical comparison of label-free quantitative levels of 750 proteins, which were quantified in all strains, revealed that levels of a majority of the shared proteins vary substantially among specific strains. Theses quantitative protein profiles clearly distinguished E. coli strains from Shigella and largely separated commensal E. coli strains from intestinal and extraintestinal E. coli isolates.

### Sample Protocol
For the mass spectrometry analysis, each strain was streaked onto sheep blood agar plates (Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway) in 3 or 4 biological replicates and cultured at 37°C for ~16 h. Extracted stationary phase cells were mechanically disrupted, and whole cell lysates processed according to the Multiple Enzymes for sample Digestion – Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (MED-FASP) protocol as previously described (Pettersen et al. 2015, doi:10.1002/pmic.201500278). The MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen (PROBE) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific. Waltham. MA) connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap) MS (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, 0.5 – 1 µg protein was loaded onto a preconcentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100. 2 cm × 75 µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5µl/min for 5 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% FA (formic acid, vol/vol) with 2% ACN (vol/vol). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 270 nl /min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 50cm x 75µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3µm C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% FA (vol/vol) with 2% ACN or 90% ACN (vol/vol) respectively. Separated peptides were sprayed directly into the MS instrument during a 195 min LC run with the following gradient composition: 0-5 min 5%B, 5-5.5 min 8%B, 5.5-140 min 8–35%B, 140-155 min 35–90%B. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column was performed by isocratic elution with 90 %B (155-170 min) and 5%B (175-195 min) respectively. Desolvation and charge production were accomplished by a nanospray Flex ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey of full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of R = 240.000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 10, depending on signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisionally induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000 charges. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 18s. General mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath; and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 1000 counts for MS/MS. and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was also applied for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed together in MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5). The Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant framework performed the MS and MS/MS spectra search against 23 protein databases based on the E. coli strains genomes (an average of 4,500 entries per database), together with reviewed E. coli proteins from the Swiss-Prot section of the UniProtKB database (28,720 entries, downloaded on the 14th December 2016). Enzyme specificity was defined in group-specific parameters as either to trypsin or LysC, allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. The spectra of the LysC and tryptic fractions originating from the same replica were combined in MaxQuant. Standard settings were used for MaxQuant searches, except that lysine acetylation and glutamate/ glutamine conversion to pyro-glutamate were set as variable modifications in addition to N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was as high as 20 ppm, and the allowed tolerance value for the fragment mass was set to maximum 0.50 Da. The maximum false discovery rates (FDR) at peptide and protein levels were kept at 1%. Normalized spectral proteins intensities (LFQ intensity), proportional to the quantity of a given protein in a sample, were derived by the MaxLFQ algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Escherichia coli and Shigella spp. causing illnesses in humans represent a genotypically and phenotypically diverse group of pathogens. Although E. coli diversity has been studied by comparative genomics, the intra-species variation at the proteome level is currently unknown. The proteomes of 16 pathogenic E. coli, 2 non-pathogenic E. coli, and 5 Shigella strains originating from 18 phylogenetic lineages are investigated. By applying label-free quantitative proteomics on trypsin-digested cell extracts from bacteria grown on blood agar, 4018 proteins are detected, 3285 of which arequantified, and 261 represented virulence factors. Of 753 proteins quantified in all strains, the levels of 153 vary substantially between strains and are functionally associated mostly with stress response and peripheral metabolism. The levels of proteins associated with the central metabolism vary considerably less than the levels of proteins from other metabolic pathways. Hierarchical clustering analysis based on the protein levels results in strains grouping that differ from that obtained by gene-based phylogenetic analysis. Finally, strains of some E. coli pathotypes have more similar protein profiles even when the strains are not genetically closely related. The results suggest that the degree of genetic relatedness may not necessarily be a good predictor of E. coli phenotypic characteristics.

### Keywords
Bacterial metabolism, Virulence, Escherichia coli, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Veronika Kucharova

### Lab Head
Dr Harald G. Wiker
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


