### Accession
PXD041515

### Title
Multiomic temporal landscape of plasma and synovial fluid derived extracellular vesicles using an experimental model of equine osteoarthritis

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common equine joint disease characterised by cartilage degradation and changes to other joint tissues severely effecting welfare and performance leading to early retirement. It results in substantial morbidity and mortality, but our understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms involved is limited. There are no disease modifying therapeutics available, with OA medication offering symptomatic relief only. Early diagnosis is thus important, as substantial joint pathology is usually present at the time of clinical diagnosis. Thus, biomarkers of early-stage OA are actively sought, and among these, extracellular vesicles (EVs) are emerging as potential candidates. Here we use a SWATH MS approach to profile the protein cargo of EVs derived from equine plasma and synovial fluid.

### Sample Protocol
Synovial fluid (SF) and plasma samples were obtained from both middle carpal joints prior to (day 0) and 10, 35, 42, 49, 56, 63 days following surgery. Biofluids were processed within one hour and stored at -80°C immediately following centrifugation. The SF and plasma were thawed, and SF was subsequently treated with 1μg/ml hyaluronidase. EVs were subsequently isolated by size exclusion chromatography using qEV single columns (IZON, Lyon, France). For the spectral libraries, SF and plasma EVs isolated from a representative pool of all study samples were resuspended in 200 µL 6M urea/1M ammonium bicarbonate/0.5% sodium deoxycholate. The samples were sonicated to disrupt the vesicle membranes, and reduced and iodoacetylated prior to the addition of 4 µg Trypsin/LysC (Promega< Southampton, UK). They were incubated at 37oC for 3h, the urea concentration was reduced by the addition of 1ml of water, and then incubation continued overnight at 37oC. The next day, the samples were subjected to cation exchange chromatography and the fractions were desalted using a reversed phase column. The peptides were resuspended in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid just prior LC-MS/MS analysis. Half of each fraction was loaded onto a trap column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap Column (Waters, Manchester, UK)) installed on an Eksigent NanoLC 415 (Sciex, Framingham, USA) and washed for 10 minutes with 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated on a bioZEN 2.6 µm Peptide XB-C18 (FS) nano column (250 mm x 75 µm, Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) using a gradient from 2−50% ACN/0.1% formic acid (v/v) over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data-dependent acquisition was performed on a Triple TOF 6600 (Sciex, Framingham, USA) in positive ion mode using 25 MS/MS per cycle (2.8s cycle time).  EVs isolated from individual SF and plasma samples were resuspended in 100 µL 6M urea/1M ammonium bicarbonate/0.5% sodium deoxycholate and the samples were sonicated. Following reduction and iodoacetylation, samples were incubated with a 1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic magnetic carboxylate SpeedBeads (Cytiva, Marlborough, USA) (12 µL beads in total) in the presence of 50% ethanol for 1h at 24oC and 1000rpm. After washing with 80% ethanol, the beads were resuspended in 100 µL 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and 2.4 µg trypsin/LysC added. The samples were incubated overnight at 37oC and 1000rpm. The supernatants were collected, acidified by the addition of 900 µL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted. The dried fractions were resuspended in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid just prior to LC-SWATH-MS analysis. Aliquots of 5 L were delivered into a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, USA) as described above and the same 2h gradient applied. SWATH acquisitions were performed using 100 windows of variable effective isolation width to cover a precursor m/z range of 400-1500 and a product ion m/z range of 100-1650. Scan times were 50ms for TOF-MS and 33ms for each SWATH window, giving a total cycle time of 3.4 seconds.

### Data Protocol
: The library data were searched using ProteinPilot 5.0 (Sciex, Frammingham, USA) and the Paragon algorithm (Sciex, Frammingham, USA) against the horse proteome (UniProt Equus cabullus reference proteome, 9796, May 2021, 20,865 entries). Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification of cysteine residues and biological modifications were allowed. The data were also searched against a reversed decoy database and proteins lying within a 1% or 5% global false discovery rate (FDR) were included in the library. For retention time alignment of SWATH data, the library was researched with no biological modifications allowed. For SWATH data, retention time alignment and peptide/protein quantification were performed by Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks (DIA-NN) 1.8, using the same reference horse proteome as above to reannotate the library, a precursor FDR of 1% and with match between runs and unrelated runs selected. Proteins with missing values were removed from the protein group matrix prior to analysis using Partek Genomics Suite 7.18 (Partek Inc.) (nomiss), or up to 3 missing values per group were imputed. PCA was performed on the uncorrected data and on data corrected for horse sample. Two-way ANOVA was performed on uncorrected data with horse, sample time and disease status (SF samples only) as variables.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) contribute to osteoarthritis pathogenesis through their release into joint tissues and synovial fluid. Synovial fluid-derived EVs have the potential to be direct biomarkers in the causal pathway of disease but also enable understanding of their role in disease progression. Utilizing a temporal model of osteoarthritis, we defined the changes in matched synovial fluid and plasma-derived EV small non-coding RNA and protein cargo using sequencing and mass spectrometry. Data exploration included time series clustering, factor analysis and gene enrichment interrogation. Chondrocyte signalling was analysed using luciferase-based transcription factor activity assays. EV protein cargo appears to be more important during osteoarthritis progression than small non-coding RNAs. Cluster analysis revealed plasma-EVs represented a time-dependent response to osteoarthritis induction associated with supramolecular complexes. Clusters for synovial fluid-derived EVs were associated with initial osteoarthritis response and represented immune/inflammatory pathways. Factor analysis for plasma-derived EVs correlated with day post-induction and were primarily composed of proteins modulating lipid metabolism. Synovial fluid-derived EVs factors represented intermediate filament and supramolecular complexes reflecting tissue repair. There was a significant interaction between time and osteoarthritis for CRE, NFkB, SRE, SRF with a trend for osteoarthritis synovial fluid-derived EVs at later time points to have a more pronounced effect.

### Keywords
Proteins, Plasma, Synovial fluid, Extracellular vesicles, Osteoarthritis, Small non-coding rna

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
CDSS Bioanalytical Facility, LIV-SRF, Dept. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Institute for Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Rosalind Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Rosalind Elspeth Jenkins
CDSS Bioanalytical Facility, LIV-SRF, Dept. Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Institute for Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool


