### Accession
PXD032689

### Title
TMT-based quantitative membrane proteomics reveals in-depth investigation of PRRs involved in the perception of MSP1 in rice leaves

### Description
Pathogen secreted pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) play a key role in PAMPs triggered immunity (PTI) in plant for the recognition of pathogens. In rice, fewer PAMPs and their pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) have been characterized during rice-Magnaporthe oryzae interaction. Particularly, recent study was identified M. oryzae snodprot1 homolog known as MSP1, however, the molecular mechanism of MSP1 induced PTI is currently elusive. Therefore, we were generated the MSP1 overexpressed transgenic rice with their subcellular localization in the apoplastic (with signal sequence) and cytoplasmic (without signal sequence) regions, respectively, to examine the functional role of MSP1 in rice. Here, we employed a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative membrane proteomic analysis to decipher the potential interaction PRRs and MSP1-induced downstream signaling. This approach led to the identification of 8,033 proteins and sequential statistical analysis were identified 2,226 differentially modulated proteins. Of these, 20 plasma membrane localized receptor like kinases (RLKs) with the increased abundance in response to MSP1. Moreover, activation of proteins related to the protein degradation and modification, calcium signaling, transcription factor, redox, and MAPK signaling were characterized. Taken together, our results indicated that potential PRR candidates involved in response to blast disease and thus suggesting the overview mechanism of the MSP1-induced signaling in rice leaves.

### Sample Protocol
To generate MSP1 overexpressed transgenic plants, MSP1 with signal sequence (eMSP1) and without signal sequence (cMSP1) in destination vetor pEarleygate101 were transformed into A. tumefaciens LBA4404 using freeze-thaw method as described before. Sequentially, rice transformation via agrobacterium-mediated co-cultivation was carried out as followed by previous study. Embryogenic calli derived from mature seeds of the rice (Oryza sativa L. cv. Dongjin) cultured on 2N6 medium [N6 major salts, N6 minor salts, N6 vitamins, casamino acids 1 g/L, sucrose 30 g/L, 2,4-dichlorophenoxy acetic acid 2 mg/L, gelrite 2 g/L, pH 5.8] for four weeks at 25 °C in dark condition. Rice (Oryza sativa L. cv. Dongjin; DJ, eMSP1, and cMSP1) seeds were sterilized in 0.05% spotak solution (Bayer Crop Science, South Korea) overnight at 28 ℃, and then washed with distilled water five times as described previously. Sterilized seeds were germinated on wet tissue paper at 28 ℃ in the dark and transferred to Yoshida solution in a growth chamber maintained at 70% humidity, 25 ℃ with a light/dark cycle of 16/8 hours. For proteomic analysis, 4-week-old rice leaves were harvested and immediately stored at -70 ℃ for further analysis. The soluble and microsomal proteins were extracted using microsomal protein ex-traction method (MME) as described in the previous study.  Protein digestion was carried out using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach. Briefly, acetone-precipitated proteins (300 μg) were dissolved in 30 μL of denaturation buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 0.1 M tetraethylammonium tetrahydroborate (TEAB), pH 8.5). After sonication of the sample for 3 min and heating at 99 °C for 30 min, denatured proteins were loaded onto a 30K spin filter (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and diluted with urea buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) to a final volume of 300 μL. The buffer was washed and exchanged three times using 300 μL of urea buffer by centrifugation at 14,000 g for removal of SDS. After removing SDS from the samples, cysteine alkylation was accomplished through addition of 200 μL of alkylation buffer (50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Then, the buffer was exchanged with UA buffer to TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5) in a spin filter unit. The protein was digested with trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:100) dissolved in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) at 37 °C overnight. After overnight digestion, the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and the filter device was rinsed with 50 mM TEAB and 50 mM NaCl. The peptide concentrations were measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequentially, TMT labeling of digest peptides was carried out. In brief, each 6-plex TMT reagent (0.8 mg) was dissolved in 120 μL of anhydrous ACN, of which 25 μL was added to each channel of samples and additional ACN was added as 30% of final concentration. After incubation of each sample at room temperature for 1hr, quenching the reaction with 0.3% (v/v) hydroxylamine as final concentration. Finally, combined samples at equal amounts across the all samples and lyophilized and subjected to desalting procedure. The pooled TMT labeled peptides were desalted using the HLB OASIS column (Waters, MA, USA) as described in the previous studies and following the manufacturer’s instructions [34]. After desalting, the dried peptides were re-constituted in 200 μL of loading solution (15 mM Ammonium formate, 2% ACN) and loaded onto stage-tip prepared by packing C18 Empore disk membranes (3M, Bracknell, UK) at the bottom and POROS 20 R2 reversed phase resin into 200 μL yellow tip. Before loading the peptides, the stage-tip was washed with 100% methanol, 100% ACN and equilibrated with loading solution. The peptides were loaded, and 12 fractions subsequently eluted with pH 10 buffer solution series containing 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 32, 35, 41, 44, 60, 80, and 100% ACN as described previously. Finally, the 12 fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80 ℃ for further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired TMT data from LC-MS/MS running were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 2.0.3.0). All the replicates of protein samples were cross-referenced against the Phytozome Oryza sativa database (67,393 entries). TMT data processing was carried out using default precursor mass tolerances set by the Andromeda search engine, which is set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Reporter mass tolerance has to set the minimum as 0.003 Da and the minimum reporter precursor ion fraction (PIF) was set to 0.5. The product mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavage were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and acetylation of lysine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as fixed and variable modifications respectively. A reverse nonsense version of the original database was generated and used to determine the FDR which was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.6.15.0). The normalization of reporter ion intensities was carried out by IRS methods as followed by previous study. In addition, missing values imputation was carried out from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8) using Perseus software. Multiple sample test controlled by the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.05, was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance (≥ 1.25-fold change). The functional classification and pathway analysis were carried out using AgriGO v2.0 web-based software for gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and MapMan software, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) play a key role in triggering PAMPs triggered immunity (PTI) in plants. In the case of the rice-Magnaporthe oryzae pathosystem, fewer PAMPs and their pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) have been characterized. Recently, a M. oryzae snodprot1 homolog protein (MSP1) has been identified that functions as PAMP and triggering the PTI responses in rice. However, the molecular mechanism underlying MSP1-induced PTI is currently elusive. Therefore, we generated MSP1 overexpressed transgenic lines of rice, and a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative membrane proteomic analysis was employed to decipher the potential MSP1-induced signaling in rice using total cytosolic as well as membrane protein fractions. This approach led to the identification of 8033 proteins of which 1826 were differentially modulated in response to overexpression of MSP1 and/or exogenous jasmonic acid treatment. Of these, 20 plasma membrane-localized receptor-like kinases (RLKs) showed increased abundance in MSP1 overexpression lines. Moreover, activation of proteins related to the protein degradation and modification, calcium signaling, redox, and MAPK signaling was observed in transgenic lines expressing MSP1 in the apoplast. Taken together, our results identified potential PRR candidates involved in MSP1 recognition and suggested the overview mechanism of the MSP1-induced PTI signaling in rice leaves. SIGNIFICANCE: In plants, recognition of pathogen pathogen-derived molecules, such as PAMPs, by plant plant-derived PRRs has an essential role for in the activation of PTI against pathogen invasion. Typically, PAMPs are recognized by plasma membrane (PM) localized PRRs, however, identifying the PM-localized PRR proteins is challenging due to their low abundance. In this study, we performed an integrated membrane protein enrichment by microsomal membrane extraction (MME) method and subsequent TMT-labeling-based quantitative proteomic analysis using MSP1 overexpressed rice. Based on these results, we successfully identified various intracellular and membrane membrane-localized proteins that participated in the MSP1-induced immune response and characterized the potential PM-localized PRR candidates in rice.

### Keywords
Plant-pathogen interaction, Mme method, Msp1, Prrs, Magnaporthe oryzae, Tmt, Rice

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea


