### Accession
PXD026048

### Title
IP-MALDI-MS assay LOD for VP40 by targeting two peptide variants

### Description
We developed a quantitative assay for carefully selected VP40 peptide variants. We selected two peptides, LGPGIPDHPLR from EBOV VP40 and LRPILLPGK from BDBV VP40 to generate pan-peptide variants antibodies. Potential structural difference in virion particles affect the efficiency of VP40 liberation during sample inactivation, and the sequence variations also affect the affinity of peptide against the pan-variants antibody. Therefore, we quantified the mass contents of VP40 in EBOV and SUDV VLPs and used the VLPs from each species to build the species-specific standard curves. This improves the accuracy of VP40 quantitation. The feasibility of using miniature mass spectrometer to collect the tandem MS spectra for both peptides was validated.

### Sample Protocol
VP40 peptide-specific antibodies generated for this study were diluted in 1× pH 7.4 PBS (Fisher Scientific, Cat. # BP399-4) and 50 µg antibody was conjugated with 3mg of protein G-coupled Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Cat. # 1009D) in 400 µL coupling buffer (PBS pH 7.4 with 0.2% (v/v) Tween-20, Sigma; Cat. # P9416-100 ML) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Beads were washed with 200 µL coupling buffer once before antibody conjugation, twice following conjugation, and then resuspended in 1 mL coupling buffer. Plasma from a single healthy human donor (Valley Biomedical, VA) was split into 100 µL aliquots that were spiked to contain 3.125-50 nM of recombinant SUDV, EBOV or BDBV VP40 protein, or spiked with 1 µL of a SUDV or EBOV VLP sequential dilutions containing 2.5 µg – 2.5 ng total protein. VP40-spiked and VLP-spiked human plasma, and inactivated plasma from EBOV-infected non-human primates were mixed with 400 µL of 0.5% Triton-X100 (Sigma; Cat. # X100-500ML), incubated for 5 min in a 100°C heat block, cooled for 5 min in a 25°C water bath, then mixed with 10 µL of an unbuffered 1 M Tris base solution (Bio-Rad; Cat. #161-0716) to attain a pH 8.5 solution. Samples were then spiked with 10 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin, digested at 37°C for 1 hr with rotary mixing, and then spiked with 10 µL of 10% (v/v) trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to achieve pH 7. After digestion, samples to be analyzed for target peptide quantification were spiked with 5 µL of a 500 nM stable-isotope-labeled internal standard peptide solution. Digested plasma samples were then incubated with antibody-conjugated protein G Dynabeads (0.15 mg beads per antibody per sample) for 1 hr at 25°C with rotary mixing for target peptide capture. The captured peptides were eluted and analysis by MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS data obtained from Bruker MALDI-TOF MS systems were processed using mMass (http://www.mmass.org/), after converting the raw data into mzML format. Peak picking was conducted by mMass with the SN cutoff as 1, and all other parameters as default. The two peptide peaks were manually annotated and their SNs were exported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Vp40

### Affiliations
Tulane University
Center for Cellular and Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Tulane University

### Submitter
Qingbo Shu

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Hu
Center for Cellular and Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Tulane University


