### Accession
PXD031872

### Title
Juxtaposition of Bub1 and Cdc20 on phosphorylated Mad1 during catalytic mitotic checkpoint complex assembly (IGX-MS data)

### Description
During metaphase, in response to improper kinetochore-microtubule attachments, the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) activates the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) to inhibit the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C). The Mad1-Mad2 complex provides a catalytic platform for MCC assembly. Mad1-bound Mad2 recruits open-Mad2 through asymmetric dimerization and Mad1 phosphorylation by Mps1 promotes conversion of Mad2 from an open (O-Mad2) to closed (C-Mad2) state, which binds Cdc20 to form the MCC. How Mad1 phosphorylation catalytically activates MCC formation is poorly understood. This study characterises Mad1 phosphorylation by Mps1 and provides structural and biochemical insights into a phosphorylation-specific Mad1-Cdc20 interaction, which allows for a tripartite assembly of Bub1-Mad1-Cdc20 on the C-terminal domain of Mad1. We also identify a folded state of Mad1-Mad2 complex, suggesting a model by which the Cdc20-Mad1 interaction brings the Cdc20 MIM motif near Mad2. The Cdc20 MIM motif is then entrapped by the Mad2 safety belt to form a stable complex, allowing spontaneous MCC assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Purified complexes of the tetrameric Mad1Δ485:C-Mad2ΔR133A complex, as well as the non-phosphorylated and phosphorylated hexameric Mad1Δ485:C-Mad2:O-Mad2 complexes were cross-linked following the published IGX-MS workflow (Hevler et al, 2021). Respective complexes were mixed with NativePAGE sample buffer, and subsequently, 15 µg of each sample was run onto a Bis-Tris gel (3–12%). For cross-linking, bands corresponding to tetrameric and hexameric Mad1:Mad2 complexes were excised, rinsed with distilled H2O and subsequently cross-linked (in triplicates) with 1.5 mM DSS for 30 mins at RT. The reaction was quenched by the addition of Tris to a final concentration of 50 mM. Following classical in-gel digestion (Shevchenko et al, 2007), cross-linked proteins were washed, reduced and alkylated prior to trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
For MS analysis of cross-linked peptides, the samples were re-suspended in 2 % formic acid and analysed using an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (ThermoFisher) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (ThermoFischer). Peptides were trapped for 5 mins in 0.1 % FA in water, using a 100-µm inner diameter 2-cm trap column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm) prior to separation on an analytical column (50 cm of length, 75 µM inner diameter; packed in-house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm). Trapped peptides were eluted following a 60 min gradient from 9-40 % of 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA. Full scan MS spectra from 350-1600 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with a normalized AGC target of 300 % and maximum injection time of 120 ms. Only peptides with charged states 3-8 were fragmented, and dynamic exclusion properties were set to n = 1, for a duration of 30 s. Fragmentation was performed using a stepped HCD collision energy mode (27, 30, 33 %) in the ion trap and acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target set to 500 %, an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Raw files obtained for respective IGX-MS experiments were subsequently analysed with pLink2 (Chen et al, 2019). FDR (controlled at PSM level for cross-linked spectrum matches and separately computed for intra and inter cross-links) rate was set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
In response to improper kinetochore-microtubule attachments in mitosis, the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) assembles the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) to inhibit the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome, thereby delaying entry into anaphase. The MCC comprises Mad2:Cdc20:BubR1:Bub3. Its assembly is catalysed by unattached kinetochores on a Mad1:Mad2 platform. Mad1-bound closed-Mad2 (C-Mad2) recruits open-Mad2 (O-Mad2) through self-dimerization. This interaction, combined with Mps1 kinase-mediated phosphorylation of Bub1 and Mad1, accelerates MCC assembly, in a process that requires O-Mad2 to C-Mad2 conversion and concomitant binding of Cdc20. How Mad1 phosphorylation catalyses MCC assembly is poorly understood. Here, we characterized Mps1 phosphorylation of Mad1 and obtained structural insights into a phosphorylation-specific Mad1:Cdc20 interaction. This interaction, together with the Mps1-phosphorylation dependent association of Bub1 and Mad1, generates a tripartite assembly of Bub1 and Cdc20 onto the C-terminal domain of Mad1 (Mad1<sup>CTD</sup>). We additionally identify flexibility of Mad1:Mad2 that suggests how the Cdc20:Mad1<sup>CTD</sup> interaction brings the Mad2-interacting motif (MIM) of Cdc20 near O-Mad2. Thus, Mps1-dependent formation of the MCC-assembly scaffold functions to position and orient Cdc20 MIM near O-Mad2, thereby catalysing formation of C-Mad2:Cdc20.

### Keywords
Cell cycle; spindle assembly checkpoint; mad1; bub1; cdc20; mitotic checkpoint complex

### Affiliations
Utrecht university
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Johannes Hevler

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Heck
Utrecht university


