### Accession
PXD003917

### Title
Proteome analysis of subcellular fractions of HeLa cells

### Description
We investigated the interaction network of human PKD2 in the cytosol as well as in Golgi-enriched subcellular protein fractions, using an affinity enrichment strategy combined with chemical cross-linking/mass spectrometry (MS). Analysis of the subproteomes revealed the presence of distinct proteins in the cytosolic and Golgi fractions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from each fractionation step of three independent biological experiments were mixed with an equal volume of solubilization buffer (100 mM HEPES, 4% (w/v) SDS, 5% (v/v) ß-mercaptoethanol) and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. The solubilized samples were centrifuged at 16,000 × g (4 °C, 30 min) and the supernatants were subjected to acetone precipitation. Precipitated proteins were sedimented by centrifugation at 16,000 × g (4 °C, 20 min) and supernatants were decanted. Proteins were resuspended in denaturation solution followed by homogenization in an ultrasonication bath for 10 min. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad). The samples were adjusted to a protein concentration of 1 µg/µl and subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Peptide solutions were analyzed by LC/MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex nano-ESI ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a RP C8 precolumn (Acclaim PepMap, 300 µm × 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. After washing on the precolumn with 0.1% (v/v) TFA for 15 min at 30 µl/min, peptides were eluted and separated on a C18 separation column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 µM × 250 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) that had been equilibrated with solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA). Elution of peptides from the separation column was performed with a gradient from 0-35% solvent B (ACN, 0.08% (v/v) FA) within 300 min at 300 nl/min. MS/MS analysis was performed using a data-dependent decision tree method (DDDT) (34). Electron transfer dissociation (ETD) was performed for peptides with charge state 3 and m/z 300-650, charge state 4 and m/z 300-900, charge state 5 and m/z 300-950, and precursor ions with charge state 6-8. CID was used for precursor ions with charge state 2, charge state 3 and m/z 650-1200, charge state 4 and m/z 900-1200, charge state 5 and m/z 950-1200. Raw data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein identification was carried out using the Sequest HT search engine with spectrum matching weighted to either c- and z-ions (ETD) or b- and y-ions (CID). Database searches were performed against the reviewed human reference proteome of the Uniprot database (date: 2015-02-10, 20,222 entries) with trypsin as enzyme (up to three missed cleavages, precursor ion and fragment ion mass tolerances: 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, oxidation of methionine: dynamic modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine: fixed modification). Search results were combined for validation with Percolator against a decoy database at false discovery rates of 1% (strict) and 5% (relaxed).

### Publication Abstract
We investigated the interaction network of human PKD2 in the cytosol and in Golgi-enriched subcellular protein fractions by an affinity enrichment strategy combined with chemical cross-linking/mass spectrometry (MS). Analysis of the subproteomes revealed the presence of distinct proteins in the cytosolic and Golgi fractions. The covalent fixation of transient or weak interactors by chemical cross-linking allowed capturing interaction partners that might otherwise disappear during conventional pull-down experiments. In total, 31 interaction partners were identified for PKD2, including glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3B), 14-3-3 protein gamma (YWHAG), and the alpha isoform of 55 kDa regulatory subunit B of protein phosphatase 2A (PPP2R2A). Remarkably, the entire seven-subunit Arp2/3 complex (ARPC1B, ARPC2, ARPC3, ARPC4, ARPC5, ACTR3, ACTR2) as well as ARPC1A and ARPC5L, which are putative substitutes of ARPC1B and ARPC5, were identified. We provide evidence of a direct protein-protein interaction between PKD2 and Arp2/3. Our findings will pave the way for further structural and functional studies of PKD2 complexes, especially the PKD2/Arp2/3 interaction, to elucidate the role of PKD2 for transport processes at the trans-Golgi network. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD003909 (enrichment from cytosolic fractions), PXD003913 (enrichment from Golgi fractions), and PXD003917 (subcellular fractionation).

### Keywords
Human, Subcellular fractionation, Hela cells, Proteome analysis, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics Institute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Halle (Saale), Germany

### Submitter
Björn Häupl

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Bioanalytics Institute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Halle (Saale), Germany


