### Accession
PXD003217

### Title
TRIM21 innate immune detection of GBP1-positive Toxoplasma gondii is essential for host survival

### Description
Interferon gamma (IFN) is the major pro-inflammatory cytokine conferring resistance to the intracellular vacuolar pathogen Toxoplasma gondii. Autophagy along with immunity-related GTPases (IRGs), guanylate binding proteins (GBPs) and the E3 ubiquitin ligase TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) mediate clearance of Toxoplasma in IFN-stimulated cells. With the exception of inflammasomes, no host innate immune mediators impacting host survival have been identified at disrupted parasitophorous vacuoles. We show that IFN drives recruitment of the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM21 to GBP1-positive avirulent Toxoplasma vacuoles. This led to Lys63-linked ubiquitination of the vacuole and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines. GBPs were ubiquitinated during infection and TRIM21 controlled their expression levels and the efficient recruitment of GBP1 to the vacuole. TRIM21 deficiency led to an enhanced early replication of Toxoplasma without interfering with vacuolar disruption. TRIM21-/- mice were highly susceptible to Toxoplasma infection, exhibiting decreased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and higher parasite burden in the brain. This study identifies TRIM21 as a previously unknown modulator of Toxoplasma gondii resistance thereby extending host innate immune recognition of eukaryotic pathogens to include E3 ubiquitin ligases.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative diGly Proteomics  Cells were lysed in 9 M urea, 20mM HEPES, pH=7.8, supplemented with 100 units/ml of benzonase and sonicated to reduce viscosity (3mm probe, 50 % amplitude, 3 x 15 sec bursts, on ice). Between 30 10 - 40 15 mg of protein per sample were used as estimated by Bradford protein assay. Lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by alkylation with 20 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Lysates were digested initially with LysC (Promega) for 2 hours at 37⁰C. The lysates were then diluted with 100 mM amonium bicarbonate, 5 % acetonitrile to a final urea concentration of less than 2 M. The samples were digested 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio (w/w) with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37⁰C. The next day, two additional aliquots of trypsin were added and incubated at 37 ⁰C four hours each.  After the digestion the samples were acidified with TFA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to final concentration of 1 % (v/v). All insoluble material was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and lyophilized for 2 days. Peptides containing the diGly remnant were enriched using K-ϵ-GG affinity resin (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, digests were reconstituted in 1.4 ml of immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer as supplied by the manufacturer. One aliquot (∼40-μl packed bead volume) was washed four times with PBS and mixed with the peptide sample. Incubation of sample and beads was performed with gentle rotation at 4 °C for 2 hours followed by a 30 sec 2000 × g spin to pellet the beads. The antibody beads were washed twice with ice-cold IAP buffer followed by three washes with ice-cold water. DiGly peptides were eluted from the beads with the addition of 50 μl of 0.15 % TFA and allowed to stand at room temperature for 5 min. After a 30 sec 2000 × g spin, the supernatant was carefully removed and retained for further analysis. A second 55-μl aliquot of 0.15 % TFA was added to the beads followed by a 30 sec 2000 × g spin, and the supernatant was added to the first elution. The eluted peptides were lyophilised for 2 days and used for SCX fractionation.  SCX (strong cationic exchange) fractionation of diGly peptides  For SCX fractionation, peptides eluted from the K-ϵ-GG affinity resin were dissolved in 35 μl of 10 mM Ammonium formate pH=2.9, 25 % acetonitrile. The samples were sonicated and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation. Peptide separation and fraction collection was performed using the micro pump on a RSLCnano U3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min. The peptides were loaded on 15-cm Polysulfoethyl-Asp SCX column (1 mm inner diameter, 5 μm particle size, PolyLC). Solvent A was 10 mM Ammonium formate pH=2.9, 25 % acetonitrile, and solvent B was 500 mM Ammonium formate pH=6.8, 25 % acetonitrile. The samples were run on a linear gradient of 0-80 % B in 45 min, total run time was 75 min including column conditioning. A total of 30 fractions were collected every minute between 15-45 min after injection (1 fraction= 50 μl). The collected fractions were vacuum dried and used for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS For MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA and loaded on 50-cm Easy Spray PepMap column (75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an integrated electrospray emitter. Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the RSLC nano U3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a binary buffer system at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO, and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO. The diGly enriched samples were run on a linear gradient of solvent B (2- 40 %) in 90 min, total run time of 120 min including column conditioning. The nanoLC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer using an EasySpray nano source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans (R=17,500) after an MS1 scan (R=70, 000) on the 10 most abundant ions using MS1 target of 1 × 106 ions, and MS2 target of 5 × 104 ions. The maximum ion injection time utilized for MS2 scans was 120 ms, the HCD normalized collision energy was set at 28, the dynamic exclusion was set at 10 s, and the peptide match and isotope exclusion functions were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analysis Raw data files were analysed with MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) as described previously (Cox et al., Nature Protocols, 2009). Parent ion and tandem mass spectra were searched against ToxoDB-12.0 Toxoplasma gondii ME49 and UniprotKB Mus musculus (August 2012) databases. A list of 247 common laboratory contaminants provided by MaxQuant was also added to the database. For the search the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximum of three missed cleavages for the diGly datasets. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 6 ppm for the main search. Product mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as fixed modification, oxidized methionines and N-terminal protein acetylation were searched as variable modifications. Di-glycine-lysine was added to the list of variable modifications when samples enriched for diGly peptides were searched. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability to achieve 1 % false discovery rate on protein, peptide and site level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Proteomics, Trim21

### Affiliations
Crick Mass Spectrometry STP
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Vesela Encheva

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Crick Mass Spectrometry STP


