### Accession
PXD031625

### Title
Localization of the priming factors CAPS1 and CAPS2 in mouse sensory neurons is determined by their N-termini

### Description
Both paralogs of the calcium-dependent activator protein for secretion (CAPS) are required for exocytosis of synaptic vesicles (SVs) and large dense core vesicles (LDCVs). Despite approximately 80% sequence identity, CAPS1 and CAPS2 have distinct functions in promoting exocytosis of SVs and LDCVs in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these differences remain enigmatic. In this study, we applied high- and super-resolution imaging techniques to systematically assess the subcellular localization of CAPS paralogs in DRG neurons deficient in both CAPS1 and CAPS2. CAPS1 was found to be more enriched at the synapses. Using - in-depth sequence analysis, we identified a unique CAPS1 N-terminal sequence, which we introduced into CAPS2. This CAPS1/2 chimera reproduced the pre-synaptic localization of CAPS1 and partially rescued synaptic transmission in neurons devoid of CAPS1 and CAPS2. Using immunoprecipitation combined with mass spectrometry, we identified CAPS1-specific interaction partners that could be responsible for its pre-synaptic enrichment. Taken together, these data suggest an important role of the CAPS1-N terminus in the localization of the protein at pre-synapses.

### Sample Protocol
Whole mouse brain lysates were homogenized in lysis buffer and after centrifugation the supernatant was incubated with Protein G Dynabeads , previously washed in lysis buffer. Precleared lysates were incubated with a rabbit anti-CAPS1 antibody for 3 h at room temperature. Incubation of precleared lysates with a rabbit anti-IgG antibody was used as a negative control. Prewashed Protein G Dynabeads were added to the sample and incubated for one hour (for CAPS1) at room temperature. After incubation, the supernatant was collected, beads were washed, and the antibody protein complex was eluted in 1× LDS sample buffer. Protein detection was done by western blot or mass spectrometry after tryptic in gel digest. Tryptic peptide extracts were analyzed by nanoflow LC-HR-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, nano UHPLC-system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro, all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham,MA, USA). Peptides were trapped on a trap column  and separated on a reversed phase column  at a flow rate of 200 nL/min for 120 min in a gradient with buffer A (water and 0.1% formic acid) and B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer through a coated silica electrospray emitter and ionized at 2.2 kV. MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode (automatic switch between full scan MS and MS2). Full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,700) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer using a target value of 106. The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states > +2 were fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by low-energy collision-induced dissociation (35% normalized collision energy).

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were identified using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) and TF Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were matched to tandem mass spectra by Mascot version 2.4.0 428 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) by searching the SwissProt database (version 2018_05, number of protein sequences 557.992 containing 16.992 Mus musculus sequences) against mouse proteins. MS2 spectra were matched with a mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor masses and 0.5 Da for peptide fragment ions. We used tryptic digestion and allowed up to two missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation of lysine, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. MASCOT output files (.dat) were loaded into Scaffold  (Version 4.8.8, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA). To ensure significant protein identification, the protein probability filter was set to 95% and the peptide probability filter was set to 90% (protein FDR: 0.6% , peptide FDR: 0.1% ). The identification of two unique peptides per protein was set as the minimum for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synapse, Cellular localization, Intracellular trafficking, Active zone, Dorsal root ganglion, Nano lc ms

### Affiliations
PZMS
Department of Cellular Neurophysiology, Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine (CIPMM), Saarland University, Homburg, Germany

### Submitter
Claudia Fecher-Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Ute Becherer
Department of Cellular Neurophysiology, Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine (CIPMM), Saarland University, Homburg, Germany


