### Accession
PXD011587

### Title
Phosphorylation of RBOHF by CIPK11 and CIPK26 in vitro

### Description
RBOHF from Arabidopsis thaliana represents a multifunctional NADPH oxidase regulating biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, developmental processes and guard cell aperture. The molecular components and mechanisms determining RBOHF activity remain to be elucidated. While the Ca2+ sensor-activated kinases CIPK11 and CIPK26 constitute alternative paths for RBOHF activation, the combined activity of CIPKs and the kinase open stomata 1 (OST1) triggers complementary activation of this NADPH oxidase, which is efficiently counteracted through dephosphorylation by the phosphatase ABI1. Within RBOHF, several distinct phosphorylation sites (p-sites) in the N-terminus of RBOHF appear to contribute individually to activity regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins purified from wheat germ lysate (100 ng of CIPK, 2000 ng of RBOHF-N) were mixed in buffer containing 50mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5mM Brij 35, 5 mM MnSO4,0.5 mM CaCl2, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 10mM ATP and incubated at 30°C for 30 min. The total reaction volume was 24 µl. Afterwards, reactions were stopped by addition of 6µl 5x SDS-loading buffer(125mM Tris/HCl, pH 6.8, 5% (v/v) glycerin, 1% (w/v) SDS, 2.5% (v/v) b-mercaptoethanol, 0.025% (w/v) bromphenol blue)and then loaded into the SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were fixed by Coomassie staining. Bands corresponding to RBOHF-N were cut out of the gel and gel slices were subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion according to established protocols (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide microtips (NT2TIO; Glygen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The LC-MS/MS system consisted of an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column (Acclaim PepMap, 150 9 0.075 mm, 2 lm particle size; Thermo Scientific). The buffers used were 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile in ultrapure water (B). The following gradient was applied: 2.5–7.5% B over 5min, 7.5–40% B over 26min, 40–99% B over 1 min, 99% B for 10 min. The MS was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (‘Top12’), switching between one MS1 scan (resolution, 70 000; scan range, 375–1600 m/z; AGC target, 1e6; maximum injection time, 120 ms) and up to 12MS/MS scans (normalized collision energy, 27 (HCD); resolution, 17 500; AGC target, 1e5; maximum injection time, 110 ms).

### Data Protocol
Spectra files were searched in MAXQUANT (version 1.6.10; Cox & Mann, 2008) using the Uniprot reference proteome of E. coli (ProteomeID UP000000625) supplemented with the protein sequence of recombinant RBOHF-N. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were considered as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
RBOHF from Arabidopsis thaliana represents a multifunctional NADPH oxidase regulating biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, developmental processes and guard cell aperture. The molecular components and mechanisms determining RBOHF activity remain to be elucidated. Here we combined protein interaction studies, biochemical and genetic approaches, and pathway reconstitution analyses to identify and characterize proteins that confer RBOHF regulation and elucidated mechanisms that adjust RBOHF activity. While the Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensor-activated kinases CIPK11 and CIPK26 constitute alternative paths for RBOHF activation, the combined activity of CIPKs and the kinase open stomata 1 (OST1) triggers complementary activation of this NADPH oxidase, which is efficiently counteracted through dephosphorylation by the phosphatase ABI1. Within RBOHF, several distinct phosphorylation sites (p-sites) in the N-terminus of RBOHF appear to contribute individually to activity regulation. These findings identify RBOHF as a convergence point targeted by a complex regulatory network of kinases and phosphatases. We propose that this allows for fine-tuning of plant reactive oxygen species (ROS) production by RBOHF in response to different stimuli and in diverse physiological processes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Cipk, Aba, Phosphorylation, Calcium, Rbohf

### Affiliations
IBBP Muenster
WWU Münster IBBP

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Münster IBBP


