### Accession
PXD011093

### Title
The ProCan90 HEK293 dataset -  A Case Study and Methodology for OpenSWATH Parameter Optimization Using the ProCan90 Data Set and 45 810 Computational Analysis Runs

### Description
A collection of HEK293 SWATH-MS raw data files generated as part of the routine operation of the ProCan experimental facility. These files represent technical replicates each being an aliquot from the same pooled digest, with fifteen runs collected from each of the six Sciex Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometers, giving a total of 90 raw data files.

### Sample Protocol
An Eksigent nanoLC 425 HPLC (Sciex) operating in microflow mode, coupled online to a6600 Triple TOF (Sciex) was used for the analyses. The peptide digests (2μg) were spikedwith retention time standards and injected onto a C18 trap column (SGE TRAPCOL C18G 300μm x 100 mm) and desalted for 5 min at 10μL/min with solvent A (0.1% [v/v]formic acid). The trap column was switched in-line with a reversed-phase capillary column (SGE C18 G 250 mm x 300μm ID 3μm 200 ̊A), maintained at a temperature of 40◦C.The flow rate was 5μL/min. The gradient started at 2% solvent B (99.9% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.1% [v/v] formic acid) and increased to 10% over 5 min. This was followed by an increaseof solvent B to 25% over 60 min, then a further increase to 40% for 5 min. The columnwas washed with a 4 min linear gradient to 95% solvent B held for 5 min, followed by a9 min column equilibration step with 98% solvent A. The LC eluent was analyzed using the Triple TOF 6600 system equipped with a DuoSpray source and 50 m internal diameterelectrode and controlled by Analyst 1.7.1 software. The following parameters were used: 5500 V ion spray voltage, 25 nitrogen curtain gas, 100C TEM, 20 source gas 1, 20 sourcegas 2. The 90 min information dependent acquisition (IDA), consisted of a survey scan of 200 ms (TOF-MS) in the range 350-1250 m/z to collect the MS1 spectra and the top 40 precursor ions with charge states from +2 to +5 were selected for subsequent fragmentationwith an accumulation time of 50 ms per MS/MS experiment for a total cycle time of 2.3 sand MS/MS spectra were acquired in the range 100-2000 m/z

### Data Protocol
SWATH data were processed using the OpenSwathWorkflow where command line parameters are varied as outlined in subsequent sections. Scoring of OpenSWATH results wasconducted with PyProphet (Version 0.24.1) and FDR cut-offs were achieved via TRIC10(msproteomictools Version v.0.8.0) run in a sample independent manner.

### Publication Abstract
In the current study, we show how ProCan90, a curated data set of HEK293 technical replicates, can be used to optimize the configuration options for algorithms in the OpenSWATH pipeline. Furthermore, we use this case study as a proof of concept for horizontal scaling of such a pipeline to allow 45&#x202f;810 computational analysis runs of OpenSWATH to be completed within four and a half days on a budget of US $10&#x202f;000. Through the use of Amazon Web Services (AWS), we have successfully processed each of the ProCan 90 files with 506 combinations of input parameters. In total, the project consumed more than 340&#x202f;000 core hours of compute and generated in excess of 26 TB of data. Using the resulting data and a set of quantitative metrics, we show an analysis pathway that allows the calculation of two optimal parameter sets, one for a compute rich environment (where run time is not a constraint), and another for a compute poor environment (where run time is optimized). For the same input files and the compute rich parameter set, we show a 29.8% improvement in the number of quality protein (&gt;2 peptide) identifications found compared to the current OpenSWATH defaults, with negligible adverse effects on quantification reproducibility or drop in identification confidence, and a median run time of 75 min (103% increase). For the compute poor parameter set, we find a 55% improvement in the run time from the default parameter set, at the expense of a 3.4% decrease in the number of quality protein identifications, and an intensity CV decrease from 14.0% to 13.7%.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Procan

### Affiliations
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Sean Peters

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Reddel
Children's Medical Research Institute


