### Accession
PXD036647

### Title
Chicken Tandem-Mass-Tag quantitative mass spectrometry analysis

### Description
About “MS210144-1 to MS210144-12”: 6 samples: cell body-1#, cell body-2#, cell body-3#, Migrasome-1#, Migrasome-2#, Migrasome-3#, were labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT) reagents and then mixed. These combined TMT-labeled peptides were separated into 12 fractions (shown in list: from MS210144-1 to MS210144-12), then desalted by Sep-Pak columns and separated with a UPLC 3000 system and with an XBridgeTM BEH300 C18 column.

### Sample Protocol
First, proteins either from migrasomes (case) or from cell bodies (control) were prepared using 8M urea in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (Wisent, Nanjing, China) containing protease inhibitor cocktail. Second, all samples were sonicated for 2 min and centrifuged, and the supernatant was carefully separated. Protein concentrations were analyzed using the BCA protein assay kit. Third, in-solution digestion was performed. A total of 100 µg of protein extracted from each sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature and alkylated with 12.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature. Then, the mixture was diluted to 1.5 M urea with PBS and the proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C overnight. Fourth, the tryptic peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak desalting columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and then the desalted peptides were labeled with 15 µl tandem mass tags (TMT) 10-PLEX reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Three repeats in the control group were marked as 126, 126N and 127C. Three repeats in the case group were marked as 128C, 129N and 129C.

### Data Protocol
These combined TMT-labeled peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak columns and separated with a UPLC 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with an XBridgeTM BEH300 C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The mobile phase A was H2O (pH=10) and the mobile phase B was 98% acetonitrile (pH=10). Peptides were separated with a gradient elution consisting of an increase from 8% to 18% phase B for 30 min, followed by an increase from 18% to 32% phase B for 22 min. Forty-eight fractions were dried by speedvac and recombined to 12 fractions. The fractions were dissolved in 20 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and analyzed by LC–MS/MS. Spectra from the mass spectrometer were searched against the UniProt Gallus gallus database using the SEQUEST search engine of Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3). The identified proteins were quality monitored, and each protein with more than 5 points and with a specific peptide segment number greater than 2 was judged to be credible and was carried forward for the subsequent quantitative analysis. For the results of the peptide segment search, Xcorr needed to be higher than 2.5 for the peptide segment to be judged as credible.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tandem mass tags

### Affiliations
The State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Centre for Life Sciences
The State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Centre for Life Sciences, Beijing Frontier Research Center forBiological Structure

### Submitter
Cuifang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Cuifang Zhang
The State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua University-Peking University Joint Centre for Life Sciences, Beijing Frontier Research Center forBiological Structure


