### Accession
PXD010130

### Title
repaired shells of Pinctada fucata LC-MSMS

### Description
Shells of pearl oyster are natural biominerals with remarkable properties and can be repaired after damage, which are regulated by biomacromolcules especially shell matrix proteins (SMPs). Identifying SMPs is critical for further understanding the process. Although proteomic methods have been used to reveal the complex protein mixture in mature shells, the proteomics of repaired shells after shell damage have not been reported before. Here, we studied the SMPs of the repaired shells (prismatic layers) 5-10 days after shell damage in Pinctada fucata by integrating transcriptomics and proteomics and compared the microstructure difference between repaired and mature shells. Although the repaired shells are calcite, similar to mature shells, the microstructure of repaired shells has holes in the center of prisms with irregular and curved edges. In total, we found 49 SMPs from the repaired shells including some proteins only existing in mature nacreous layers. Peroxidase-like protein and beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase may be important players in repaired shells. In addition, they have the capability to affect CaCO3 crystallization process in vitro, altering the packing and reducing the crystallinity of crystals. This study could improve our understanding of shell repair process and lay the foundation for studying SMPs-controlled biomineralization.

### Sample Protocol
Adult pearl oysters, P. fucata (with shells 5.5–6.5 cm in length and 30–40 g of wet weight and approximately 2 years of age) were obtained from the Zhanjiang Pearl Farm (Guangxi Province, China).To acquire repaired shells, 50 adult pearl oysters were notched.Briefly, a V-shape notch was cut onto the shell margin, which damaged the prismatic layer and the margin of the nacre without harming the mantle. We had three sets of duplicates; each group had 50 individual adult pearl oysters. The cut pearl oysters were put back into the aquarium. After 5-10 days, the repaired shells generated at the cut sites were collected.

### Data Protocol
Briefly, 50 individual repaired shells were cut from the V-shaped notch and then rinsed in the distilled water to avoid possible contamination. After air-drying, the collected fragments were pulverized (2g) and were then decalcified with 0.8 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, pH 8.0) for 60 h at 4 °C with continuous agitation. For extraction of the EDTA soluble matrix (ESM), the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 30min at 4 °C, and was then desalted by ultrafiltration (3 K). For extraction of the EDTA insoluble matrix (EISM), the above precipitation was thoroughly rinsed with water and was treated with denaturing solution (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10 mM dithiothreitol) at 100 °C for 30 min. After a short centrifugation, the denatured samples were ready to be applied on 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Proteins were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and were quantified by a BCA assay kit (Pierce).Protein bands selected from ESMs and EISMs of the repaired shells (described in section 2.3) were excised and completely destained by washing with 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3/CH3CN (50/50) mixture for 30 min at 37 °C. Then, reduction was conducted with 50 μL of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 57 °C, and alkylation was performed with 50 μL of 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at RT in the dark. The cut gels were dried in CH3CN and were treated with 0.4 μg trypsin (Proteomics grade, Sigma) in 10 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 12 h at 37 °C. The solution was treated with 50 μL of 1% formic acid at 30 °C for 30 min under agitation. The digests were then lyophilized and suspended in 30 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 4% acetonitrile for LC–MS/MS analysis. Five μL of sample was injected into the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer with Dionex U-3000 Rapid Separation nano LC system (Thermo Scientific) for analysis. MS data were acquired automatically using Analyst QS 1.1 software (Applied Biosystems) following a MS survey scan over m/z 350–1500 at a resolution of 60,000 for full scan and 2, 000 for MS/MS measurements. For searching SMPs of repaired shells, the LC-MS/MS data were searched against the P. fucata predicted protein database (http://marinegenomics.oist.jp/genomes) and the P. fucata SMPs database obtained in the previous study (72 SMPs). The peptide MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 0.5 Da. Finally, sequences with mascot scores of at least 5.0 and with at least two matched peptide fragments were considered valid. Using the mantle and foot transcriptome established as the database, genes corresponding to the proteins identified from the above LC-MS/MS experiment were queried by local BLASTN program, resulting in transcripts which should be transcribed from the above genes.  EmPAI value is calculated for estimation of absolute protein amount in proteomics by Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Repaired shells, Pinctada fucata

### Affiliations
Tsinghua university

### Submitter
Yan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Rongqing Zhang
Tsinghua university


