### Accession
PXD031569

### Title
GPR56 (ADGRG1) and Transglutaminase (TG2) interaction in Regulation of Mesenchymal Transition in Glioblastoma.

### Description
G protein-coupled receptor 56 (GPR56/ADGRG1) is an adhesion GPCR with an essential role in brain development and cancer. Elevated expression of GPR56 was observed in the clinical specimens of Glioblastoma (GBM), a highly invasive primary brain tumor. However, we found the expression to be variable across the specimens, presumably due to the intratumor heterogeneity of GBM. Therefore, we re-examined GPR56 expression in public domain spatial gene expression data and single-cell expression data for GBM, which revealed that GPR56 expression was high in cellular tumors, infiltrating tumor cells, and proliferating cells, low in microvascular proliferation and peri-necrotic areas of the tumor, especially in hypoxic mesenchymal-like cells. To gain a better understanding of the consequences of GPR56 downregulation in tumor cells and other molecular changes associated with it, we generated a sh-RNA-mediated control and GPR56 knockdown in the GBM cell line U373 and performed transcriptomics, proteomics, and phospho-proteomics analysis and using the data we propose a putative model to explain this functional and regulatory relationship of the two proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and iTRAQ labeling: GPR56 control and knockdown cells were grown to 70% confluence, starved in serum-free medium for 12 h, and then lysed in cell lysis buffer (2% SDS in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) with sonication. Protein concentration was estimated using the BCA method (Pierce; Waltham, MA, USA). 200 µg of protein from the GPR56 control or knockdown cells were reduced using 5mM DTT at 60°C for 20 minutes. Subsequently, alkylation was carried out using 15mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes in the dark. After reduction and alkylation, the proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone and incubation at −20 °C overnight. For enzyme digestion of the proteins, sequencing grade trypsin reconstituted in 50 mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate was added to the dried protein in the ratio of 1:20 (trypsin: protein in µg), and the digestion was carried out at 37 °C for overnight. Trypsin digested peptides were then subjected to iTRAQ labeling using an iTRAQ 8-plex kit (AB SCIEX Pte Ltd., USA) as per the manufacturer's instructions. Labeling tag details are as follows: GPR56 control sample batch1 with 114, GPR56 knockdown batch1 sample with 115, GPR56 control sample batch 2 with 118, and GPR56 knockdown batch 2 with 119 tags. Reactions were quenched with 10 mM glycine. All the four labeled samples were combined, desalted using C18 StageTip and vacuum dried.  Phosphopeptide enrichment: For total proteome analysis, 10 percent (40 µg) of the pool was used and subjected to MS analysis in duplicates, as described below. Remaining pool - 90 percent (360 µg) was used to enrich phosphopeptides using a metal affinity-based Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Briefly, the dried peptides were dissolved in 150 μl of binding buffer. TiO2 beads were washed twice with washing buffer, and a total of 300 µg of tryptic peptide solution was incubated with an appropriate amount (tryptic peptide: TiO2 = 1:1, w/w) of TiO2 beads by end-over-end rotation at room temperature for 30 min. The phosphopeptide-bound beads were collected by brief centrifugation, washed twice with 500 μl washing buffer, and transferred to a C18 StageTip (Thermo Fisher Scientific) placed on the top of a 1.5-ml centrifuge tube and was centrifuged to remove the wash buffer, and phosphopeptides were collected from the resin with elution buffer. The eluents were dried and stored at −80 °C until further LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass Spectrometry (MS): The tryptic peptides or the phosphopeptide fraction were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy nano-LC II (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and were analyzed in duplicates. The peptides were first loaded on a preanalytical column (2cmx75µm, Magic C18 Aq) (Michrom Bioresources, Inc.) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then resolved on an analytical column (50cm x75µm, Magic C18 Aq) using a gradient of 5–38% of solvent B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 280 nL/min for 120 min. The data-dependent acquisition of MS spectra in the range of 400–1600 m/z was carried out using Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 120,000 at MS level and 60,000 at MS/MS level; higher energy collision dissociation was selected for fragmentation with 37% normalized collision energy. The automatic gain control was set to 2x106 ions for full MS and 1x106 ions for MS/MS. Internal calibration was executed using lock mass from ambient air (m/z 445.1200025).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Protein identifications and quantifications of differentially expressed proteins were carried out as follows. The MS data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Version 2.2). MS/MS search was carried out using the SEQUEST search engine against the NCBI RefSeq database version 89 (containing 425211 entries). Search parameters included trypsin as an enzyme with 1 missed cleavage allowed; precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively; methionine oxidation was set as a dynamic modification while methylthio modification at cysteine and iTRAQ modification at N-terminus of the peptide was set as static modifications. Signal to noise ratio applied was 1.5 or more. Peptide identifications were obtained by setting a target FDR threshold of 1% at the peptide level, using a decoy database. Protein abundance values obtained from the PD output, are based on the ratios of relative intensities of the iTRAQ reporter ions from the control and knockdown cells, released during MS/MS fragmentation of each peptide. The intensities were checked and found to be conformed to less than 40% coefficient of variation. The abundance values of proteins or the phosphopeptides for phosphoproteome experiments of the control and knockdown were normalized by dividing the abundance values of the proteins or the phosphopeptides (in phosphoproteome analysis) in each column by the column mean. The normalized values were then log2 transformed, and fold change in abundance for proteins were calculated.  A 1.5 fold change in expression was considered to identify differentially expressed proteins and phosphopeptides.  We used a single sample pair in duplicates for our study. Thus, as in the RNA analysis, to identify and add statistical strength to the differentially abundant proteins and phosphopeptides, the Prediction Interval (PI) model was applied to the log2 normalized abundance values of proteins or of phosphopeptides (for the phosphoproteome data). We analyzed the two replicates separately.  Prediction interval (PI) was calculated from the linear regression model applied using the log2 values from the control sample, and the log 2 abundance values of the proteins or phosphopeptides in the test sample were predicted based on the values in the control sample at a 95% prediction interval (upper and lower PI) to do so.  For determining the upregulated or downregulated protein, we used the predict () function in R as in the transcriptomics data:  〖protein〗_(up=) 〖protein〗_test>upperPIand〖protein〗_test-〖protein〗_control>0.58 〖protein〗_(down=) 〖protein〗_test<lowerPIand〖protein〗_test-〖protein〗_control<-0.58                         The z-score for each protein was calculated using the following formula: 〖protein〗_SD=((〖protein〗_predicted-〖protein〗_upperPI ))/2 〖protein〗_zscore=((〖protein〗_predicted-〖protein〗_test ))/〖protein〗_SD   For further analysis and interpretation, proteins with ≥2 unique peptides or at least 2 peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were considered for single peptide identifications.  Single peptide based identifications with 1PSM per peptide were included only if supported with concordant transcript-level evidence. All phosphopeptides considered in the subsequent analysis were with ≥2 PSM with less than 40% coefficient of variation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gbm, Adgrg1, Gpr56, Tg2, Mesenchymal

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics
Mazumdar Shaw Medical Center, Narayana Health, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Ravi Sirdeshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ravi Sirdeshmukh
Mazumdar Shaw Medical Center, Narayana Health, Bangalore, India


