### Accession
PXD027451

### Title
Bassoon contributes to tau-seed neurotoxicity and propagation.

### Description
Tau aggregates are critical pathological features of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and other tauopathies. Growing evidence suggests that soluble tau aggregates trigger neurodegenerative phenotypes. However, the nature of the tau species and interactors involved in its aggregation and spreading remains unclear. By using size exclusion chromatography, mass spectrometry, and bioinformatic analysis, we identified Bassoon protein (BSN) as a significant tau interactor in PS19 mice, as well as in human AD and PSP cases. We also found that overexpression of BSN triggers the aggregation of tau and increase the tau seeding activity in vitro, and also exacerbates the degenerative phenotype in a Fly model for tauopathy. Knockdown of BSN significantly reduced tau spreading in PS19 mouse brains and destabilized the tau aggregates, leading to a reduction in the tau pathology in this model. Furthermore, BSN downregulation was able to restore the neurodegenerative phenotype in PS19 mice, observed in electrophysiology and behavioral tests. Our results identify BSN as a key interactor of tau spread and aggregation in the brain, and therefore a potential target for the treatment of diseases that involve tau spread and aggregation.

### Sample Protocol
Fractions from size exclusion chromatography were subjected to immunoprecipitation using a specific biotinylated antibody against human tau (HT7). The affinity purified and washed streptavidin Dynabeads were then submitted to the IUSM proteomics core for TMT (Tandem Mass tags) based bottom-up proteomics mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A default TMT 11plex method was used for quantification, however the non-used 126TMT channels for each mixture was referred as a “void” category during in the “Study Factors” in Proteome Discover 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). While thee TMT131 channel was used for the reference samples, the rest of the channels were used as designated in Supplemental Figure 1A and 1B. The MS/MS spectra were searched against in silico tryptic digest of a database (FASTA format) downloaded from the UniProt sequence database that carries both the mouse and human proteins downloaded from uniprot (mouse_human_uniprot_contam_030419.fasta) using the SEQUEST HT search engine that also accounted for “common mass spectrometry contaminants”—63 entries. In order to carry out the search, following specific search parameters were applied to vender provided  “processing” and “consensus” workflow templates that correspond to Thermo “Fusion” instruments: Trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme; searched for peptides with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine(C) residues; 2) TMT sixplex label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines, and phosphorylation of S/T/Y. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Please note: reporter ions based normalization was not implemented so that target protein enrichment could be quantified; and it was assumed, minimal variability is associated with sample processing. The unprocessed reporter ion intensity values for each sample/TMT-channel were exported to Microsoft Excel to derive/calculate average abundance values for each “sample type” or “sample group”.  Subsequently, for quantitative comparisons between sample types/groups, respective “abundance ratio” values; and respective “p-values (t-test)” from Microsoft Excel were calculated to construct “Volcano Plots”.

### Publication Abstract
Tau aggregation is a defining histopathological feature of Alzheimer's disease and other tauopathies. However, the cellular mechanisms involved in tau propagation remain unclear. Here, we performed an unbiased quantitative proteomic study to identify proteins that specifically interact with this tau seed. We identified Bassoon (BSN), a presynaptic scaffolding protein, as an interactor of the tau seed isolated from a mouse model of tauopathy, and from Alzheimer's disease and progressive supranuclear palsy postmortem samples. We show that BSN exacerbates tau seeding and toxicity in both mouse and Drosophila models for tauopathy, and that BSN downregulation decreases tau spreading and overall disease pathology, rescuing synaptic and behavioral impairments and reducing brain atrophy. Our findings improve the understanding of how tau seeds can be stabilized by interactors such as BSN. Inhibiting tau-seed interactions is a potential new therapeutic approach for neurodegenerative tauopathies.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Brain, Neurotoxicity, Ad, Lc-msms, Propagation, Tau, Tauopathy, Psp, Bassoon.

### Affiliations
Indiana University
Department of Anatomy Cell Biology & Physiology Indiana University School of Medicine. Neurosciences Research Building 320 W. 15th Street, NB-214G Indianapolis, IN 46202

### Submitter
Aruna Wijeratne

### Lab Head
Dr Cristian Lasagna-Reeves
Department of Anatomy Cell Biology & Physiology Indiana University School of Medicine. Neurosciences Research Building 320 W. 15th Street, NB-214G Indianapolis, IN 46202


