### Accession
PXD043226

### Title
Proteomic study of the retina of guinea pigs with form-deprivation myopia

### Description
Myopia has become the major cause of visual impairment worldwide. However, its retina-related pathogenesis remains unclear. In recent years, proteomics has become a high-throughput tool to explain biological mechanisms. In this study, we examined the retinas of guinea pigs with form deprivation myopia using 4D label-free proteomics and found disorders of retinal metabolism in experimental myopia.

### Sample Protocol
After 2 weeks of form deprivation, guinea pigs were executed with an overdose of barbiturates. Six retinas from each group were taken for subsequent protein extraction, trypsin digestion, LC-MS/MS assay, and bioinformatics analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Search the UniProt database for tandem mass spectra of guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus). A series of bioinformatics analyses, such as GO functional annotation, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, subcellular localization, protein-protein interaction network, and Motif analysis, were then performed.

### Publication Abstract
Myopia has become the major cause of visual impairment worldwide. Although the pathogenesis of myopia remains controversial, proteomic studies suggest that dysregulation of retinal metabolism is potentially involved in the pathology of myopia. Lysine acetylation of proteins plays a key role in regulating cellular metabolism, but little is known about its role in the form-deprived myopic retina. Hence, a comprehensive analysis of proteomic and acetylomic changes in the retinas of guinea pigs with form-deprivation myopia was performed. In total, 85 significantly differential proteins and 314 significantly differentially acetylated proteins were identified. Notably, the differentially acetylated proteins were markedly enriched in metabolic pathways such as glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, the pentose phosphate pathway, retinol metabolism, and the HIF-1 signaling pathway. HK2, HKDC1, PKM, LDH, GAPDH, and ENO1 were the key enzymes in these metabolic pathways with decreased acetylation levels in the form-deprivation myopia group. Altered lysine acetylation of key enzymes in the form-deprived myopic retina might affect the dynamic balance of metabolism in the retinal microenvironment by altering their activity. In conclusion, as the first report on the myopic retinal acetylome, this study provides a reliable basis for further studies on myopic retinal acetylation.

### Keywords
Guinea pig, Proteome, Retina

### Affiliations
Affiliated Eye Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
jiaojiao Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Hongsheng Bi
Affiliated Eye Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine


