### Accession
PXD015676

### Title
Phosphorylation of the receptor protein Pex5p modulates import of PTS1 cargoes into peroxisomesPhosphorylation of the receptor protein Pex5p modulates import of PTS1 cargoes into peroxisomes

### Description
Peroxisomes are dynamic organelles with vital functions in cellular metabolism and dysfunction of peroxisomes is associated with human diseases. To fulfill their multiple roles, peroxisomes rely on import of nuclear-encoded matrix proteins, most carrying a peroxisomal targeting signal (PTS) 1. The receptor Pex5p recruits PTS1-proteins for import into peroxisomes; whether and how this process is posttranslationally regulated is unknown. Here, we identify 22 phosphorylation sites of Pex5p. Yeast cells expressing phospho-mimicking Pex5p-S507/523D (Pex5p-2D) show a decreased peroxisomal import of GFP-SKL. We show that the binding affinity between PTS1-protein and Pex5p-2D is reduced. An in vivo analysis of the effect of the phosphomimicking mutants on all known PTS1-proteins revealed that import of most, but not all, cargo proteins is affected. The physiological effect of the phosphomimetic mutations correlate with the binding affinity of the corresponding extended PTS1-sequences. Thus, we report a novel Pex5p phosphorylation-dependent mechanism for regulating PTS1-protein import into peroxisomes.

### Sample Protocol
Pex5p was affinity-purified from crude membrane and cytosolic fractions prepared from oleic acid-induced cells expressing TPA-tagged Pex5p as described before (Agne et al., Mol. Cell 11, 2003, ; Schäfer et al., Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 2004). For the analysis of Pex5p phosphorylation sites, crude membrane fractions were resuspended in glycerol-containing lysis buffer (20 mM Tris, 80 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors), the protein concentration was adjusted to 5 mg/ml, and proteins were solubilized using 1% (v/v) Triton X-100. Unsolubilized material was removed by centrifugation (100,000 x g, 1 h, 4°C). The cleared detergent extracts as well as cytosolic fractions were subjected to affinity purification via IgG Sepharose. Proteins bound to the matrix were eluted by incubation with AcTEV protease (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Invitrogen) followed by addition of Ni-NTA agarose to remove the His-tagged TEV protease. Eluted proteins were collected by centrifugation and precipitated by adding the fivefold volume of ice-cold acetone followed by incubation at -20°C for at least 1 h. For the analysis of Pex5p in vivo phosphosites, affinity-purified and acetone-precipitated Pex5p from cytosolic and membrane fractions was resuspended in 100 µl of 60% (v/v) methanol/20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxy-ethyl)phosphine (30 min at 37°C) and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at RT in the dark), followed by protein digestion with trypsin (Promega; 375 ng trypsin per sample, 4 h at 42°C). Phosphopeptides were enriched from tryptic digests using titanium dioxide (TiO2, GL Sciences Incorporated, cat. # 5020-75000). All steps were performed at 4°C. TiO2 beads were prepared as slurry in 100% acetonitrile (ACN) at a ratio of 1:2, washed twice with washing buffer (80% [v/v] ACN/0.1% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid [TFA]) and dissolved in 1x loading buffer (see below). For each enrichment, 15 µl of TiO2 slurry were used. Proteolytic peptides were diluted by adding the same volume of 2x loading buffer (40% [v/v] acetic acid, 40 mg/ml dihydroxybenzoic acid, 840 mM 1-octansulfonic acid, 0.2% [v/v] heptafluorobutyric acid), added to 15 µl TiO2 slurry and incubated for 20 min on a rotating wheel. Beads were washed twice with washing buffer. 50 µl of elution buffer (50 mM ammonium dihydrogenphosphate, pH 10.5) were added and the beads were incubated for further 10 min on a rotating wheel. Eluted phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation (2,500 g, 2 min) through StageTips prepared with three layers of Empore Octyl C8 extraction disc material (Supeclo, Bellefonte, USA) into glass vials and acidified by adding 8 µl of 100% TFA. Peptide mixtures were dried in vacuo and resuspended in 0.1% TFA prior to LC-MS analysis. LC/MS analysis: LC-MS analyses were performed using the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) directly coupled to a Q Exactive plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The RSLC system was equipped with 5 mm × 0.3 mm PepMap C18 μ-precolumns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for washing and preconcentration of the peptide mixtures and 50 cm × 75 μm C18 reversed-phase nano LC columns (Acclaim PepMap RSLC column; 2 μm particle size; 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) for peptide separation at a temperature of 40°C. Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and 86% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent B) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 3   40% solvent B in 30 min followed by 40   90% B in 5 min and 5 min at 95% B. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source and stainless steel emitters (Thermo Scientific) and externally calibrated using standard compounds. Full MS scans in the range of m/z 375   1,700 were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200) with an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3 x 10E+06 ions and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Up to 12 of the most intense multiply charged precursor ions were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. Fragment spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000, a signal threshold of 5,800, an AGC of 10E+05 ions, and a maximum fill time of 120 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursor ions was set to 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were searched against a yeast proteome dataset downloaded from the Saccharomyces genome database (SGD), in which the sequence for Pex5p was C-terminally modified by adding the amino acid residues remaining after TEV cleavage of the TPA tag, using MaxQuant/Andromeda (v. 1.5.5.1) with default settings. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were selected as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The option 'match between runs' was disabled. Skyline (v. 3.6.0.10163) was used to manually verify the correct assignment of phosphosites. Pex5p in vivo phosphosites reported in this study were identified by MS/MS in at least two out of three biological replicates in cytosolic or membrane fractions with a mass error tolerance of 5 ppm. In addition, the corresponding isotopic pattern of a phosphopeptide ion was required to comprise at least three isotopic peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxisomes are organelles with vital functions in metabolism and their dysfunction is associated with human diseases. To fulfill their multiple roles, peroxisomes import nuclear-encoded matrix proteins, most carrying a peroxisomal targeting signal (PTS) 1. The receptor Pex5p recruits PTS1-proteins for import into peroxisomes; whether and how this process is posttranslationally regulated is unknown. Here, we identify 22 phosphorylation sites of Pex5p. Yeast cells expressing phospho-mimicking Pex5p-S507/523D (Pex5p<sup>2D</sup>) show decreased import of GFP with a PTS1. We show that the binding affinity between a PTS1-protein and Pex5p<sup>2D</sup> is reduced. An <i>in vivo</i> analysis of the effect of the phospho-mimicking mutant on PTS1-proteins revealed that import of most, but not all, cargos is affected. The physiological effect of the phosphomimetic mutations correlates with the binding affinity of the corresponding extended PTS1-sequences. Thus, we report a novel Pex5p phosphorylation-dependent mechanism for regulating PTS1-protein import into peroxisomes. In a broader view, this suggests that posttranslational modifications can function in fine-tuning the peroxisomal protein composition and, thus, cellular metabolism.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Peroxisomal protein import, Phosphoproteomics, Pex5p

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Signalling Research Centres BIOSS and CIBSS, University of Freiburg, Germany


