### Accession
PXD009254

### Title
Proteome profiles of primary pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas undergoing adjuvant chemoradiation link ALDH1A1 to early local recurrence and chemoradiation resistance

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a poor prognosis with very frequent post-surgical local recurrence. The combination of adjuvant chemotherapy with radiotherapy is under consideration to achieve a prolonged disease-free survival (DFS). To date, few studies have determined protein profiles that are associated with responsiveness to adjuvant chemoradiation. Here, we analyzed the proteomes of primary, surgically resected PDAC tumors subjected to adjuvant chemoradiation and achieving short DFS (median DFS of 6 months, n = 6) or a prolonged DFS (median DFS of 28 months, n = 6) using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
An acid-labile surfactant protocol for heat antigen retrieval and trypsinization was employed as described previously [30, 31]. The dissected tumor regions were scrapped into 1.5 ml reaction tubes. 100 µl of an aqueous buffer containing 0.1% Rapigest (Waters), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, AppliChem) and 1 M Hepes pH 8.0 (AppliChem) was added into each tube. Antigen retrieval and protein extraction was performed by incubating the samples at 95°C and 750 rpm for 1 hour. Afterwards, the pH of each sample was controlled to be in the range of 7.0 - 8.0. The samples were trypsinized at 37°C, 18 h using sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington), with 2 µg trypsin added per 1 mm3 tissue volume. Undigested tissue debris was removed by centrifugation (19000 g for 15 minutes). The supernatant was transferred to new 1.5 ml reaction tubes followed estimation of the protein concentration by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific). Cysteine resides in the digested samples were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 37°C, followed by 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 minutes at 37°C, and quenching of excess iodoacetamide with 10 mM DTT for 15 minutes at 37°C. Prior to Rapigest decomposition, guanidinium chloride (AppliChem) was added to a final concentration of 3 M together with acidification by 0.2 M hydrochloric acid and incubation at 37°C for 30 minutes.  The samples were then centrifuged (19000 g for 15 minutes) and the supernatant was transferred to 1.5 ml reaction tubes. 12.5 µg of each sample in a 100 µl solution were desalted using self-assembled C18 Stage tips (Empore, St.Paul, MN). Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay and 2 µg peptides per sample were vacuum dried using a centrifugal concentration (Eppendorf) and stored at -80°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode with top 10 MS/MS scans selected with a mass range between 200 and 3000 Daltons.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) [21]. For peptide identification, the Andromeda search engine and the reviewed human database without isoforms downloaded from Uniprot on 25th July, 2016 (20193 entries) were used. A decoy database was generated using the revert function. The precursor mass tolerance for the first search was 20 ppm, 4.5 ppm for the main search and 20 ppm for the fragment mass tolerance. Peptide-spectrum matching included a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. Tryptic cleavage specificity was set with a maximum of two missed cleavages and minimum peptide length set at seven amino acids. For protein identification, a minimum of one peptide was set. The false discovery rate (FDR) at both the peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. Label free quantitation was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with at least one peptide per protein considered.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a poor prognosis with frequent post-surgical local recurrence. The combination of adjuvant chemotherapy with radiotherapy is under consideration to achieve a prolonged progression-free survival (PFS). To date, few studies have determined the proteome profiles associated with response to adjuvant chemoradiation. We herein analyzed the proteomes of primary PDAC tumors subjected to additive chemoradiation after surgical resection and achieving short PFS (median 6 months) versus prolonged PFS (median 28 months). Proteomic analysis revealed the overexpression of Aldehyde Dehydrogenase 1 Family Member A1 (ALDH1A1) and Monoamine Oxidase A (MAOA) in the short PFS cohort, which were corroborated by immunohistochemistry. In vitro, specific inhibition of ALDH1A1 by A37 in combination with gemcitabine, radiation, and chemoradiation lowered cell viability and augmented cell death in MiaPaCa-2 and Panc 05.04 cells. ALDH1A1 silencing in both cell lines dampened cell proliferation, cell metabolism, and colony formation. In MiaPaCa-2 cells, ALDH1A1 silencing sensitized cells towards treatment with gemcitabine, radiation or chemoradiation. In Panc 05.04, increased cell death was observed upon gemcitabine treatment only. These findings are in line with previous studies that have suggested a role of ALDH1A1 chemoradiation resistance, e.g., in esophageal cancer. In summary, we present one of the first proteome studies to investigate the responsiveness of PDAC to chemoradiation and provide further evidence for a role of ALDH1A1 in therapy resistance.

### Keywords
Maoa, Aldh1a1, Chemoradiation

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research Stefan Meier Strasse 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, Freiburg

### Submitter
Victor Oria

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research Stefan Meier Strasse 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany


