### Accession
PXD042427

### Title
Obatoclax rescues FUS-ALS phenotypes in iPSC-derived neurons by inducing autophagy

### Description
Disruption of protein homeostasis plays an essential role in neurodegenerative diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). One strategy for restoring protein homeostasis and protecting neurons is to de-repress autophagy by disrupting the inhibitory BECN1/BCL2 complex, which has been shown to improve healthspan and lifespan in mice. We screened small molecule BH3 mimetics using an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based model of ALS with a FUS mutation and identified obatoclax rescued neurons at by reducing cytoplasmic FUS levels, restoring protein homeostasis, and reducing degeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion of proteins in-gel and analysis by GeLC-MS/MS was performed according to procedures described previously [1,2] with slight modifications. Subsequently, gel pieces were destained and proteins were reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol and iodacetamide (both Sigma-Aldrich). Digestion was performed with trypsin at a final enzyme concentration of 10ng/µl overnight. Peptides were extracted, dried under vacuum and stored until analysis at -20°C. For LC-MS/MS analyses the peptides were recovered in 1.5µl 30% formic acid supplemented with 50fmol/µl Peptide Retention Time Standard (ThermoScientific – Pierce), diluted with 20µl of water and 5µl were injected. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) hyphenated to nanoflow LC system (Dionex3000 RSLC, ThermoScientific). Peptides were separated in linear gradient of 0.1% aqueous formic acid (eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile (eluent B) and the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition mode (DIA).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were loaded into the DIA-NN V1.8 [3] program for peak picking and quantitative analysis.  Differential expression analysis of the proteins was performed using the DEP package in R.  [1] A. Shevchenko, M. Wilm, O. Vorm, M. Mann, Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels., Anal Chem. 68 (1996) 850–8. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac950914h. [2] A. Vasilj, M. Gentzel, E. Ueberham, R. Gebhardt, A. Shevchenko, Tissue proteomics by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis combined with label-free protein quantification, J Proteome Res. 11 (2012) 3680–3689. https://doi.org/10.1021/pr300147z. [3] V. Demichev, C.B. Messner, S.I. Vernardis, K.S. Lilley, M. Ralser, DIA-NN: neural networks and interference correction enable deep proteome coverage in high throughput, Nat Methods. 17 (2020) 41–44. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0638-x.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is associated with the disruption of protein homeostasis and causally contributes to multiple diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). One strategy for restoring protein homeostasis and protecting neurons against age-dependent diseases such as ALS is to de-repress autophagy. BECN1 is a master regulator of autophagy; however, is repressed by BCL2 via a BH3 domain-mediated interaction. We used an induced pluripotent stem cell model of ALS caused by mutant FUS to identify a small molecule BH3 mimetic that disrupts the BECN1-BCL2 interaction. We identified obatoclax as a brain-penetrant drug candidate that rescued neurons at nanomolar concentrations by reducing cytoplasmic FUS levels, restoring protein homeostasis, and reducing degeneration. Proteomics data suggest that obatoclax protects neurons via multiple mechanisms. Thus, obatoclax is a candidate for repurposing as a possible ALS therapeutic and, potentially, for other age-associated disorders linked to defects in protein homeostasis.

### Keywords
Bh3 mimetic, Fus, Als, Ipsc-derived neurons, Dia, Autophagy, Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Molecular Analysis - Mass Spectrometry,
Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), TU Dresden
Center for Regenerative Therapies TU Dresden (CRTD), Technische Universität Dresden, Fetscherstraße 105, 01307, Dresden, Germany

### Submitter
Marc Gentzel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Jared Sterneckert
Center for Regenerative Therapies TU Dresden (CRTD), Technische Universität Dresden, Fetscherstraße 105, 01307, Dresden, Germany


