### Accession
PXD037995

### Title
Folding stabilities of ribosome-bound nascent polypeptides probed by mass spectrometry

### Description
The folding of most proteins occurs during the course of their translation while their tRNA-bound C-termini are embedded in the ribosome. How the close proximity of nascent proteins to the ribosome influences their folding thermodynamics remains poorly understood. Here, we have developed a mass spectrometry-based approach for determining the stabilities of nascent polypeptide chains using methionine oxidation as a folding probe. This approach enables quantitative measurements sub-global folding stabilities of ribosome nascent chains (RNCs) within complex protein mixtures and extracts. To validate the methodology, we analyzed the folding thermodynamics of three model proteins (DHFR, CheY and DinB) in soluble and ribosome-bound states. The data indicated that the ribosome can significantly alter the stability of nascent polypeptides. Ribosome-induced stability modulations were highly variable among different folding domains and were dependent on localized charge distributions within nascent polypeptides. The results implicated electrostatic interactions between the ribosome surface and nascent polypeptides as the cause of ribosome-induced stability modulations. The study establishes a robust proteomic methodology for analyzing localized stabilities within ribosome-bound nascent polypeptides and sheds light on how the ribosome influences the thermodynamics of protein folding.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were injected with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher) into a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) through 30 cm C18 column composed of 1.8uM beads (Sepax). Using the Nanospray Flex source, ions were introduced into the Fusion Lumos at 2 kV. Solvent A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, respectively. The total run time was 60 minutes and the gradient was composed of 3% B for 2 minutes, increased to 10% B for more than 5 minutes, elevated to 38% B for more than 38 minutes, followed by an increase to 90% B within 3 minutes, which was maintained for an additional 3 minutes. Lastly, the starting conditions were restored in 2 minutes and the machine re-equilibrated for 7 minutes. The mass spectrometer was run in data-dependent mode with an inclusion list composed of the targeted peptides from dinB, DHFR, and cheY. MS1 and MS2 scans were obtained in the Orbitrap and ion trap, respectively. To increase the sensitivity of these targeted peptides and isotopes, a multiplexed SIM scan was completed and the 7 most abundant peptides with a charge state between 2-5 from the inclusion list were fragmented. The Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) setting was Peptide. The range of the full scan was 375-1400 m/z with a AGC target of 4e5, a 50 ms maximum injection time, and a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) was used to fragment precursor ions with a collision energy of 30% and a 1.1 m/z isolation width. The setting of the Ion Trap Scan Rate was Rapid, with a 35 ms maximum injection time. Peptides from the target inclusion list had a 200ms maximum injection time. The AGC target was 1e4 and the dynamic exclusion was 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw files for all samples were searched against the E. coli K12 UniProt database (UP000000625_83333, downloaded 02/16/2022) using MSFragger and Fragpipe software54. Peptide and protein quantifications were performed with Fragpipe default parameter settings. 18O, 16O, and N-terminal formylation were set as variable modifications; carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification. MS1 spectra from raw files were converted to .ms1 format using MSConvert software55. The PSM search results from Fragpipe and the MS1 spectra were used to determine the fraction oxidized for each methionine-containing peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The folding of most proteins occurs during the course of their translation while their tRNA-bound C termini are embedded in the ribosome. How the close proximity of nascent proteins to the ribosome influences their folding thermodynamics remains poorly understood. Here, we have developed a mass spectrometry-based approach for determining the stabilities of nascent polypeptide chains using methionine oxidation as a folding probe. This approach enables quantitative measurement subglobal folding stabilities of ribosome nascent chains within complex protein mixtures and extracts. To validate the methodology, we analyzed the folding thermodynamics of three model proteins (dihydrofolate reductase, chemotaxis protein Y, and DNA polymerase IV) in soluble and ribosome-bound states. The data indicate that the ribosome can significantly alter the stability of nascent polypeptides. Ribosome-induced stability modulations were highly variable among different folding domains and were dependent on localized charge distributions within nascent polypeptides. The results implicated electrostatic interactions between the ribosome surface and nascent polypeptides as the cause of ribosome-induced stability modulations. The study establishes a robust proteomic methodology for analyzing localized stabilities within ribosome-bound nascent polypeptides and sheds light on how the ribosome influences the thermodynamics of protein folding.

### Keywords
Protein stability; co-translational protein folding; ribosome; translation; proteomics; mass spectrometry (ms); methionine oxidation

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
Ghaemmaghami lab, biology department, University of Rochester

### Submitter
Ruiyue Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Ghaemmaghami lab, biology department, University of Rochester


