### Accession
PXD000853

### Title
Profiling of human lung tissues on 11 normal control, 11 patient and 11 corresponding mouse xenograft tumours

### Description
The total protein expression level of  11 paired human normal, human lung cancer samples and correspoding mouse xenograft samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. These protein expression data were than compared with corresponding DNA copy number changes and mRNA expression level changes among these samples.

### Sample Protocol
The tumor or normal tissues were lyzed in 9m urea buffer (Rush J. et al. 2005 Nat Biotechnol), trypsin digested and C18 purified. 30 ug of each samples were analyzed in Thermo Elite LC-MS/MS equipment. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the tryptic peptides were separated on a 50-cm Easy-Spray column with a 75-μm inner diameter packed with 2 μm C18 resin (Thermo Scientific, Odense Denmark). The peptides were eluted over 240 min (250 nl/min) using a 0 to 40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system operating at 50 °C (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were analyzed by using MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2) for quantification. The Andromeda probabilistic search engine  was used to search peak lists against the Unipro-Prot database. The default search parameters were used as describe by Deeb et al. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Bioinformatics analysis was completed with Perseus tools within the MaxQuant environment. LFQ intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer results from processes prone to selective pressure and dysregulation acting along the sequence-to-phenotype continuum DNA &#x2192; RNA &#x2192; protein &#x2192; disease. However, the extent to which cancer is a manifestation of the proteome is unknown. Here we present an integrated omic map representing non-small cell lung carcinoma. Dysregulated proteins not previously implicated as cancer drivers are encoded throughout the genome including, but not limited to, regions of recurrent DNA amplification/deletion. Clustering reveals signatures composed of metabolism proteins particularly highly recapitulated between patient-matched primary and xenograft tumours. Interrogation of The Cancer Genome Atlas reveals cohorts of patients with lung and other cancers that have DNA alterations in genes encoding the signatures, and this was accompanied by differences in survival. The recognition of genome and proteome alterations as related products of selective pressure driving the disease phenotype may be a general approach to uncover and group together cryptic, polygenic disease drivers.

### Keywords
Human lung tumor, Proteomics, Mouse xenograft

### Affiliations
Hospital for Sickkids
Hospital for Sickkids, University of Toronto

### Submitter
Jiefei Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Mike F. Moran
Hospital for Sickkids, University of Toronto


