### Accession
PXD019501

### Title
Exploring the diversity of cysteine-rich natural product peptides via MS/MS fingerprint ions

### Description
Stable and commonly bioactive cysteine-rich peptides (CRPs) have are typically discovered via mass shift analysis. However, the accurate assessment of unique CRP species in a given botanical species is often challenged by same mass species, post-translational modifications or modifications derived from sample handling, and incomplete MS2 fragmentation. Mass spectral fingerprint ions can be leveraged to gain additional information about a mass species prior to full sequence characterization and with only poor quality MS2 spectra. Herein we identify sets of mass spectral fingerprint ions characteristic of the CRP cyclotide family, which may indicate a mass belongs to a specific cyclotide subfamily, and “tell-tale” ions that are of importance when discriminating putative cyclotide species, including common oxidation and over-alkylation ions observed experimentally. Cyclotide-containing V. communis material is used as proof-of-principle, where experimental cyclotide fingerprint ions are explored. Fingerprint ions derived from a third type of CRP, the trypsin inhibitors, are assessed in the gourd L. siceraria. Combining mass shift analysis with the identification of prominent MS2 fingerprint ions is then used to identify three novel CRPs. We demonstrate that abundant mass spectral fingerprint ions can be used to quickly discern masses of interest in complex matrices and masses that are already characterized, aiding prioritization of the most promising novel mass species in a natural product sample for characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Viola aerial material was ground under liquid nitrogen to a fine powder, and L. siceraria seed material was ground with a seed mill. Peptides were extracted with 10% acetic acid buffer (1:3 w/v aerial tissue, 1:10 w/v seed material). Peptidyl constituents were selected for by filtering extracts through a 30 kDa MWCO filter (Millipore) and dialyzing with a 0.1−1 kDa cutoff membrane (Spectrum Labs) into 5 mM ammonium formate pH 2.7. Remaining small molecule components were removed by strong cation exchange (PolySulfoethyl A column, 100 mm × 4.6 mm, 3 μm particles, PolyLC) using a linear salt gradient (mobile phase A: 5 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7; mobile phase B: 500 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 3.0). Peptide-containing fractions were pooled, salts were removed via solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (Waters Sep-Pak, 500 mg), and elutions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Labconco). Material was reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 45 °C, 850 rpm, 30 min) and alkylated (100 mM iodoacetamide, 25 ˚C, 850 rpm, 15 min). Reduced and alkylated material was incubated 1:200 enzyme:substrate with endoproteinase Glu-C enzyme (Sigma)  in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8, at 37 °C for 3 h. Pierce SPE C18 spin columns were used to remove salts (Thermo Scientific) prior to LC-MS analysis. Acidified sample was injected onto a nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS platform comprised of a NanoAcquity (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a TripleTOF5600 MS (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA).

### Data Protocol
Mass shift analysis was performed by identifying 348.16 Da mass shifts in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0) using “Peptide ion data” deisotoped peak lists with a retention time filter of 14−45 min and a maximum charge of +10. Viola reduced, alkylated, and Glu-C digested LC-MS/MS data was searched against the Swissprot database via Mascot (Matrix Science) with parameters peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm, V8-E enzyme, fragment mass tolerance: 0.1 Da, 2 max. missed cleavages, and the variable modifications: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
Natural product extracts present inherently complex matrices in which the identification of novel bioactive peptide species is challenged by low-abundance masses and significant structural and sequence diversity. Additionally, discovery efforts often result in the re-identification of known compounds, where modifications derived <i>in vivo</i> or during sample handling may obscure true sequence identity. Herein, we identify mass spectral (MS<sup>2</sup>) "fingerprint" ions characteristic of cyclotides, a diverse and biologically active family of botanical cysteine-rich peptides, based on regions of high sequence homology. We couple mass shift analysis with MS<sup>2</sup> spectral fingerprint ions cross referenced with CyBase-a cyclotide database-to discern unique mass species in <i>Viola communis</i> extracts from mass species that are likely already characterized and those with common modifications. The approach is extended to a related class of cysteine-rich peptides, the trypsin inhibitors, using the characterized botanical species <i>Lagenaria siceraria</i>. Coupling the observation of highly abundant MS<sup>2</sup> ions with mass shift analysis, we identify a new set of small, highly disulfide-bound cysteine-rich <i>L. siceraria</i> peptides.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Cyclotides, Lagenaria siceraria, Fingerprint ions, Viola communis

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA


