### Accession
PXD038718

### Title
An NPAS4:NuA4 complex couples synaptic activity to DNA repair

### Description
Neuronal activity is critical for adaptive circuit remodeling but poses an inherent risk to the stability of the genome across the long lifespan of post-mitotic neurons1-5. Whether neurons have acquired specialized genome protection mechanisms that enable them to withstand decades of potentially damaging stimuli during periods of heightened activity is not known. Here we identify an activity-dependent DNA repair mechanism via a new form of the NuA4/TIP60 chromatin modifier that assembles in activated neurons around the inducible, neuronal-specific transcription factor NPAS4. We purify this complex directly from the brain and demonstrate its functions in eliciting activity-dependent changes to neuronal transcriptomes and circuitry. By identifying the landscape of activity-induced DNA double-strand breaks in the brain, we show that the NPAS4:NuA4 complex binds to recurrently damaged regulatory elements and recruits additional DNA repair machinery to stimulate their repair. Gene regulatory elements bound by the NPAS4:NuA4 complex are partially protected from age-dependent accumulation of somatic mutations. Impaired NPAS4:NuA4 signaling leads to a cascade of cellular defects including dysregulated transcriptional responses to activity, loss of control over neuronal inhibition, and genome instability, culminating in reduced organismal lifespan. In addition, mutations in several components of the NuA4 complex are reported to lead to neurodevelopmental disorders and autism. Together, these findings identify a neuronal-specific complex that couples neuronal activity directly to genome preservation and whose disruption may contribute to developmental disorders, neurodegeneration and aging.

### Sample Protocol
To isolate protein complexes associated with NPAS4 from stimulated neurons in vivo, 8-12 hippocampi were dissected from 6-week-old Npas4-FLAG-HA mice injected with 15 mg/kg kainic acid (KA) (Sigma-Aldrich, K0250) to induce high levels of NPAS4 expression. Wild-type mice of the same age and gender distributions were processed in parallel to serve as a control. Hippocampal regions were dissected 3 hours post-KA injection to allow sufficient time for NPAS4 protein expression and assembly into potential complexes. Hippocampi were collected and dounced 20X in 10 mL of NE1 buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Triton, 0.1 mM EDTA) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich, P5726, P0044). Nuclei were released by 10 minute incubation in NE1 buffer and then pelleted by gentle centrifugation (1000-1500g). Nuclear pellets were resuspended in 1 packed nuclear volume of NE1 buffer. To facilitate release of chromatin-associated proteins, nuclei were incubated for 30 min at 4C with Benzonase endonuclease (Sigma-Aldrich E1014, >25KU (1 µL/10 million nuclei)) followed by addition of NaCl to a final concentration of 300 mM. Following high-speed centrifugation to remove insoluble material, lysates were diluted to achieve a final salt concentration of 200 mM. To preclear non-specific interactions, lysates were incubated for 30 minutes at 4C with 50 µL of ms-IgG coated agarose breads (Sigma-Aldrich). Following preclear, lysates were incubated for 1.5 hours with 60 µL of anti-M2-FLAG resin (Sigma-Aldrich, A2220) per 1 mL of diluted lysate (Sigma-Aldrich, A2220). Samples were washed 4 times in NE1 buffer containing 250 mM NaCl for 5 min with rotation at 4C. NPAS4 and interacting proteins were competitively eluted off M2 resin by incubation in 50-100 µL of 500 µg/mL 3X FLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich, F4799) diluted in NE1 buffer for 30 min at room temperature. For mass spectrometry analysis, eluted proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid. Replicates for these experiments consisted of 3 independent pools of 8-12 mice. For HEK293T experiments, plasmids (FUW with UbC promoter) containing the sequence for FLAG-HA-tagged NPAS4 or various truncated forms of NPAS4 were expressed in HEK293Ts via CaCl2/BBS transfection (2 μg DNA, 6x106 cells). With the exception of nuclear GFP-FH control samples, the plasmids expressed GFP-IRES-NPAS4 to visualize transfection efficiency. FLAG-HA tags were appended to the N-terminus of NPAS4 to minimize differences in tag accessibility across NPAS4 variants truncated at the C-terminal end. Cells were harvested by gently scraping in ice-cold PBS containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and were pelleted by gentle centrifugation (2,000g). Nuclei were isolated, and FLAG immunoprecipitation was performed as described above. A second immunoprecipitation using HA was performed by collecting the FLAG peptide eluate, raising the volume to 1 mL in NE1 buffer, adding 50 μL anti-HA resin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, SC-7392 AC), and gently rotating at 4°C for 1.5 hr. Samples were washed 4 times in NE1 buffer containing 250 mM NaCl for 5 min with rotation at 4C. Proteins were eluted by incubating resin with HA peptide (Thermo Fisher, 26184) diluted in NE1 buffer for 30 min at room temperature. Eluted proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry peptide quantifications were performed following the standard practices of the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry facility, Harvard Medical School. Briefly, the program Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used to compare peptides against protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern. Data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate, and databases include a reversed version of all the sequences. Triplicate NPAS4 IP-MS experiments were performed from hippocampal tissue. The R (3.6.1) package EdgeR (edgeR_3.28.1;limma_3.42.2) was used to identify proteins significantly enriched in NPAS4 IP samples relative to WT samples that do not express FLAG-tagged proteins. Proteins that were identified in at least 2 of 3 replicates were included in the EdgeR analysis. Peptides found strictly in WT control samples, and not in NPAS4 (i.e. background associated with the M2 resin), were removed prior to running EdgeR’s glmFit() and glmLRT() functions.

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal activity is crucial for adaptive circuit remodelling but poses an inherent risk to the stability of the genome across the long lifespan of postmitotic neurons<sup>1-5</sup>. Whether neurons have acquired specialized genome protection mechanisms that enable them to withstand decades of potentially damaging stimuli during periods of heightened activity is unknown. Here we identify an activity-dependent DNA repair mechanism&#xa0;in which a new form of the NuA4-TIP60 chromatin modifier assembles in activated neurons around the inducible, neuronal-specific transcription factor NPAS4. We purify this complex from the brain and demonstrate its functions in eliciting activity-dependent changes to neuronal transcriptomes and circuitry. By characterizing the landscape of activity-induced DNA double-strand breaks in the brain, we show that NPAS4-NuA4 binds to recurrently damaged regulatory elements and recruits additional DNA repair machinery to stimulate their repair. Gene regulatory elements bound by NPAS4-NuA4 are partially protected against age-dependent accumulation of somatic mutations. Impaired NPAS4-NuA4 signalling leads to a cascade of cellular defects, including dysregulated activity-dependent transcriptional responses, loss of control over neuronal inhibition and genome instability, which all culminate to reduce organismal lifespan. In addition, mutations in several components of the NuA4 complex are reported to lead to neurodevelopmental and autism spectrum&#xa0;disorders. Together, these findings identify a neuronal-specific complex that couples neuronal activity directly to genome preservation, the disruption of which may contribute to developmental disorders, neurodegeneration and ageing.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Hek293t, Tip60, Hippocampus, Nua4, Npas4

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School Department of Neurobiology
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Daniel Gilliam

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Greenberg
Harvard Medical School Department of Neurobiology


