### Accession
PXD031520

### Title
LUBAC interactors identification

### Description
Identification of LUBAC interactors. Analysis of HOIL-1, HOIP and Sharpin N and C terminal interactors

### Sample Protocol
3x15 cm dish/replicate of Flp-InTM HEK293 cell line expressing HOIL-1/HOIP/Sharpin in an inducible manner were used; protein expression was induced by addition of doxycycline (Sigma) at 1.33 g/ml for 24hours prior harvesting. Cell pellets were resuspended and lysed in 4 ml HNN lysis Buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 0.5% Igepal CA-630) supplemented with 400 nM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF (Sigma-Aldrich), 1.2 M Avidin (IBA Lifesciences) and 1x Protease Inhibitor mix (Sigma) and incubated on ice for 10 minutes. Debris was removed by centrifugation at 14000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C on a tabletop centrifuge, and the supernatant was incubated with Strep-Tactin beads (IBA LifeSciences) for 1 hour. Beads were washed two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF); the protein complexes were eluted from Strep-Tactin beads with 2mM Biotin (600µl). Proteins were precipitated in trichloroacetic acid solution (25%) and after washing with acetone dry pellet was dissolved in 8M urea. After reduction (5mM, Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and alkylation (10mM iodoacetamide), proteins were digested with 0.8µ of trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 hours at 37°C with agitation. Peptides were clean-up and subjected to high pH fractionation, with a procedure based on the high pH fractionation kit by Thermo (3 fractions collected). Dried peptides were resuspended in 20 l 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of UBASH3B interactome was carried out on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters). Peptides were loaded on a commercial Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5µm, 180µm*20mm, Waters) and separated on a HSS T3 Column (100Å,1.8µm, 75µm*250mm, Waters) using a 90 minutes gradient from acetonitrile 5% to 40% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan in the m/z range 300-1500 (resolution of 120000 and maximum injection of 50 ms) and twelve MS2 scans (resolution 30000 and maximum injection of 50 ms).  Precursor ions with charge 2-7 were isolated with a window of 1.2 m/z and fragmented using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 28 %. A dynamic exclusion of 30s was applied.  MS1 intensities from shotgun data were analyzed using MaxQuant (v 1.5.2.8) (38). UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (download 2019.06.15, plus GST-TNF sequence) using the following parameters: fully tryptic peptides; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl; variables modifications: acetylation, oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY); MS and MS/MS mass tolerance set to 20ppm; FDR <1% at the protein level; LFQ with a minimum of 2 unique peptides; match-between-runs.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) represent the main mode of the proteome organization in the cell. In the last decade, several large-scale representations of PPI networks have captured generic aspects of the functional organization of network components but mostly lack the context of cellular states. However, the generation of context-dependent PPI networks is essential for structural and systems-level modeling of biological processes-a goal that remains an unsolved challenge. Here we describe an experimental/computational strategy to achieve a modeling of PPIs that considers contextual information. This strategy defines the composition, stoichiometry, temporal organization, and cellular requirements for the formation of target assemblies. We used this approach to generate an integrated model of the formation principles and architecture of a large signalosome, the TNF-receptor signaling complex (TNF-RSC). Overall, we show that the integration of systems- and structure-level information provides a generic, largely unexplored link between the modular proteome and cellular function.

### Keywords
Apms, Lucab

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry ETHZ
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry ETHZ


