### Accession
PXD022258

### Title
A conserved cysteine-based redox mechanism sustains TFEB/HLH-30 activity under persistent stress

### Description
Mammalian TFEB and TFE3, as well as their ortholog in C. elegans HLH-30, play an important role in mediating cellular response to a variety of stress conditions, including nutrient deprivation, oxidative stress and pathogen infection. In this study we identify a novel mechanism of TFEB/HLH-30 regulation through a cysteine-mediated redox switch. Under stress conditions, TFEB-C212 undergoes oxidation, allowing the formation of intermolecular disulfide bonds that result in TFEB oligomerization. TFEB oligomers display increased resistance to mTORC1-mediated inactivation and are more stable under prolonged stress conditions. Mutation of the only cysteine residue present in HLH-30 (C284) significantly reduced its activity, resulting in developmental defects and increased pathogen susceptibility. Therefore, cysteine oxidation represents a new type of TFEB post-translational modification that functions as a molecular switch to link changes in redox balance with expression of TFEB/HLH-30 target genes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells washed with ice-cold PBS were lysed in lysis buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA and 1% Triton X-100 (wt/v) and supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Cell lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min and then were passed 10 times through a 25-gauge needle. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. For immunoprecipitation, the soluble fractions were incubated with 20 μl of anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 4h at 4°C. The immunoprecipitates were collected, washed three times with lysis buffer, and proteins were eluted with Laemmli sample buffer without reducing agent. Gel bands from corresponding molecular weights were cut out for enzymatic digestion. Briefly, the samples were first alkylated with chloroacetamide (CAA) (Sigma-Aldrich) to protect free cysteines, and then digested with chymotrypsin (Promega). The resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos that is equipped with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide IDs and phosphorylation and glutathionylation sites were assigned with Mascot V2.5 (Matrix Science). The confidence of phosphorylation and glutathionylation site localization is assessed with ptmRS node in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All peptides were filtered out at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and their relative abundances were compared based on the areas under curve (AUC) of their corresponding chromatographic peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian TFEB and TFE3, as well as their ortholog in Caenorhabditis elegans HLH-30, play an important role in mediating cellular response to a variety of stress conditions, including nutrient deprivation, oxidative stress, and pathogen infection. In this study, we identify a novel mechanism of TFEB/HLH-30 regulation through a cysteine-mediated redox switch. Under stress conditions, TFEB-C212 undergoes oxidation, allowing the formation of intermolecular disulfide bonds that result in TFEB oligomerization. TFEB oligomers display increased resistance to mTORC1-mediated inactivation and are more stable under prolonged stress conditions. Mutation of the only cysteine residue present in HLH-30 (C284) significantly reduced its activity, resulting in developmental defects and increased pathogen susceptibility in worms. Therefore, cysteine oxidation represents a new type of TFEB post-translational modification that functions as a molecular switch to link changes in redox balance with expression of TFEB/HLH-30 target genes.

### Keywords
Tfe3, Hlh-30, Tfeb, Lysosomes, Glutathionylation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Cell and Developmental Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Cell and Developmental Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, USA

### Submitter
Jose Martina

### Lab Head
Dr Rosa Puertollano
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Cell and Developmental Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, USA


