### Accession
PXD004191

### Title
Diurnal regulatory landscape of the mouse liver nucleus

### Description
To dissect how diurnal rhythms affect key functions such as transcription or chromatin remodelling, we quantified the temporal nuclear accumulation of proteins and phosphoproteins from mouse liver using in vivo stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based mass spectrometry (MS). Protein extracts from isotope labelled mice liver nuclei were used as a reference and mixed with extracts from animals collected every 3 h for 45 h total. Phosphopeptide levels were analysed after enrichment with titanium dioxide (TiO2). The proteins levels were also analysed (dataset with project accession PXD003818).

### Sample Protocol
Protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride for 1 hour at 55 °C. Alkylation was performed with 18.75 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. To remove lipids and salts, proteins were precipitated using chloroform/methanol. Briefly, methanol, chloroform and water were added sequentially. Mixtures were centrifuged at 13’000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Upper and lower phases were discarded. The white disk precipitates were additionally washed with methanol prior to be dried for 5 min under vacuum. Obtained pellets were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer and proteins were digested with premixed Lys-C/trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) 2:100 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. Samples were cleaned up using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and finally dried. Purified peptides (350 μg of heavy/light material) were then enriched using TiO2 Mag Sepharose Magnetic beads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Little Chalfont, UK) following manufacturer instructions for enrichment of phosphopeptides.  The enriched samples were dissolved in 25 µL water/acetonitrile/formic acid 96.9/3/0.1 for reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RP-LC) tandem MS (MS/MS). RP-LC MS/MS was performed on a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite equipped with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 µL of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of acetonitrile after 140 min and 80% of acetonitrile after 150 min at a flow rate of 220 nL·min−1.  For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120’000 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1’500 Th. For MS2 with collision-induced dissociation at 30% of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1 × 104 (isolation width of 2 Th), and a maximum injection time of 150 ms in the LTQ. A maximum of 20 precursor ions (most intense) were selected for MS/MS. Ions with 1+ and unassigned charge-states were rejected from MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 Th was used. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (Cox and Mann 2008) (version 1.4.1.2) was used for data processing. Identification was performed using Andromeda (Cox, Neuhauser et al. 2011) as search engine against the mouse UniProtKB database (26/06/2013 release; 50818 entries). Variable amino acid modifications were acetyl (Protein N-term), phospho (STY), and oxidation (M). Carbamidometyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Trypsin/P (i.e., cleaves after lysine and arginine also if a proline follows) was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to, respectively, 6 ppm and 0.5 Da. Peptide-spectrum match, protein and site FDRs were fixed at 1% against a reversed sequence database. Quantification was performed with stable isotope with a multiplicity of 2 using lysine 13C6 as heavy labels. A maximum of 3 labeled amino acids per peptide was specified. Site quantification used least modified peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Diurnal oscillations of gene expression controlled by the circadian clock and its connected feeding rhythm enable organisms to coordinate their physiologies with daily environmental cycles. While available techniques yielded crucial insights into regulation at the transcriptional level, much less is known about temporally controlled functions within the nucleus and their regulation at the protein level. Here, we quantified the temporal nuclear accumulation of proteins and phosphoproteins from mouse liver by SILAC proteomics. We identified around 5,000 nuclear proteins, over 500 of which showed a diurnal accumulation. Parallel analysis of the nuclear phosphoproteome enabled the inference of the temporal activity of kinases accounting for rhythmic phosphorylation. Many identified rhythmic proteins were parts of nuclear complexes involved in transcriptional regulation, ribosome biogenesis, DNA repair, and the cell cycle and its potentially associated diurnal rhythm of hepatocyte polyploidy. Taken together, these findings provide unprecedented insights into the diurnal regulatory landscape of the mouse liver nucleus.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Phosphoproteomics, Liver, Ltq-orbitrap, Silac, Circadian

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms Department, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Gachon
Diabetes and Circadian Rhythms Department, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


