### Accession
PXD008166

### Title
A comprehensive proteome-wide lysine crotonylation profiling of papaya (Carica papaya L.)

### Description
Lysine crotonylation of histone proteins is a recently-identified post-translational modification with multiple cellular functions. However, lysine crotonylation of non-histone proteins in fruit cells has not yet been studied. Using high-resolution LC-MS/MS coupled with highly sensitive immune-affinity antibody analysis, a global crotonylation proteome analysis of papaya (Carica papaya L.) fruit was performed. In total, 2,120 proteins with 5,995 lysine crotonylation sites were discovered, among which eight conserved motifs were identified. Bioinformatic analysis linked crotonylated proteins to multiple metabolic pathways, including biosynthesis of antibiotics, carbon metabolism, biosynthesis of amino acids, and glycolysis. Notably, 40 crotonylated enzymes involved in various amino acid metabolism pathways were identified, suggesting a potential conserved function for crotonylation in the regulation of amino acid metabolism. Numerous crotonylation sites were identified in proteins involved in hormone signaling and cell wall-related pathways, indicating a role for crotonylation in the regulation of fruit ripening in papaya. Our comprehensive crotonylation proteome indicates diverse functions for lysine crotonylation in fruit ripening-related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Papaya (Carica papaya L.) cultivar ‘Sunrise’ trees were grown in an experimental field at Lingnan Normal University in Zhanjiang city, China, at a temperature of 25 ± 1°C with a 12 h/12 h light/dark cycle and 60–70% relative humidity. Two-year-old papaya trees were planted and maintained using a standard drip irrigation and fertiliser application containing 1.425 mM NH4NO3, 0.323 mM NaH2PO4, 0.513 mM K2SO4, 0.998 mM CaCl2, 1.643 mM MgSO4, 0.009 mM MnCl2, 0.075 mM (NH4)6Mo7O24, 0.019 mM H3BO3, 0.155 mM CuSO4, 1 mM FeCl3, 0.070 mM citric acid, and 0.152 mM ZnSO4. Ripened fruits were washed with ddH2O and 0.2% (w/v) hypochlorite solution for 15 min to eliminate potential microbes.  Fruit samples were ground in liquid nitrogen, and the resultant cell powder was transferred to a 15 mL centrifuge tube. Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity SCIENT-200F sonicator (Scientz, Ningbo, China) in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM NAM, 3 μM TSA, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. Remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min, protein was precipitated with pre-cold 15% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20°C, the sample was centrifuged at 10,000 g at 4°C for 10 min, and the pellet was collected and washed three times with pre-cold acetone. The protein concentration was determined using a 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein sample was redissolved in buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM NH4CO3 (pH 8.0) for further experiments.  The protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min in darkness at 25°C. For trypsin digestion, the alkylated protein sample was first diluted with 100 mM NH4CO3, and trypsin was added at a trypsin:protein mass ratio of 1:50 for overnight-digestion, followed by a second 4 h digestion at a trypsin:protein mass ratio of 1:100.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data produced by MaxQuant and the integrated Andromeda search engine v.1.5.2.8 was searched against the Carica papaya L. genome database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was used as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 4 missing cleavages and five modifications per peptide. For precursor ions, mass error was set to 20 ppm, and for fragment ions, mass error was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamido-methylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and three other modifications (oxidation on Met, crotonylation on Lys, and acetylation on the peptide N-terminus) were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for proteins, peptides, and modification sites were set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine crotonylation of histone proteins is a recently-identified post-translational modification with multiple cellular functions. However, no information about lysine crotonylation of non-histone proteins in fruit cells is available. Using high-resolution LC-MS/MS coupled with highly sensitive immune-affinity antibody analysis, a global crotonylation proteome analysis of papaya fruit (Carica papaya L.) was performed. In total, 2,120 proteins with 5,995 lysine crotonylation sites were discovered, among which eight conserved motifs were identified. Bioinformatic analysis linked crotonylated proteins to multiple metabolic pathways, including biosynthesis of antibiotics, carbon metabolism, biosynthesis of amino acids, and glycolysis. particularly, 40 crotonylated enzymes involved in various pathways of amino acid metabolism were identified, suggesting a potential conserved function for crotonylation in the regulation of amino acid metabolism. Numerous crotonylation sites were identified in proteins involved in the hormone signaling and cell wall-related pathways. Our comprehensive crotonylation proteome indicated diverse functions for lysine crotonylation in papaya.

### Keywords
Amino acid metabolism; cell wall; crotonylation; fruit ripening; papaya; ptm

### Affiliations
PTM
Life Science and Technology School, Lingnan Normal University, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524048, PR China

### Submitter
zhang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kaidong Liu
Life Science and Technology School, Lingnan Normal University, Zhanjiang, Guangdong 524048, PR China


