### Accession
PXD002957

### Title
Methyltioadenosine regulates liver cells proteome and methylproteome. Implications in liver biology and disease.

### Description
Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP), a key enzyme in the adenine and methionine salvage pathways, catalyzes the hydrolysis of methylthioadenosine (MTA), a compound suggested to affect pivotal cellular processes in part through the regulation of protein methylation. MTAP is expressed in a wide range of cell types and tissues and its deletion is common to cancer cells and in liver injury. The aim of this study was to investigate the proteome and methyl proteome alterations triggered by MTAP deficiency in liver cells to define novel regulatory mechanisms that may explain the pathogenic processes of liver diseases. iTRAQ analysis resulted in the identification of 216 differential proteins (p<0.05) that suggest deregulation of cellular pathways as those mediated by ERK or NFκB. R-methyl proteome analysis lead to the identification of 74 differentially methylated proteins between SK-Hep1 and SK-Hep1+ cells, including 116 new methylation sites. Restoring normal MTA levels in SK-Hep1+ cells parallels the specific methylation of 56 proteins, including KRT8, TGF and CTF8A, which provides a novel regulatory mechanism of their activity with potential implications in carcinogenesis. Inhibition of RNA binding proteins methylation is especially relevant upon accumulation of MTA. As an example, methylation of quaking protein in R242 and R256 in SK-Hep1+ cells may play a pivotal role in the regulation of its activity as indicated by the up-regulation of its target protein p27 kip1. The phenotype associated with a MTAP deficiency was further verified in the liver of MTAP+/- mice. Our data support that MTAP deficiency leads to MTA accumulation and deregulation of central cellular pathways, increasing proliferation and decreasing the susceptibility to chemotherapeutic drugs, which involves differential protein methylation.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ analysis. Peptides obtained from SK-Hep1 and SK-Hep1+ cell lines were differentially labeled by isobaric tags, pooled, vacuum dried, reconstituted in 5 mM ammonium bicarbonate and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Methylation analysis. Protein extracts form SK-Hep and SK-Hep1+ cell lines were proteolytically digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were purified over a SepPack C18 cartridge and vacuum. HPLC analysis was performed in each steep for control. Dried peptides are dissolved in IP buffer and immunoaffinity purifies using R-mono-methylation-specific antibodies. Enriched methyl peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in order to identify the methylation sites.

### Data Protocol
For iTRAQ, MS data processing was preformed with ProteinPilot while for methylation analyses; the generated files were converted to MGF for sequence assignments and protein identifications with MASCOT. The database used was UniprotKB  (Release 2014_03; 79,824,243 entries). Mass tolerance was 10 ppm and 0.2 Da for precursor and fragment ions respectively. Only assignments below 1% FDR were accepted. One trypsin-missed cleavage was allowed (four in the case of Methyl-R peptides) as well as cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57,021) as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation (+15.995) and R mono-methylation (+14.015) as variable modifications (for analyses of methyl-R peptides only). For all methylated peptides, trypsin missed cleavage as well as the presence of GAR consensus sequences was assessed and de novo sequencing was performed to verify the expected -mass in the parent and in the corresponding fragment ions. For iTRAQ experiments, quantitative analysis was performed with R/Bioconductor. Quantile normalization and filtering of reporter ions was performed to discard proteins with peptides displaying low quantitative correlation values. Significant differential expression between SK-Hep1 and SK-Hep1+ cells (p<0.05) was estimated with LIMMA. Differentially expressed proteins and their corresponding fold-change were based on the median quantification value of all their peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP), a key enzyme in the adenine and methionine salvage pathways, catalyzes the hydrolysis of methylthioadenosine (MTA), a compound suggested to affect pivotal cellular processes in part through the regulation of protein methylation. MTAP is expressed in a wide range of cell types and tissues, and its deletion is common to cancer cells and in liver injury. The aim of this study was to investigate the proteome and methyl proteome alterations triggered by MTAP deficiency in liver cells to define novel regulatory mechanisms that may explain the pathogenic processes of liver diseases. iTRAQ analysis resulted in the identification of 216 differential proteins (p &lt; 0.05) that suggest deregulation of cellular pathways as those mediated by ERK or NF&#x3ba;B. R-methyl proteome analysis led to the identification of 74 differentially methylated proteins between SK-Hep1 and SK-Hep1+ cells, including 116 new methylation sites. Restoring normal MTA levels in SK-Hep1+ cells parallels the specific methylation of 56 proteins, including KRT8, TGF, and CTF8A, which provides a novel regulatory mechanism of their activity with potential implications in carcinogenesis. Inhibition of RNA-binding proteins methylation is especially relevant upon accumulation of MTA. As an example, methylation of quaking protein in Arg(242) and Arg(256) in SK-Hep1+ cells may play a pivotal role in the regulation of its activity as indicated by the up-regulation of its target protein p27(kip1) The phenotype associated with a MTAP deficiency was further verified in the liver of MTAP&#xb1; mice. Our data support that MTAP deficiency leads to MTA accumulation and deregulation of central cellular pathways, increasing proliferation and decreasing the susceptibility to chemotherapeutic drugs, which involves differential protein methylation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002957 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD002957).

### Keywords
Human, Liver, Msms, Mta, Methylation

### Affiliations
Department of Hepatology, Proteomics laboratory. CIMA, University of Navarra. 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
Center for applied medical research (CIMA), University of Navarra

### Submitter
Emilie Bigaud

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando J Corrales
Department of Hepatology, Proteomics laboratory. CIMA, University of Navarra. 31008 Pamplona, Spain.


