### Accession
PXD013364

### Title
Hippocampal circadian proteomes of young and middle-aged mice

### Description
Hippocampal tissues from young and middle-aged C57BL/6J mice were harvested at 4-hour intervals over two days and processed for proteomic analysis using label-free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from hippocampal tissues of individual mice were obtained by homogenization in lysis buffer using a pellet pestle and sonication (three 10 s pulses with 30 s on ice between each pulse). The lysis buffer contained 4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; pH 8.2) supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche; Mississauga, ON, Canada). Protein concentrations were determined using the DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad; Mississauga, ON, Canada). Hippocampal lysates were loaded onto 30-kDa molecular weight cutoff Microcon filters (MilliporeSigma; Oakville, ON, Canada). Proteins were reduced by incubating samples with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; MilliporeSigma) for 30 min at 37°C with agitation (245 rpm) and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM 2-iodoacetamide (IAA; MilliporeSigma) for 30 min in darkness at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed by incubation with 40:1 (w/w, protein:enzyme) trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corporation; Lakewood, NJ, USA) overnight at 37°C with agitation (245 rpm). Prior to strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation of hippocampal samples, peptides were diluted with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and the pH adjusted with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 3.0. Step elution of peptides was performed using in-house-made SCX columns (10-μm SCX beads, Polymer Laboratories) and subsequent addition of buffers (20 mM boric acid, 20 mM phosphoric acid, and 20 mM acetic acid) at pH 5, 6, 8, 10, and 12. Samples were desalted using in-house-made C18 desalting cartridges (C18 beads: ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 10 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH; Beim Brückle, Germany) and dessicated using a SpeedVac prior to being resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) using the integrated Andromeda search engine and UniProt FASTA database from mouse (Mus musculus; 2013_05). The search included variable modifications for methionine oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as well as fixed modification for carbamidomethylation (C). Trypsin/P was set as the cleavage specificity with up to two missed cleavages allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) cutoffs were set at 0.01 at the peptide and protein levels and the minimum peptide length was set at 7. Identification across different replicates and adjacent fractions was achieved by enabling the "match between runs" option with a matching time window of 5 min.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is associated with cognitive decline and dysregulation of the circadian system, which modulates hippocampal-dependent memory as well as biological processes underlying hippocampal function. While circadian dysfunction and memory impairment are common features of aging and several neurodegenerative brain disorders, how aging impacts the circadian expression patterns of proteins involved in processes that underlie hippocampal-dependent memory is not well understood. In this study, we profiled the hippocampal proteomes of young and middle-aged mice across two circadian cycles using quantitative mass spectrometry in order to explore aging-associated changes in the temporal orchestration of biological pathways. Of the &#x223c;1,420 proteins that were accurately quantified, 15% (214 proteins) displayed circadian rhythms in abundance in the hippocampus of young mice, while only 1.6% (23 proteins) were rhythmic in middle-aged mice. Remarkably, aging disrupted the circadian regulation of proteins involved in cellular functions critical for hippocampal function and memory, including dozens of proteins participating in pathways of energy metabolism, neurotransmission, and synaptic plasticity. These included processes such as glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, synaptic vesicle cycling, long-term potentiation, and cytoskeletal organization. Moreover, aging altered the daily expression rhythms of proteins implicated in hallmarks of aging and the pathogenesis of several age-related neurodegenerative brain disorders affecting the hippocampus. Notably, we identified age-related alterations in the rhythmicity of proteins involved in mitochondrial dysfunction and loss of proteostasis, as well as proteins involved in the pathogenesis of disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. These insights into aging-induced changes in the hippocampal proteome provide a framework for understanding how the age-dependent circadian decline may contribute to cognitive impairment and the development of neurodegenerative diseases during aging.

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Circadian, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Paula Adler

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada


