### Accession
PXD000996

### Title
Proteomics analysis of cystic fluid from human cystic papillary thyroid carcinoma

### Description
Here we have performed quantitative and qualitative profiling of the proteome of cystic fluid from human cystic papillary thyroid carcinoma with the aim to identify specific proteins and pathways involved in cystic fluid from human cystic papillary carcinoma, as well as possible diagnostic markers.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin, labeled with 8plex iTRAQ and separated by isoelectric focusing before LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
MSMS data was searched using Sequest/Percolator under Proteome Discoverer 1.3 against the Swissprot_human_20121008.fasta  database. Variable mods: oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine. Fixed mods: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, iTRAQ8plex on N-terminus and on lysine side chains.

### Publication Abstract
Cystic papillary thyroid carcinoma (cPTC) is a subgroup of PTC presenting a diagnostic challenge at fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB). To further investigate this entity we aimed to characterize protein profiles of cyst fluids from cPTC and benign thyroid cystic lesions. In total, 20 cPTCs and 56 benign thyroid cystic lesions were studied. Profiling by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on cyst fluids from a subset of cases after depletion, and selected proteins were further analyzed by Western blot (WB), immunohistochemistry (IHC) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A total of 1,581 proteins were detected in cyst fluids, of which 841 were quantified in all samples using LC-MS/MS. Proteins with different expression levels between cPTCs and benign lesions were identified by univariate analysis (41 proteins) and multivariate analysis (59 proteins in an orthogonal partial least squares model). WB analyses of cyst fluid and IHC on corresponding tissue samples confirmed a significant up-regulation of cytokeratin 19 (CK-19/CYFRA 21-1) and S100A13 in cPTC vs. benign lesions. These findings were further confirmed by ELISA in an extended material of non-depleted cyst fluids from cPTCs (n = 17) and benign lesions (n = 55) (p&lt;0.05). Applying a cut-off at &gt;55 ng/ml for CK-19 resulted in 82% specificity and sensitivity. For S100A13 a cut-off at &gt;230 pg/ml revealed a 94% sensitivity, but only 35% specificity. This is the first comprehensive catalogue of the protein content in fluid from thyroid cysts. The up-regulations of CK-19 and S100A13 suggest their possible use in FNAB based preoperative diagnostics of cystic thyroid lesions.

### Keywords
Biomarker discovery, Proximal fluid, Isoelectric focusing, Cystic fluid, Papillary thyroid carcinoma

### Affiliations
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Clinical proteomics mass spectrometry, Science for Life Laboratory, Sweden.
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Maria Pernemalm

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Clinical proteomics mass spectrometry, Science for Life Laboratory, Sweden.


