### Accession
PXD023404

### Title
Dictyostelium DIA LFQ proteomics of vegetative and developmental growth

### Description
Dictyostelium discoideum behavior depends on nutrients. When sufficient food is present these amoebae exist in a unicellular state (vegetative growth), but upon starvation they aggregate into a multicellular organism (developmental growth). For proteomics 30 minutes and eight hour cultures of D. discoideum under vegetative and starved growth conditions were compared by DIA-LFQ. This unique biology makes D. discoideum an ideal model for investigating how fundamental metabolism commands cell differentiation and function. We show here that reactive oxygen species (ROS), generated as a consequence of nutrient limitation, lead to the sequestration of the amino acid cysteine in the antioxidant glutathione, limiting the use of its sulfur atom for processes such as protein translation and FeS cluster-containing enzyme activity that contribute to mitochondrial metabolism and cellular proliferation. Such regulated sulfur sequestration maintains D. discoideum in a non-proliferating state that paves the way for multicellular development. This new mechanism of ROS signaling highlights oxygen and sulfur as simple, early evolutionary signaling molecules dictating cell fate, with implications for responses to nutrient fluctuations in higher eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation was carried out (starting from 1x10^7 cells, each) using the iST sample preparation kit (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation.  All samples were spiked with iRT (index Retention Time) kit peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The general nanoLC–MS setup consisted of an Easy nanoLC-1200 interfaced to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the chromatographic separation of peptides, 4 μg peptide digest was analyzed at 50 °C (controlled by Sonation column oven, Germany) on a 50 cm in-house packed fused-silica emitter microcolumn (75 μm ID × 360 µm OD SilicaTip PicoTip; New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm reverse-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). Peptides were separated by a 4 h linear gradient of 5–80% (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. DIA acquisition included a single MS1 survey scan at 35,000 resolution followed by 21 DIA windows.

### Data Protocol
Spectral libraries (Dictyostellium03_20180726_170546.kit; iRTKit\V10122015-111336_HRM_Kit_U.kit) were generated by Spectronaut (version 10.0 and 14.7) utilizing MaxQuant results as an input. Fifteen shotgun (DDA) runs (using 2-3 biological replicates from each biological condition) were acquired using a Q Exactive Plus instrument as outlined above, and data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0). The spectral library was constructed using an FDR cutoff of 1% and a minimum and maximum of 3 and 6 fragments ions, respectively, while protein grouping was performed according to MaxQuant search results.  Briefly, DDA MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0), and peak lists were searched against the Dictyostellium discoideum UniProt FASTA database (version March 2017) concatenated with an in-house contaminant protein database by the Andromeda search engine embedded in MaxQuant. The MS2-based label-free quantification was carried out by analyzing DIA raw data utilizing Biognosys Spectronaut (version 10.0 and 14.7) software employing default parameters. Briefly, the decoy method was set to ”mutated”, data extraction and extraction window were set to “dynamic” with correction factor 1, identification was set to “normal -distribution p-value  estimator” with q-value cutoff of 0.01. The profiling strategy was set to “iRT profiling” with q-value cutoff of 0.01. Ultimately, protein quantity was set to “Average precursor quantity” and smallest quantitative unit was set to “Precursor ion” (summed fragment ions). For statistical testing and identification of deregulated proteins in all approaches, a two-sample Student’s t-test was employed to identify differentially expressed proteins filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The behaviour of Dictyostelium discoideum depends on nutrients<sup>1</sup>. When sufficient food is present these amoebae exist in a unicellular state, but upon starvation they aggregate into a multicellular organism<sup>2,3</sup>. This biology makes D.&#xa0;discoideum an ideal model for investigating how fundamental metabolism commands cell differentiation and function. Here we show that reactive oxygen species-generated as a consequence of nutrient limitation-lead to the sequestration of cysteine in the antioxidant glutathione. This sequestration limits the use of the sulfur atom of cysteine in processes that contribute to mitochondrial metabolism and cellular proliferation, such as protein translation and the activity of enzymes that contain an iron-sulfur cluster. The regulated sequestration of sulfur maintains D.&#xa0;discoideum in a nonproliferating state that paves the way for multicellular development. This mechanism of signalling through reactive oxygen species highlights oxygen and sulfur as simple signalling molecules that dictate cell fate in an&#xa0;early eukaryote, with implications for responses to nutrient fluctuations in multicellular eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Dictyostelium discoideum; non-starved (vegetative); starved (developmental); dia hyper reaction monitoring; spectronaut; sulfur metabolism; reactive oxygen species;

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Proteomics Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stuebeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Proteomics Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stuebeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany


