### Accession
PXD000867

### Title
Cell type-resolved quantitative proteomics of mouse liver

### Description
Proteomics of pure cell populations provides a powerful approach to globally investigate biological function of individual cell types in mammalian organs. Here, we applied latest mass spectrometry techniques for in-depth proteomic analysis of freshly isolated hepatic cell types (HC-types) from murine liver. This study provides a valuable comprehensive resource for liver biology and biomedicine.

### Sample Protocol
Male C57BL/6J mice (8-10 weeks old) were used in each experiment for isolation of HC-types. HC-types were isolated with different protocols according to their particular density and immunogenic properties. Cell lysis, protein digestion and peptide fractionation were done as describe before (Kulak et al., 2014). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by Q Exacitive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files (177 files) were processed by MaxQuant (Version 1.4.1.4) software at FDR<0.01 for proteins and peptides (Cox and Mann, 2008). The peak lists were searched against the Mouse Uniprot FASTA database version 2/25/2012 (54232 entries). The proteins and peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) were determined by searching a reverse database. The Quantification of peptides and proteins was carried out by MaxQuant with standard Label-free quantification settings.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics provides a powerful approach to globally investigate the biological function of individual cell types in mammalian organs. Here, we applied this technology to the in-depth analysis of purified hepatic cell types from mouse. We quantified 11,520 proteins, making this the most comprehensive proteomic resource of any organ to date. Global protein copy number determination demonstrated that a large proportion of the hepatocyte proteome is dedicated to fatty acid and xenobiotic metabolism. We identified as-yet-unknown components of the TGF-&#x3b2; signaling pathway and extracellular matrix in hepatic stellate cells, uncovering their regulative role in liver physiology. Moreover, our high-resolution proteomic data set enabled us to compare the distinct functional roles of hepatic cell types in cholesterol flux, cellular trafficking, and growth factor receptor signaling. This study provides a comprehensive resource for liver biology and biomedicine.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Liver, Cell type, Murine

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institut of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institut of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany.


