### Accession
PXD004986

### Title
Common and ancestral histone patterns in newly identified human cellular structures.

### Description
High resolution Mass Spectrometry and Peptides identification uncovered ancestral giant  insect viruses motifs within Histone-4 peptides  in human liver cells. These peptides did not match any human sequence. This finding consolidates the dogma that molecular patterns are universal and suggests that metazoan cellular structures possibly share an evolutionary link with ancient giant viruses.

### Sample Protocol
We identified new cellular structures in human cells. These human structures have strong morphological similarities with giant viruses and carry conventional human histone proteins along with histone variants having the viral footprints of giant viruses. However, although manifesting morphological and biochemical properties of giant viruses, the newly identified human structures are not giant viruses infecting humans. Their ubiquitous distribution within the cells, make these structures not very different from other cellular organelles like the Golgi apparatus, mitochondria or ribosome engaged in the translation machinery. The structures are suggestive of cellular niches where an ancestral shuttling system, possibly evolutionary linked to giant viruses, is in place to control human transcription in addition to or on top of the conventional human histone variants.

### Data Protocol
mmunoblot positive bands from frozen and FFPE, were analyzed by Mass Spectrometry (nano LC-ESI-MS/MS), using a Thermo Orbitrap XL with CID fragmentation. Protein fractions were investigated with protein identification using PEAKS 7.5 software  (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) . Proteins were identified using MS/MS ion search.  The csv file (Q5ZP39_9VIRU_CombinedSearch.csv) shows the full details of all identification made searching the combined human and viral database within a 1% false discovery rate. The search parameters were :20 ppm precursor error tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment error tolerance, trypsin allowing non-specific cleavage at 1 end and a maximum of 3 missed cleaves, carbamidomethylation set as a fixed ptm, acetylation(k), oxidation (M), deamidation(NQ), formylation (K, Nterm), phosphorylation (STY) set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
BSI
St Vincent Hospital, Dublin, Ireland

### Submitter
Dan Maloney

### Lab Head
Dr Lusi Elena Angela
St Vincent Hospital, Dublin, Ireland


