### Accession
PXD041616

### Title
NOD Mouse Islet Peptide Content Identification

### Description
Beta-cells produce hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs) by linking insulin fragments to other peptides through peptide bonds. HIPs have unique amino acid sequences and are targeted by autoreactive T cells in type 1 diabetes (T1D). Individuals with recent-onset T1D have significantly higher levels of HIP-reactive T cells in their blood compared to non-diabetic control subjects. HIP-reactive T cells have also been found in the residual pancreatic islets of deceased T1D organ donors. In non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, a major T1D animal model, several CD4 T cell clones that trigger diabetes have been shown to target HIPs. Through mass spectrometry, a subgroup of HIPs containing N-terminal amine groups of various peptides linked to aspartic acid residues of insulin C-peptide has been detected in NOD islets. Our research reveals that these HIPs form spontaneously in beta-cells via an aspartic anhydride intermediate mechanism. This process leads to the creation of a regular HIP with a standard peptide bond and a HIP-isomer (isoHIP) with an isopeptide bond linked to the carboxylic acid side-chain of the aspartic acid residue. Our mass spectrometric analyses confirmed the presence of both HIP isomers in murine islets, thereby validating the occurrence of this new reaction mechanism in beta-cells. The spontaneous formation of neoepitopes through the development of new peptide bonds within cells may contribute to the pathogenesis of T1D and other autoimmune diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Murine NOD islets were prepared from whole mouse pancreata at the University of Colorado Diabetes Research Center (DRC) Tissue Procurement and Processing Core (K. Scott Beard). We observed no differences in the sex of mice used for islet isolation.Two vials of 750 islet equivalents were resuspended in 50ul of water and 50ul of TFE then sonicated for 5 minutes. The islets were then heated for 10 minutes at 95°C and briefly vortexed every 2 minutes. The islets were  sonicated for another 5 minutes, vortexed, then spun down at 17,000xg. Supernatants from the Islet homogenates  were then run  on an HPLC SEC column [Agilent – XBridge BEH200A 3.5 um, 7.8x150 mm, PN186007639] with 25mM ammonium acetate running buffer at 1 mL/min  and 4 fractions were collected in order to isolate peptides from proteins. The fractions were then reduced and alkylated and one set of fractions was AspN digested while the second set of fractions was not digested prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Prepared NOD islets were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Agilent 1200 series UHPLC system with a nanoflow adapter and an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF equipped with a nano-ESI source. Online separation was accomplished by reversed-phase liquid chromatography using a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (75 μm × 2 cm; 3 μm particles; 100 Å pores) and Thermo Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm inner diameter; 2 μm particles; 100 Å pores) in a trap forward-elute configuration using a water/acetonitrile gradient (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile in water).

### Publication Abstract
Hybrid insulin peptides (HIPs) form in beta-cells when insulin fragments link to other peptides through a peptide bond. HIPs contain nongenomic amino acid sequences and have been identified as targets for autoreactive T cells in type 1 diabetes. A subgroup of HIPs, in which N-terminal amine groups of various peptides are linked to aspartic acid residues of insulin C-peptide, was detected through mass spectrometry in pancreatic islets. Here, we investigate a novel mechanism that leads to the formation of these HIPs in human and murine islets. Our research herein shows that these HIPs form spontaneously in beta-cells through a mechanism involving an aspartic anhydride intermediate. This mechanism leads to the formation of a regular HIP containing a standard peptide bond as well as a HIP-isomer containing an isopeptide bond by linkage to the carboxylic acid side chain of the aspartic acid residue. We used mass spectrometric analyses to confirm the presence of both HIP isomers in islets, thereby validating the occurrence of this novel reaction mechanism in beta-cells. The spontaneous formation of new peptide bonds within cells may lead to the development of neoepitopes that contribute to the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes as well as other autoimmune diseases.

### Keywords
Nod mouse, Peptides, Lc-msms, Hips, Islet cells

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado - Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA
University of Colorado Anschutz

### Submitter
Samantha Crawford

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Delong
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado - Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA


