### Accession
PXD011153

### Title
Proteome characterization of Spleen during Schistosoma mansoni infection

### Description
Schistosomiasis is a chronic parasitic disease that affects more that 230 million people worldwide. In the Americas, it caused by the blood flook Schistosoma mansoni. This parasite has a complex life cycle with two intermediary hosts. When infecting mammals, schistosomes cause an intense immune response to the presence of the different stages of the parasite within the host. After maturation of the worms and commencing of the oviposition, some eggs are transported via circulation to the liver, where they elicit an exaggerated inflammatory response in the tissue. This could lead to the formation of granulomas and liver fibrosis and along with this, the developent of hepatosplenomegaly and in the worst scenario could lead to the dead of the patient. In this project, we aim to make a shotgun evaluation of the proteome from splenocytes in a mice model, in order to identify novel molecular signatures associated with the immune respose to the presence of the parasite in the hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extract from whole murine spleen were prepared in presence of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 buffer (1mM DTT, 1% PIC) using a tissue homogenizer. 30 μg protein previously treated with RapiGest SF were sequencially incubatated in the presence of DTT and Iodoacetamide. The enzymatic digestion of the proteins were carried out by addition of trypsin in the proportion of 1:50 and overnight incubation. LC-MS/MS analyses was performed in a nanoHPLC Dionex (C18 trap and separation columns) coupled to a Q-Exactive system, while elution of digested peptides were performed in a gradient  using water and acetonitrile:water 80:20 (0.1%¨formic acid, both) in 185 min (3.8 to 99% of acetonitrile). The mass spectrometry acquisition followed the DDA method collecting the TOP 12 ions in the 300-2000 m/z band, 30 V of normalized collision energy and exclusion time of 40 s.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed in Pattern Lab for proteomics software(version 4.0). Sequences from mouse were downloaded from UniprotKB (https://www.uniprot.org/) and a target-reverse database was generated using the processing software. Peptide sequence matching using the Comet algorithm were performed and then filtered using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) and a match was considered true for a tryptic peptide candidates with carbamidomethylation as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable PTMs under the range of less than 3% False discoverer rate for spectra, 2% for peptide and 1% for protein. The quantification was executed using the NSAF normalization and the TFold method embedded in the Patternlab for Proteomics software. The quantification parameters were fixed to 0.3 for F-stringency, 0.4 for L-stringency and 0.05 for BH q-value. Identities and quantification data was exported into csv files and loaded into R for data mining, categorization and pathway/enrichment analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Schistosomiasis is a neglected parasitic disease that affects millions of people worldwide and is caused by helminth parasites from the genus <i>Schistosoma</i>. When caused by <i>S. mansoni</i>, it is associated with the development of a hepatosplenic disease caused by an intense immune response to the important antigenic contribution of adult worms and to the presence of eggs trapped in liver tissue. Although the importance of the spleen for the establishment of immune pathology is widely accepted, it has received little attention in terms of the molecular mechanisms operating in response to the infection. Here, we interrogated the spleen proteome using a label-free shotgun approach for the potential discovery of molecular mechanisms associated to the peak of the acute phase of inflammation and the development of splenomegaly in the murine model. Over fifteen hundred proteins were identified in both infected and control individuals and 325 of those proteins were differentially expressed. Two hundred and forty-two proteins were found upregulated in infected individuals while 83 were downregulated. Functional enrichment analyses for differentially expressed proteins showed that most of them were categorized within pathways of innate and adaptive immunity, DNA replication, vesicle transport and catabolic metabolism. There was an important contribution of granulocyte proteins and antigen processing and presentation pathways were augmented, with the increased expression of MHC class II molecules but the negative regulation of cysteine and serine proteases. Several proteins related to RNA processing were upregulated, including splicing factors. We also found indications of metabolic reprogramming in spleen cells with downregulation of proteins related to mitochondrial metabolism. <i>Ex-vivo</i> imunophenotyping of spleen cells allowed us to attribute the higher abundance of MHC II detected by mass spectrometry to increased number of macrophages (F4/80<sup>+</sup>/MHC II<sup>+</sup> cells) in the infected condition. We believe these findings add novel insights for the understanding of the immune mechanisms associated with the establishment of schistosomiasis and the processes of immune modulation implied in the host-parasite interactions.

### Keywords
Spleen, Immunology, Schitosoma mansoni

### Affiliations
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Enzimologia e Proteômica, Instituto de Ciencias Ciências Exatas e Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Brasil
Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto

### Submitter
William Borges

### Lab Head
Dr William Castro Borges
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Laboratório de Enzimologia e Proteômica, Instituto de Ciencias Ciências Exatas e Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto, Brasil


