### Accession
PXD034587

### Title
Functional and molecular dissection of viral lncRNAs throughout HCMV life cycle

### Description
Small, compact genomes confer a selective advantage to viruses, yet human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) expresses the long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) RNA1.2, RNA2.7, RNA4.9, and RNA5.0. These lncRNAs account for majority of the viral transcriptome, but their functions remain largely unknown. Here, we showed that HCMV lncRNAs, except for RNA5.0, are required throughout the entire viral life cycle. Deletion of each lncRNA resulted in a decrease in viral progeny during lytic replication and failing to efficiently establish latent reservoirs and reactivate. Nanopore direct RNA sequencing of native lncRNA molecules revealed that each lncRNA exhibited a dynamic modification landscape, depending on the state of infection. Global analysis of the lncRNA interactome identified 32, 11, and 89 host factors that specifically bind to RNA1.2, RNA2.7, and RNA4.9, respectively. Moreover, 52 proteins commonly bound to the three lncRNAs were identified, including 11 antiviral immunity-related proteins. Our molecular analyses found that three lncRNAs are modified with N⁶-methyladenosine (m6A) and interact with m6A readers in all infection states. In-depth functional analysis revealed that m6A–mediated lncRNA stabilization as the key mechanism by which lncRNAs are maintained at high levels. Our study lays the groundwork for understanding viral lncRNA–mediated regulation of host-virus interaction throughout the HCMV life cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Per replicate for each lncRNA, 60 million HFFs were infected with HCMV Toledo ( 3 MOI ) and detached from culture dishes by trypsin. The cell pellets were resuspended with 6 mL of ice-cold PBS and dispersed in 100 mm dishes to irradiate 254 nm UV for 800 mJ/cm2 using Spectrolinker XL-1500. UV-crosslinked cells were frozen with liquid phase of nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Frozen cell pellet was thawed and resuspended in TURBO DNase solution (10 Units per million cells) and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. DNA digested cells were supplemented with equal volume of pre-heated 2X lysis buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 1 M LiCl, 1% LDS, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 8 M urea) and denatured by incubating at 68°C for 30 minutes. Lysate was centrifuged at 15,000g for 20 min to remove insoluble pellet. Take out 1/100th of “Input RNA” sample and store it at 4 °C to measure RNA yield later. Remaining cell lysates were loaded into Amicon 100K filter (Merck) that had been previously washed with 1X lysis buffer. Spin down cell lysates at 3,200 g and 4 °C until upper chamber volume reduces to 1/7th of original volume. UV-crosslinked RNP complexes were concentrated in the upper chamber. Concentrated RNP was split into three of 2 mL protein-LOBIND tube (Eppendorf) and each sample was mixed with 6 μg biotin probe pools (Each sense-lncRNA or antisense-lncRNA targeting probes) or distilled water (No probe). Hybridization was performed by incubating at 68°C for 10 minutes and rotation at room-temperature for 3 h. Biotin-labeled RNP lysates were supplemented with streptavidin beads (300 μL per sample, New England Biolabs) and captured by rotating at room temperature overnight. Probe-enriched RNP beads were washed with 1X lysis buffer and transferred to fresh tubes, followed by final wash with detergent-free wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 0.5 M LiCl, 1 mM EDTA). 1/10th of beads were set aside for assessment of RNA contents by RT-qPCR. The remaining 9/10th of beads were digested with 100 units of Benzonase nuclease (Millipore) at 37 °C for 1 hour. 1/10th of digested samples were used for silver staining (KOMA biotech) and the remaining 9/10th of digested samples were subjected for MS analysis. For on-bead peptide digestion, nuclease treated beads were suspended to final 8 M urea and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hour each at 37 °C, and diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to final 1 M urea. These bead suspensions were supplemented with 300 ng Trypsin (Thermo Scientific, MS grade) and 1 mM CaCl2 and digested overnight at 37 °C. Peptide solutions were separated from magnetic beads and subjected with HiPPR detergent removal spin columns (Thermo Scientific) and desalted by reverse phase C18 ziptip (Millipore). After the clean-up, the samples were reconstituted with 20 μL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data files were processed for Label-Free Quantification with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the built-in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011)  at default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Small, compact genomes confer a selective advantage to viruses, yet human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) expresses the long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs); RNA1.2, RNA2.7, RNA4.9, and RNA5.0. Little is known about the function of these lncRNAs in the virus life cycle. Here, we dissected the functional and molecular landscape of HCMV lncRNAs. We found that HCMV lncRNAs occupy&#x2009;~&#x2009;30% and 50-60% of total and poly(A)+viral transcriptome, respectively, throughout virus life cycle. RNA1.2, RNA2.7, and RNA4.9, the three abundantly expressed lncRNAs, appear to be essential in all infection states. Among these three lncRNAs, depletion of RNA2.7 and RNA4.9 results in the greatest defect in maintaining latent reservoir and promoting lytic replication, respectively. Moreover, we delineated the global post-transcriptional nature of HCMV lncRNAs by nanopore direct RNA sequencing and interactome analysis. We revealed that the lncRNAs are modified with N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) and interact with m<sup>6</sup>A readers in all infection states. In-depth analysis demonstrated that m<sup>6</sup>A machineries stabilize HCMV lncRNAs, which could account for the overwhelming abundance of viral lncRNAs. Our study lays the groundwork for understanding the viral lncRNA-mediated regulation of host-virus interaction throughout the HCMV life cycle.

### Keywords
Hcmv, Lncrna, Rna modification

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University

### Submitter
Sungwon Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Kwangseog Ahn
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University


