### Accession
PXD011576

### Title
Bufffalo serum iTRAQ -  Global serum proteomic changes in water buffaloes infected with Fasciola gigantica

### Description
Fasciola gigantica infects buffalo in Asian and African countries and causes significant economic losses. As a kind of zoonotic parasite disease, human infection has been reported and make fascioliasis patients suffer heavy abdominal pain, anemia and workforce loss. Fasciola can modulate host immune responses to survive from immune attack and some mechanisms have been reported with its antigen protein. Protein, as the chief actors within the cell, presents the dynamic changes of body with its specific changes and serves as unexceptionable biomarkers in many disease-detections. But there is not any study about serum proteomic for diagnostic target seeking in buffalo after infection with F. gigantica. Herein, Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) and Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) technologies were used in the present study to reveal the dynamic changes of proteins in buffalo serum after infected with F. gigantica. Six proteins were found significantly regulated in all three groups which reminds us that they could be used as new diagnostic biomarkers in buffalo throughout F. gigantica infection. All these are new findings in buffalo after infection with F. gigantica and could provide a new insight into the potential possibility in this parasite clearance.

### Sample Protocol
whole blood samples of all animals in each group were collected before sacrifice aseptically into tubes without anticoagulant and were separated by centrifugation for collection. Highly-abundant proteins were depleted by the ProteoMinerTM protein enrichment kit (Bio-Rad) following manufacturer's instruction. Desalted peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents (iTRAQ® Reagent-8PLEX Multiplex Kit, Sigma) according to the manufacturer's instructions. iTRAQ-labeled peptide mix was fractionated using Durashell RP column on a Rigol L3000 HPLC operating at 1 mL/min. Shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Obitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files (Wiff files) from Triple-TOF 5600 were first searched by ProteinPilot version 4.2 using Paragon search engine against the Bos taurus protein database. Three databases are used to predict gene and protein functions. They were GO (Gene Ontology), KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes)and COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum, Itraq, Buffalo

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Fu-Kai Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing-Quan Zhu
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China


