### Accession
PXD008266

### Title
A proteomics approach reveals function of Secretory Carrier-Associated Membrane Proteins in wood formation of​ ​​Populus​​ ​trees

### Description
Secretory Carrier-Associated Membrane Proteins (SCAMPs) are highly conserved 32–38 kDa proteins that are involved in membrane trafficking. A proteomics approach was taken to elucidate function of the SCAMPs in wood formation of transgenic Populus trees carrying an RNAi construct for Populus tremula x tremuloides SCAMP3 (PttSCAMP3; Potri.019G104000).  Secondary xylem tissues were run on a SynaptTM G2 HDMS mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoflow electrospray ionization interface. Multivariate OnPLS (orthogonal projections to latent structures) modeling was applied to identify consistent changes in the proteomes of the transgenic lines compared to the wild type trees. The woody tissues of the transgenic trees displayed increased amounts of both polysaccharides and lignin oligomers, indicating increased deposition of both the carbohydrate and lignin components of the secondary cell walls. This coincided with slightly increased wood density as well as significantly increased thickness of the suberized cork in the transgenic lines. The OnPLS model identified a rather large number of proteins that were more abundant in the transgenic lines than in the wild type. Several of these were related to secretion and/or endocytosis as well as both primary and secondary cell wall biosynthesis, suggesting function of the Populus SCAMP proteins in membrane trafficking to fine-tune the abundance of cell wall precursors and/or proteins involved in cell wall biosynthesis and transport. The data provides a multi-level source of information for future studies on the function of the SCAMP proteins in plant stem tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from 20 mg of frozen stem tissue powder as described in Masuda et al. (2008). The samples were run on a SynaptTM G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, UK) equipped with a nanoflow electrospray ionization interface according to Obudulu et al. (2016). Masuda T, Tomita M, Ishihama Y. Phase Transfer Surfactant-Aided Trypsin Digestion for Membrane Proteome Analysis. J. Proteome Res. 2008;7:731–40. Obudulu O, Bygdell J, Sundberg B, Moritz T, Hvidsten TR, Trygg J, et al. Quantitative proteomics reveals protein profiles underlying major transitions in aspen wood development. BMC Genomics 2016;17:119.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with Protein Lynx Global Server v.3.0 (Waters) and the resulting spectra were searched against Populus trichocarpa v3.0 sequences compiled in the JGI Comparative Plant Genomics Portal database (http://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov) along with sequences for human keratin and rabbit glycogen phosphorylase. The database search settings were: enzyme-specific cleavage with one miss-cleavage allowed; oxidized methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, peptide and fragment tolerance 10 and 25 ppm, respectively; and a false positive rate of 3 %. Detected proteins were quantified from the sum of the top three matched peptide intensities, as the average intensity of the three most intense peptides strongly correlates with absolute amounts of their source proteins (Silva et al., 2005; Distler et al., 2014). All samples were weighed prior to extraction and protein peak area data were normalized relative to the weight. Only unique peptides were used for calculation of the protein abundancies. Obudulu O, Bygdell J, Sundberg B, Moritz T, Hvidsten TR, Trygg J, et al. Quantitative proteomics reveals protein profiles underlying major transitions in aspen wood development. BMC Genomics 2016;17:119. Silva JC, Denny R, Dorschel CA, Gorenstein M, Kass IJ, Li GZ, McKenna T, Nold MJ, Richardson K, Young P, Geromanos S. Quantitative proteomic analysis by accurate mass retention time pairs. Anal Chem. 2005;77:2187–2200. Distler U, Kuharev J, Navarro P, Levin Y, Schild H, Tenzer S. Drift time-specific collision energies enable deep-coverage data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat Methods. 2014;11:167–70.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xylem, Hdmse, Wood formation, Populus

### Affiliations
Computational Life Science Cluster (CLiC),
Deptartment of Chemistry, Umeå University
Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Plant Physiology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden

### Submitter
Joakim Bygdell

### Lab Head
Dr Hannele Tuominen
Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Plant Physiology, Umeå University, 90187 Umeå, Sweden


