### Accession
PXD037957

### Title
Mining Nudibranch Symbionts for Biosynthesis of novel Secondary Metabolites

### Description
Metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic analysis of C.quadricolor symbiotic bacteria for discovery of new potential biosynthetic clusters

### Sample Protocol
Three samples were prepared for metaproteomic analysis. Proteins were Extracted by urea denaturation protocol and digested through three steps: reduction, alkylation and trypsinization. Proteins and peptides were quantified using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA assay). Then 1 μg/10 μl of each sample was injected in NanoLC system consisting of Eksigent nanoLC 400 autosampler attached with Ekspert nanoLC425 pump with adjustment of certain parameters. Finally, Samples were run on Sciex TripleTOFTM 5600+ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Spectra files produced from mass spectrometry were converted from WIFF format to MGF format by Sciex(1.3.1)converter. Then, MGF files were mapped against our created biosunthetictranscripts clusters database using MetaProteomeAnalyzer software (3.0). Identified Biosynthetic proteins were combined across all samples, dereplicated, and filtered according to peptide coverage and protein length.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bcgs, Secondary metabolites, Metaproteomic, Nudibranch, Metatranscriptomic

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Delta University for Science and Technology
Delta university for science and technology

### Submitter
Esraa Elsaeed

### Lab Head
Dr Esraa Elsaeed Sobhy
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Delta University for Science and Technology


