### Accession
PXD007748

### Title
Populus Drought Stress -  Quantitative proteome profile of water deficit stress responses in eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides) leaves

### Description
We sought to generate a comprehensive proteomic profile for a Populus plant that captures protein abundance behavioral differences in mature leaves under various water deficit conditions. The sudden infliction of severe drought is unlikely to reflect what naturally happens to soil-grown plants. Therefore, rather than exposing plants to severe dehydration via the application of concentrated osmotica (e.g., polyethylene glycol or mannitol), we aimed to monitor plants exposed to prolonged drought as well as plants frequently experiencing cyclic drought. For the progressive drought experiment, herein referred to as acute drought, water will be withheld from the plants for a certain period of time until symptoms of wilting are observed. From this drought treatment, protein abundance changes that occur because of declining water potentials that consequently lead to worsening plant health will provide new insights to biological pathways in response to severe drought conditions. On the other hand, as a consequence of simulating a more natural condition, the cyclic drought treatment will provide novel insights into drought recovery and coping mechanisms. As first noted in a meta-analysis of microarray experiments comparing different water deficit-related treatments3, one consequence of analyzing multiple treatment conditions is that we expect only a few differentially abundant proteins to be common to both treatments. Therefore, we implemented a bioinformatic framework to provide an overall integrative picture of the conserved drought markers but also meaningful divergences in functional behavioral responses between the two experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis protein extraction were performed by an SDS-containing lysis buffer and TCA precipitation, respectively. One milligram of proteins were digested with trypsin. 50 µg of each peptide mixture were bomb-loaded onto a biphasic MudPIT back column packed with ~5 cm strong cation exchange (SCX) resin followed by ~3 cm C18 reversed phase (RP) and analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
All experimental MS/MS spectra were compared to theoretical tryptic peptide sequences generated from a FASTA database containing the full protein complement of the Populus trichocarpa v3.0 database (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov), appended with chloroplast, mitochondria and common contaminant proteins. A decoy database, consisting of the reversed sequences of the target database, was appended in order to discern the false-discovery rate (FDR) at the spectral level. For standard database searching, the peptide fragmentation spectra (MS/MS) were searched with MyriMatch algorithm. For protein inference and post-search filtering, database search results for each sample were merged together in IDPicker.

### Publication Abstract
Drought stress is a recurring feature of world climate and the single most important factor influencing agricultural yield worldwide. Plants display highly variable, species-specific responses to drought and these responses are multifaceted, requiring physiological and morphological changes influenced by genetic and molecular mechanisms. Moreover, the reproducibility of water deficit studies is very cumbersome, which significantly impedes research on drought tolerance, because how a plant responds is highly influenced by the timing, duration, and intensity of the water deficit. Despite progress in the identification of drought-related mechanisms in many plants, the molecular basis of drought resistance remains to be fully understood in trees, particularly in poplar species because their wide geographic distribution results in varying tolerances to drought. Herein, we aimed to better understand this complex phenomenon in eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides) by performing a detailed contrast of the proteome changes between two different water deficit experiments to identify functional intersections and divergences in proteome responses. We investigated plants subjected to cyclic water deficit and compared these responses to plants subjected to prolonged acute water deficit. In total, we identified 108,012 peptide sequences across both experiments that provided insight into the quantitative state of 22,737 Populus gene models and 8,199 functional protein groups in response to drought. Together, these datasets provide the most comprehensive insight into proteome drought responses in poplar to date and a direct proteome comparison between short period dehydration shock and cyclic, post-drought re-watering. Overall, this investigation provides novel insights into drought avoidance mechanisms that are distinct from progressive drought stress. Additionally, we identified proteins that have been associated as drought-relevant in previous studies. Importantly, we highlight the RD26 transcription factor as a gene regulated at both the transcript and protein level, regardless of species and drought condition, and, thus, represents a key, universal drought marker for Populus species.

### Keywords
Plant, Lc-ms/ms, Populus, Drought

### Affiliations
Chemical Sciences Division at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831
Oak Ridge National Laboratory

### Submitter
Paul Abraham

### Lab Head
Dr Paul E. Abraham
Chemical Sciences Division at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831


