### Accession
PXD001859

### Title
Coordinated assembly of NHE3, IRBIT, NHERF1, and ezrin ameliorates fluid malabsorption in diabetes

### Description
Clinical evidence supports the occurrence of intermittent diarrhea in many type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) patients. Others and we found that net fluid absorption rate is dramatically lower in the ileum of T1DM murine models. However, the identity of molecules that contribute to fluid malabsorption in the gut remains unknown. Considering the importance of ion transporters and channels for intestinal fluid absorption, we reasoned that their expression level at the luminal membrane is altered under diabetic conditions. To this end, we analyzed the brush border membrane vesicles (BBMVs) from the ileum of control and DM mice by proteomic analysis. The expression levels of Cl-/HCO3- exchanger SLC26A3/DRA and cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) were not significantly different between control and DM mice. Cl-/HCO3- exchanger Slc26a6/PAT1 and Na+/H+ exchanger 3 (NHE3) were not detected. Interestingly, cytoskeleton scaffold proteins that regulate NHE3, including NHERF1-3 and ezrin, were all significantly lower in diabetic animals.

### Sample Protocol
CF-1 mice were administered (i.p.) with streptozotocin (50 mg/kg body weight) for 5 consecutive days, and hyperglycemia was confirmed by blood glucose level over 300 mg/dL. Three months after T1DM induction, ileal tissue was collected from control and T1DM mice and BBMVs were prepared. At the last step of purification, three samples of each control and diabetes were pooled together. BBMV pellets were solubilized in 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0.The quality of BBMV preparation was confirmed by enrichment of apical membrane protein NHE3, but not of basolateral protein Na+, K+-ATPase. Protein expression profile of the control and diabetic samples was analyzed through Mass Spectrometry by MS Bioworks (Ann Arbor, MI).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to MGF files using Proteome Discover v1.4. MGF files were searched using Mascot v2.5 against the Swissprot Mouse concatenated forward/decoy database. Mascot DAT files were parsed in Scaffold and filtered at 1% FDR (protein and peptide level). Spectral counts were converted to Normalized Spectral Abundance Factors (NSAF), these values were used to compare the two samples.

### Publication Abstract
Diarrhea is one of the troublesome complications of diabetes, and the underlying causes of this problem are complex. Here, we investigated whether altered electrolyte transport contributes to diabetic diarrhea. We found that the expression of Na+/H+ exchanger NHE3 and several scaffold proteins, including NHE3 regulatory factors (NHERFs), inositol trisphosphate (IP&#x2083;) receptor-binding protein released with IP&#x2083; (IRBIT), and ezrin, was decreased in the intestinal brush border membrane (BBM) of mice with streptozotocin-induced diabetes. Treatment of diabetic mice with insulin restored intestinal NHE3 activity and fluid absorption. Molecular analysis revealed that NHE3, NHERF1, IRBIT, and ezrin form macrocomplexes, which are perturbed under diabetic conditions, and insulin administration reconstituted these macrocomplexes and restored NHE3 expression in the BBM. Silencing of NHERF1 or IRBIT prevented NHE3 trafficking to the BBM and insulin-dependent NHE3 activation. IRBIT facilitated the interaction of NHE3 with NHERF1 via protein kinase D2-dependent phosphorylation. Insulin stimulated ezrin phosphorylation, which enhanced the interaction of ezrin with NHERF1, IRBIT, and NHE3. Additionally, oral administration of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) increased NHE3 activity and fluid absorption in diabetic mice via an insulin-independent pathway. Together, these findings indicate the importance of NHE3 in diabetic diarrhea and suggest LPA administration as a potential therapeutic strategy for management of diabetic diarrhea.

### Keywords
Scaffold proteins, Intestine, Ion transporters, Brush border membrane, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA
Emory University

### Submitter
Peijian He

### Lab Head
Dr Peijian He1
Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA


