### Accession
PXD010945

### Title
Proteases Shape the Chlamydomonas Secretome: Comparison to Classical Neuropeptide Processing Machinery

### Description
The recent identification of catalytically active peptidylglycine -amidating monooxygenase (PAM) in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular green alga, suggested the presence of a PAM-like gene and peptidergic signaling in the last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA).  Homologs of prototypical neuropeptide precursors and essential peptide processing enzymes (subtilisin-like prohormone convertases and carboxypeptidase B-like enzymes) were identified in the C. reinhardtii genome.  Reasoning that sexual reproduction by C. reinhardtii requires extensive communication between cells, we used mass spectroscopy to identify proteins recovered from the soluble secretome of mating gametes and searched for evidence that the putative peptidergic processing enzymes were functional.After fractionation by SDS-PAGE, signal peptide-containing proteins that remained intact or were subjected to cleavage were identified.  The C. reinhardtii mating secretome contained multiple matrix metalloproteinases, cysteine endopeptidases and serine carboxypeptidases, along with one subtilisin-like proteinase.  Published transcriptomic studies support a role for these proteases in sexual reproduction.  Multiple extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) were identified in the soluble mating secretome.  Several pherophorins, ECM glycoproteins homologous to the Volvox sex-inducing pheromone, were present; most contained typical peptide processing sites and had been cleaved, generating stable N- or C-terminal fragments.  Our data suggest that subtilisin endoproteases and matrix metalloproteinases similar to those important in vertebrate peptidergic and growth factor signaling play an important role in stage transitions during the life cycle of C. reinhardtii.

### Sample Protocol
Fractionation for mass spectroscopy Aliquots (40 µl) of each soluble mating secretome were prepared for SDS-PAGE by mixing with 4X Laemmli sample buffer (BioRad) and denaturation at 55°C for 5 min. Each sample was then fractionated on a Criterion TGX 4-15% gradient gel (BioRad).  Electrophoresis of the first set of samples was stopped when the dye band had traveled 3 cm and the gel was stained with QC Colloidal Coomassie (BioRad), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Based on molecular weight standards analyzed at the same time, each lane was cut into 10 slices that covered material migrating from the dye band to the top of the gel. Electrophoresis of the second set of samples was stopped when the dye band had traveled 2.5 cm; after staining with QC Colloidal Coomassie, each lane was cut into 4 slices covering the entire molecular weight range.  Gel slices were stored frozen in microfuge tubes before preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis after in-gel digestion with trypsin.  Mass spectrometry Gel bands were cut into small pieces, washed with 250 µl of 50% acetonitrile for 5 min with rocking, then washed with 50% acetonitrile/50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min on a tilt-table.  After a final 30 min wash with 50% acetonitrile/10 mM NH4HCO3, gel fragments were dried using a speed vacuum. Each spot was suspended in 30 µl of 10 mM NH4HCO3 containing 0.20 µg of digestion grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) and incubated at 37ºC for 16 hours. The digestion supernatant was acidified and placed into a vial for LC-MS/MS analysis (5 µl injected).    Data acquisition was conducted on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.  Reversed phase (RP)-LC-MS/MS was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer. After injection, samples were loaded into a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap column, 180 µm × 20 mm) at a flowrate of 5 µL/min and separated using a C18 column (nanoACQUITY column Peptide BEH C18, 75 µm × 250 mm). The compositions of mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. Peptides were eluted with a gradient extending from 3% to 20% mobile phase B in 85 min and then to 35% mobile phase B in another 35 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 37°C. The data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in a top speed data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. An Orbitrap full MS scan was performed in the range of 300–1500 m/z at  resolution setting of 120,000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 400000. Iterative isolation (with 1.6 Th isolation window and minimum intensity threshold of 50000) and fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of ions were carried out after the Orbitrap full MS scan.  Ions were injected with a maximum injection time of 110 ms and an AGC target of 100000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). MS2 spectra were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK), which was set up to search against the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii database. The search criteria included 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, trypsin enzyme and maximum missed cleavage sites of two. Dynamic modifications included propionamide on cysteine, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and Gly-loss+Amide on C-terminal glycine. Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator modeling of true and false matches.   Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
The recent identification of catalytically active peptidylglycine &#x3b1;-amidating monooxygenase (PAM) in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a unicellular green alga, suggested the presence of a PAM-like gene and peptidergic signaling in the last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA). We identified prototypical neuropeptide precursors and essential peptide processing enzymes (subtilisin-like prohormone convertases and carboxypeptidase B-like enzymes) in the <i>C.</i> <i>reinhardtii</i> genome. Reasoning that sexual reproduction by C. reinhardtii requires extensive communication between cells, we used mass spectrometry to identify proteins recovered from the soluble secretome of mating gametes, and searched for evidence that the putative peptidergic processing enzymes were functional. After fractionation by SDS-PAGE, signal peptide-containing proteins that remained intact, and those that had been subjected to cleavage, were identified. The C. reinhardtii mating secretome contained multiple matrix metalloproteinases, cysteine endopeptidases, and serine carboxypeptidases, along with one subtilisin-like proteinase. Published transcriptomic studies support a role for these proteases in sexual reproduction. Multiple extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) were identified in the secretome. Several pherophorins, ECM glycoproteins homologous to the <i>Volvox</i> sex-inducing pheromone, were present; most contained typical peptide processing sites, and many had been cleaved, generating stable N- or C-terminal fragments. Our data suggest that subtilisin endoproteases and matrix metalloproteinases similar to those important in vertebrate peptidergic and growth factor signaling play an important role in stage transitions during the life cycle of <i>C.</i> <i>reinhardtii</i>.

### Keywords
Mating, Prohormone convertase, Peptidylglycine -amidating monooxygenase, Pherophorin, Signal peptide, Carboxypeptidase, Subtilisin, Matrix metalloproteinase, Cilia

### Affiliations
Yale University
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biophysics Molecular Biology and Biophysics UConn Health 263 Farmington Avenue Farmington, CT 06030-3401

### Submitter
Navin Rauniyar

### Lab Head
Dr Betty A. Eipper
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biophysics Molecular Biology and Biophysics UConn Health 263 Farmington Avenue Farmington, CT 06030-3401


