### Accession
PXD027034

### Title
A jack of all trades and a master of some: remodeling of signaling pathways downstream of CFIm 3’ end processing factor

### Description
The mammalian cleavage factor I (CFIm) has been implicated in alternative polyadenylation (APA) in a broad range of contexts, from cancers to learning deficits and parasite infections. To uncover the molecular pathways that translate CFIm expression levels into these observed phenotypes, we carried out a multi-omics analysis of cell lines in which the CFIm25 (NUDT21) or CFIm68 (CPSF6) subunits were either repressed by siRNA-mediated knockdown or over-expressed from stably integrated constructs. We established that more than 600 genes exhibit CFIm-dependent APA, and they cluster in distinct functional classes related to protein metabolism. The activity of the ERK pathway traces the CFIm concentration, and explains some of the metabolic and proliferation changes induced by CFIm perturbations. Transcripts of miRNA pathway proteins are prominent targets of CFIm-dependent APA. This leads to increased miRNA biogenesis and repressive activity at the same time as 3’ UTRs become shorter upon CFIm depletion. Our study provides a first systematic assessment of the signalling pathways downstream of CFIm to improve our understanding of CFIm-dependent phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 5x106 cells were washed twice with ice-cold 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed in 100 μl urea lysis buffer (8 M urea (AppliChem), 0.1 M Ammonium Bicarbonate (Sigma), 1x PhosSTOP (Roche)). Samples were vortexed, sonicated at 4°C (Hielscher), shaked for 5 min on a thermomixer (Eppendorf) at room temperature and centrifuged for 20 min at 4°C full speed. Supernatants were collected and protein concentration was measured with BCA Protein Assay kit (Invitrogen). Per sample, a total of 300 µg of protein mass were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 10 mM at 37°C for 1 hour, alkylated with 20 mM chloroacetamide (CAM, Sigma) at 37°C for 30 minutes and incubated for 4 h with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:200 w/w). After diluting samples with 0.1 M Ammonium Bicarbonate to a final urea concentration of 1.6 M, proteins were further digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1. Subsequently, peptides were desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (VAC 3cc, 500 mg, Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, split in peptide aliquots of 200 and 25 µg, dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until further use.  For proteome profiling, sample aliquots containing 25 µg of dried peptides were subsequently labeled with isobaric tag (TMT 6-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) following a recently established protocol 83. To control for ratio distortion during quantification, a peptide calibration mixture consisting of six digested standard proteins mixed in different amounts were added to each sample before TMT labeling. After pooling the TMT labeled peptide samples, peptides were again desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. Peptides were loaded on column in buffer A (ammonium formate (20 mM, pH 10) in water) and eluted using a two-step linear gradient starting from 2% to 10% in 5 minutes and then to 50% (v/v) buffer B (90% acetonitrile / 10% ammonium formate (20 mM, pH 10) over 55 minutes at a flow rate of 42 µl/min. Elution of peptides was monitored with a UV detector (215 nm, 254 nm). A total of 36 fractions were collected, pooled into 12 fractions using a post-concatenation strategy as previously described 84, dried under vacuum and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  For phosphoproteome profiling, sample aliquots containing 200 µg of dried peptides were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using IMAC cartridges and a BRAVO AssayMAP liquid handling platform (Agilent) as recently described 85.  The setup of the μRPLC-MS system was described previously 83. Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 30 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 μg total peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom made column heater set to 60°C. 3E6 ions were collected for MS1 scans for no more than 100 ms and analyzed at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired of the 10 most intense precursor ions at a target setting of 100,000 ions, accumulation time of 50 ms, isolation window of 1.1 Th and at resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) using a normalized collision energy of 35%. For phosphopeptide enriched samples, the isolation window was set to 1.4 Th and a normalized collision energy of 28% was applied. Total cycle time was approximately 1-2 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For proteome profiling, the raw data files were processed as described above using the Mascot and Scaffold software and TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted. Phosphopeptide enriched samples were analyzed by label-free quantification. Therefore, the acquired raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters.    Quantitative analysis results from label-free and TMT quantification were further processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2. (https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant/) to obtain protein relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of protein abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. The summarized protein expression values were used for statistical testing of differences in expression of abundant proteins between conditions. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-tests were applied, as implemented in the limma package (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/limma.html) of R/Bioconductor. The resulting per protein and condition comparison P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Tmt, Cfim3

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


