### Accession
PXD011017

### Title
Dilute-and-Shoot Analysis of Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibody Variants in Fermentation Broth: A Method Capability Study

### Description
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are widely applied as highly specific and efficient thera-peutic agents for various diseases, including cancer, inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. As protein production in cellular systems inherently generates a multitude of molecular variants, manufacturing of mAbs requires stringent control in order to ensure safety and efficacy of the drug. Moreover, monitoring of mAb variants in the course of the fermentation process may allow instant tuning of process parameters to maintain optimal cell culture conditions. Here, we describe a fast and robust workflow for the characterization of mAb variants in fermentation broth. Sample preparation is minimal in that the fermentation broth is shortly centrifuged before dilution and HPLC-MS analysis in a short 15-min gradient run. In a single analysis, N-glycosylation and truncation variants of the expressed mAb can be identified at the intact protein level. The molecular attributes of the expressed therapeutic protein may thus be continuously monitored to ensure the desired product profile. Simultaneously, absolute quantification of mAb content in fermentation broth yielded concentrations of 67 and 2578 ng.mL-1 at the beginning and end of fermentation, respectively. The whole workflow features excellent robustness as well as retention time and peak area stability of 0.3% and 4.9% RSD. Additional enzymatic removal of N-glycans enables determination of mAb glycation levels, which are subsequently considered in relative N-glycoform quantification to correct for isobaric galactosylation. Application of the described workflow in an industrial environment may therefore substantially enhance in-process control in mAb production as well as targeted biosimilar development.

### Sample Protocol
For the measurement of the concentration-response curves the reference drug product was diluted to the respective concentrations in 25% ACN + 0.050% TFA. Additionally ribonuclease A (RibA) was added at a concentration of 100 ng.µL-1 as carrier protein for diminishing loss of the calibrant because of adsorption to glass surfaces especially of the low concentrated solutions, as previously described.41  The samples from fermentation broth (day 5, day 10, day 14) and the capture eluate (day 15 after protein A purification) were centrifuged for three minutes at 14,000 g at 4 °C. The required volume of the supernatant was diluted in 25% ACN + 0.050% TFA and 100 ng.µL-1 RibA. As the protein concentration in the fermentation samples and the capture eluate was unknown, a trial injection of a 1:10 (v/v) dilution of each sample was performed before preparing the final samples. If a 1:10 diluted sample exceeded a value of 800 mAU measured with the UV detector, the samples were further diluted to avoid overloading of the column. Samples were finally diluted as follows: day 5 (1:10), day 10 (1:50), day 14 (1:200), capture eluate (1:400). For the determination of the glycation level, 500 ng mAb of each sample were diluted in 20 µL of 175 mmol.L-1 ammonium acetate, supplemented with 0.50 µL (250 units) of PNGase F and incubated for three hours at 37 °C. Samples were then diluted 1:4 with 25% ACN + 0.050% TFA. For peptide mapping, 100 ng of each sample were diluted to a concentration of 2.0 ng.µL-1 in 50 µL ultrapure water. After addition of 150 µL of SMART Digest™ buffer  the samples were incubated at 70 °C and 900 rpm for one hour. Disulfides were reduced by addition of 5 mM TCEP and incubation at 70 °C and 900 rpm for 15 min.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition of intact mAb separation and peptide mapping was conducted using Thermo Scientific™ Dionex™ Chromeleon™ 7.2 chromatography data system software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). Deconvolution and peak assignment of mass spectra was performed with Thermo Scientific™ BioPharma Finder™ 3.0 software and an integrated CHO glycan database (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). For intact mAb the integrated ReSpect algorithm was used, for peptide mapping the Xtract algorithm was utilized. Specific details for the deconvolution of individual spectra are provided in the Supplementary material. XICCs for mAb glycation and glycosylation variants were calculated based on the FWHM of the respective experimentally observed most intense charge state at the resolution settings used for mass spectrometry simulated in Thermo Scientific™ Xcalibur™ 3.0.63 software (Figure S-5). For calculation of XICCs, linearity testing and data assembly a spreadsheet (Microsoft Excel 2010, vers. 14.0.7192.5000, 32-bit, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA) was generated.

### Publication Abstract
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are widely applied as highly specific and efficient therapeutic agents for various medical conditions, including cancer, inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. As protein production in cellular systems inherently generates a multitude of molecular variants, manufacturing of mAbs requires stringent control in order to ensure safety and efficacy of the drugs. Moreover, monitoring of mAb variants in the course of the fermentation process may allow instant tuning of process parameters to maintain optimal cell culture conditions. Here, we describe a fast and robust workflow for the characterization of mAb variants in fermentation broth. Sample preparation is minimal in that the fermentation broth is shortly centrifuged before dilution and HPLC-MS analysis in a short 15-min gradient run. In a single analysis, N-glycosylation and truncation variants of the expressed mAb are identified at the intact protein level. Simultaneously, absolute quantification of mAb content in fermentation broth is achieved. The whole workflow features excellent robustness as well as retention time and peak area stability. Additional enzymatic removal of N-glycans enables determination of mAb glycation levels, which are subsequently considered in relative N-glycoform quantification to correct for isobaric galactosylation. Several molecular attributes of the expressed therapeutic protein may thus be continuously monitored to ensure the desired product profile. Application of the described workflow in an industrial environment may therefore substantially enhance in-process control in mAb production, as well as targeted biosimilar development.

### Keywords
Process monitoring, Pat, Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry, Glycosylation, Fermentation, High-performance liquid chromatography, Glycation, Biosimilar, Process analytical technology, Antibody subunits, Multiple attribute monitoring, Monoclonal antibodies, Mam, Structural analysis

### Affiliations
University of Salzburg
1: Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry andBioanalytics, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria 2: Christian Doppler Laboratory for Innovative Tools for Biosimilar Characterization, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria

### Submitter
Christof Regl

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
1: Department of Molecular Biology, Division of Chemistry andBioanalytics, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria 2: Christian Doppler Laboratory for Innovative Tools for Biosimilar Characterization, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria


