### Accession
PXD036676

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus prophage-encoded protein causes abortive infection and provides population immunity against kayviruses

### Description
The aim of the study was to investigate the resistance mechanism of Staphylococcus aureus towards lytic phages of the genus Kayvirus and the role of the membrane-anchored protein (primary accession Q2FYE0) designated PdpSau encoded by Staphylococcus aureus prophages. PdpSau does not prevent the infecting kayvirus from adsorbing onto the host cell and delivering its genome into the cell, but phage DNA replication is halted. Changes in the cell membrane polarity and permeability were observed 10 min after the infection leading to prophage-activated cell death. The LC-MS/MS analysis, as one of the methods, was used for protein detection and to find out whether this protein is predominantly presented in membranes. These findings are relevant for the advancement of phage therapy.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain cytoplasmic (C) and membrane (M) protein fractions, the isolation method described previously (Zheng et al. 2021) was used with changes for the final processing of membrane fraction. The membrane fraction in a state of a pellet was washed twice with 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB), centrifuged at 20 000 x g for 10 min and then solubilized in 200 µL of SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) in ThermoMixer C (Eppendorf) for 20 min at 95°C, 1,000 rpm. The mixture was then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min to check that proteins are completely solubilized.  Solubilized proteins were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) according to (Wiśniewski 2019) with some modifications. Proteins were diluted 3 times with 8 M urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and loaded to centrifugal filter units Microcon-30kDa (MRCF0R030, Merck), centrifuged at 7,000 x g (all other centrifugations were done at 14,000 x g). Proteins collected on the filter unit were washed and reduced 2 times with 200 µL of 8 M urea buffer with 0.1 M dithiothreitol. After that, proteins were alkylated with 100 µL of 8 M urea buffer with 50 mM iodoacetic amide, incubated for 20 min. Proteins were washed 3 times with 100 µL of 8 M urea buffer followed up by washing 3 times with 100 µL of 50 mM AB to remove residual urea. Proteins were digested with trypsin (SOLu-Trypsin dimethylated, Merck) in ratio (enzyme:protein, 1:50) in 50 µL of 50 mM AB and incubated for 18 h at 37 °C. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation at 14,000 x g, followed up by two additional filter washes with 50 µL of 50 mM AB. Water-saturated ethyl acetate extraction described in detail by (Yeung a Stanley 2010) was used after FASP procedure as cleaning step of the resulting peptide solution. The cleaned solution was dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientifics). Peptides were extracted into LC-MS vials by 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN with addition of polyethylene glycol (20,000, final concentration 0.001%) (Stejskal, Potěšil, a Zdráhal 2013) and concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator to also remove ACN. For peptide separation for MS/MS analysis UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Peptides were separated using EASY-Spray column (Acclaim PepMap C18 column (2 µm particles, 75 µm x 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientifics)) during 138 min gradient elution (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid in water, mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientifics) and analyzed in a Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientifics). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy with defined number of scans based on precursor abundance with survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120000 (at m/z 200) with a target value of 1×106 ions and maximum injection time of 500 ms. HCD MS/MS (30% relative fragmentation energy) at 15,000 resolution (maximum injection time 50 ms).

### Data Protocol
For data evaluation the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.3.0) with inbuild search engine Andromeda was used. Searches were done against Staphylococcus aureus (2,889 protein sequences; https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Bacteria/UP000008816/UP000008816_93061.fasta.gz; version 2022/08) and cRAP contaminants (112 sequences; http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) databases. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as the protein-cleaving enzyme with two allowed missed cleavages. Peptides and proteins with false discovery rate < 1 % and proteins having at least one unique or razor peptide were considered for final data evaluation. Protein relative abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Intensities of reported proteins were further evaluated using the software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows/KNIME_docker_vnc; version 4.1.3). Processing workflow is available upon request, and it covered decoy hits and contaminant protein groups removal, protein group intensities log2 transformation, normalization, and statistical analysis (LIMMA; p values adjustment using Benjamini and Hochberg approach).

### Publication Abstract
Both temperate and obligately lytic phages have crucial roles in the biology of staphylococci. While superinfection exclusion among closely related temperate phages is a well-characterized phenomenon, the interactions between temperate and lytic phages in staphylococci are not understood. Here, we present a resistance mechanism toward lytic phages of the genus <i>Kayvirus</i>, mediated by the membrane-anchored protein designated Pdp<sub>Sau</sub> encoded by Staphylococcus aureus prophages, mostly of the Sa2 integrase type. The prophage accessory gene <i>pdp</i><sub>Sau</sub> is strongly linked to the lytic genes for holin and ami2-type amidase and typically replaces genes for the toxin Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL). The predicted Pdp<sub>Sau</sub> protein structure shows the presence of a membrane-binding &#x3b1;-helix in its N-terminal part and a cytoplasmic positively charged C terminus. We demonstrated that the mechanism of action of Pdp<sub>Sau</sub> does not prevent the infecting kayvirus from adsorbing onto the host cell and delivering its genome into the cell, but phage DNA replication is halted. Changes in the cell membrane polarity and permeability were observed from 10&#x2009;min after the infection, which led to prophage-activated cell death. Furthermore, we describe a mechanism of overcoming this resistance in a host-range <i>Kayvirus</i> mutant, which was selected on an S. aureus strain harboring prophage 53 encoding Pdp<sub>Sau</sub>, and in which a chimeric gene product emerged via adaptive laboratory evolution. This first case of staphylococcal interfamily phage-phage competition is analogous to some other abortive infection defense systems and to systems based on membrane-destructive proteins. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Prophages play an important role in virulence, pathogenesis, and host preference, as well as in horizontal gene transfer in staphylococci. In contrast, broad-host-range lytic staphylococcal kayviruses lyse most S. aureus strains, and scientists worldwide have come to believe that the use of such phages will be successful for treating and preventing bacterial diseases. The effectiveness of phage therapy is complicated by bacterial resistance, whose mechanisms related to therapeutic staphylococcal phages are not understood in detail. In this work, we describe a resistance mechanism targeting kayviruses that is encoded by a prophage. We conclude that the defense mechanism belongs to a broader group of abortive infections, which is characterized by suicidal behavior of infected cells that are unable to produce phage progeny, thus ensuring the survival of the host population. Since the majority of staphylococcal strains are lysogenic, our findings are relevant for the advancement of phage therapy.

### Keywords
Pdpsau, Kayvirus, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap, Staphylococcus aureus, Phage resistance

### Affiliations
CEITEC Masaryk university
CEITEC

### Submitter
Petr Gintar

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
CEITEC Masaryk university


