### Accession
PXD029297

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveals the role of Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation Pathway mediated by Tip60

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is an evolutionary conserved and widespread protein posttranslational modification (PTM) that has diverse cellular functions. Recently, it has been demonstrated that Khib can be regulated by p300 and Tip60. Although the specific Khib substrates mediated by p300 has been revealed, how Tip60 regulates diverse cellular processes through the Khib pathway and the different roles between Tip60 and p300 towards regulating Khib remains largely unknown, which hinders our understanding of the mechanisms by which this modification exerts its biological functions. Here we report the first Khib proteome mediated by Tip60. A total of 2999 unique Khib sites on 956 proteins were identified. Among them, 397 Khib sites from 322 proteins presented only in Tip60 overexpressing cells and 10 Khib sites increased greater than 2-fold in response of Tip60 overexpression, indicating that Tip60 significantly affected global Khib . Surprisingly, only 5 of the 407 Tip60-targeted Khib sites overlapping with the 149 known p300-targeted Khib sites, indicating that Tip60 and p300 have different substrate preference for Khib. In addition, the Khib substrates regulated by Tip60 are deeply involved in processes such as mRNA translation and protein co-folding, and some are associated with diseases such as Parkinson. Together, this study reveals the Khib substrates in response to Tip60, which elucidates the role of Tip60 in regulating various cellular processes through Khib pathway, and provides new insights into functional mechanism of Tip60.

### Sample Protocol
Khib peptides were immunoaffinity enriched as previously described [ref: Huang H, Luo Z, Qi S, et al. Landscape of the regulatory elements for lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation pathway. Cell Research, 2017, 28(1):111.]. Briefly, the peptides obtained from above (2mg) were resuspended in NETN buffer (100mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, pH 8.0), and incubated with 30 μL of pan anti-Khib beads (PTM Biolabs Inc.) at 4 oC overnight with tender shaking. The beads were then washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. Bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, then vacuum-dried and desalted using C18 ZipTip (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA).

### Data Protocol
The experimental MS/MS data was searched against UniProt Human protein database (88 277 entries, http://http://www.uniprot.org) by using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.3.0.5). Enzyme specificity was set as full cleavage by trypsin and allowing a maximum of two missing cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine, acetylation on protein N-terminal, and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on lysine were set as dynamic modifications. The estimated FDR thresholds for proteins, modification sites, and peptides were set at 1%, and the modified peptides with PTM score more than 40 were selected for further bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a new type of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) extensively reported on eukaryotic cell histones. It is evolutionarily conserved and participates in diverse important biological processes, such as transcription and cell metabolism. Recently, it has been demonstrated that Khib can be regulated by p300 and Tip60. Although the specific Khib substrates mediated by p300 have been revealed, how Tip60 regulates diverse cellular processes through the Khib pathway and the different roles between Tip60 and p300 in regulating Khib remain largely unknown, which prevents us from understanding how this modification executes its biological functions. In this study, we report the first Khib proteome mediated by Tip60. In total, 3502 unique Khib sites from 1050 proteins were identified. Among them, 536 Khib sites from 406 proteins were present only in Tip60 overexpressing cells and 13 Khib sites increased more than 2-fold in response to Tip60 overexpression, indicating that Tip60 significantly affected global Khib. Notably, only 5 of the 549 Tip60-targeted Khib sites overlapped with the 149 known Khib sites targeted by p300, indicating the different Khib substrate preferences of Tip60 and p300. In addition, the Khib substrates regulated by Tip60 are deeply involved in processes such as nucleic acid metabolism and translation, and some are associated with Parkinson's and Prion diseases. In summary, our research reveals the Khib substrates targeted by Tip60, which elucidates the effect of Tip60 in regulating various cellular processes through the Khib pathway, and proposes novel views into the functional mechanism of Tip60.

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification, Substrate, Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Quantitative proteomics, Tip60

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr He Huang
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica


