### Accession
PXD009366

### Title
protein-protein interaction dataset TNFR1-mediated NFkB signaling

### Description
Most MS-based approaches to study protein-protein interactions require homogenization of the cells, which leads to loss of the cellular structures, dilution of proteins and formation of incorrect protein complexes. Furthermore, several purification and washing steps are needed, which can lead to the loss of (weaker) interactions. We recently developed a new method for studying protein complexes without interfering with the cellular integrity; Virotrap. By trapping and purifying protein complexes in virus-like particles, we avoid cell lysis and preserve intact complexes during the purification process.  Here, we present a protein-protein interaction network of the TNFR1-induced NF-κB and apoptosis pathway, using TRADD, FADD, TRAF2, cIAP1, NEMO, TANK, HOIL1, HOIP, SHARPIN, A20, ABIN1 and ABIN2 as baits in Virotrap. Virotrap was applied both under resting conditions as well as upon TNF stimulation, which reveals dynamic interactions in TNFR1-induced NF-κB signaling. The found interactions compromise both known interactors as well as novel ones that might serve as valuable resource for further unraveling the molecular mechanisms controlling inflammation, cellular proliferation and cell death.

### Sample Protocol
The Virotrap protocol is described in detail elswere [Eckerman, 2016; Titeca, 2017]. HEK293T cells were cultured at 37°C and 8% CO2 in DMEM medium (Invitrogen), supplemented with 10% fetal bovind serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 25 units/ml penicillin, 25 µg/ml streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell cultures were kept at low passage (<10) and regularly tested for mycoplasma contamination. For every experiment, two 175 cm2 falcons with 23.3 x 106 cells were seeded the day befor transfection. Cells were transfected using polyethylenemine (PEI) with a DNA mixture containing 17.5 µg bait plasmid (pMET7-GAG-bait), 12.5 µg pSVsport plasmid, 3.33 µg pcDNA3-FLAG-VSV-G plasmid and 1.67 µg pMD2.G plasmid. For Virotrap experiments with TNF treatment, 2.3 µg of the pSVsport plasmid was replaced by the pSV25S-hTNFR55 plasmid. After 6-8 h, the medium was refreshed. For Virotrap experiments with TNF treatment, cells were treated with 300 U/ml human TNF (made in-house) 24 h post-transfection.  40 h post-transfection, cells were visually inspected before purification of virus-like particles. The medium of two 175 cm2 falcons were combined and centrifuged at 1,500 g for 3 min at room temperature. The centrifuged supernatant was filtered trough a 0.45 µm filter (Millipore). For every experiment, 200 µl MyOne Streptavidin T1 beads (Invitrogen) were pre-loaded with 20 µl Anti-Flag BioM2-Biotin antibody (Sigma). Particles were allowed to bind for 2 h by end-over-end rotation and the total supernatant was processed in three consecutive binding steps. Bead-particle complexes were washed twice with washing buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl) and eluted with 200 µg/ml Flag peptide (Sigma) for 30 min at 37°C. Particles were lysed by addition of SDS to a final concentration of 0.1% for 5 min, followed by removal of SDS using HiPPR detergent removal columns (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were heated at 95°C for 5 min and digested overnight with 1 µg sequence-grade trypsin (Promega). Peptide mixtures were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system through an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the needle (PicoFrit SELF/P PicoTip emitter, PF360-75-15-N-5, New Objective). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/ACN, 98/2 (v/v)) and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% solvent B′ (0.1% formic acid in water/ACN, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This was followed by a 5 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’. Two trapping columns and two analytical columns were configured in tandem LC mode, with switching between two flow paths – an analysis flow path and a regeneration flow path – allowing for column washing and re-equilibration off-line; thus, while one column is re-equilibrated, the system separates a sample on the other column. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.5 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400-2,000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at m/z 200) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions , maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass m/z 140, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7 x 104,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, >8  charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass). The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with the Mascot algorithm using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, www.matrixscience.com) at 99% confidence against the in the Swiss-Prot database with taxonomy set to human complemented with Gag, EGPF, DHFR, VSV-G and FLAG-VSV-G protein sequences. Acetylation of protein N-termini, pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and on fragment ions to 20 mmu. Trypsin was set as enzyme allowing 1 missed cleavage. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+, and instrument setting was put to ESI-QUAD. False discovery rates (FDR) were obtained by searches against the reversed version of the complete search database and by retaining only the peptide to spectra matches (PSMs) with the highest score in standard or reverse search. The false discovery rate was then calculated by dividing the number of PSMs against the reverse database by the number of PSMs against both databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virotrap, Nfkb, Tnf, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Ghent University
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, Belgium Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Emmy Van Quickelberghe

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, Belgium Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Belgium


