### Accession
PXD029668

### Title
Comparative investigations on surfactin as an antimicrobial metabolite

### Description
Surfactin is described as one of the most powerful biosurfactants and is natively produced by Ba-cillus subtilis in notable quantities. In addition to other industrially relevant characteristics, anti-microbial properties were highlighted for surfactin. To investigate this property, stress ap-proaches were carried out with biotechnologically established strains of Corynebacterium glutami-cum, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas putida with the highest possible amounts of surfactin. Contrary to the popular opinion, growth-reducing effects were only detectable for B. subtilis and E. coli at the higher gram-per-litre scale, while other antimicrobial biosurfactants, such as rhamnolipids and sophorolipids, showed significantly stronger effects on bacterial growth. As the addition of high amounts of surfactin in defined mineral salt medium reduced the cell growth of B. subtilis by about 40%, the initial stress response at the protein level was ana-lyzed by mass spectrometry, showing an induction of stress proteins under the control of the al-ternative sigma factors σB and σW as well as the activation of LiaRS two-component system. Overall, growth-reducing effects could be demonstrated after addition of high amounts of sur-factin at a high gram-per-litre scale, while absolutely no effects could be detected for the exem-plary bacterial strains C. glutamicum and P. putida, challenging the general claim of the antimi-crobial properties of surfactin.

### Sample Protocol
Stress approach After reaching an OD600 of approx. 1, the main culture was split and equal volumes of the cell suspension and the biosurfactant solution were transferred to a pre-warmed 100 mL shake flask. For the preparation of the biosurfactant solutions, MSM was used for the surfactin solution (proteome analysis), destilled water for the surfactin and rhamnolipid solutions, respectively, and 2 % (v/v) ethanol for sophorolipid solution. All biosurfactant solutions were filter-sterilized before use in the stress approaches. Different concentrations of surfactin (>90%; KANEKA, Osaka, Japan), rhamnolipid (90%, AGAE Technologies, Oregon, USA) and sophorolipid (lactonic version; gift of the working group of Wim Soetaert) were used for the stress approaches. For mass spectrometry (MS), the cell suspension was transferred to MSM supplemented with 75 g/L surfactin. Samples (5 mL) were collected immediately before and 10 min after stress initiation. After centrifugation (13700 rpm, 3 min), cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL cell lysis buffer containing 2% SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate), 20 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) and 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. The lysates were stored at -80 °C until the proteome was analysed by MS.  Pretreatment for MS analysis Samples were centrifuged (15 min, 4 °C, 13700 rpm), the supernatant was removed and proteins were precipitated using chloroform-methanol. Protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea and 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay [Bradford 1976]. Subsequently, cysteine reduction was performed by addition of a final concentration of 10 mM DTT to 25 µg of protein solution. Samples were incubated for 30 min at 56 °C under shaking at 1000 rpm. Alkylation of cysteines was done by adding 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 20 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. Alkylation was stopped by adding 50 mM DTT and samples were incubated for another 10 min at RT. Proteins were digested overnight at 30 °C using 500 ng LysC protease (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). Next, urea in the reaction mixture was diluted to 2 M by adding the appropriate amount of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and 1 µg trypsin (Roche) for further protein digestion (4 hours at 37 °C). Digestion was stopped by adding 3 µl 10 % TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). Finally, peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted on C18 stage tips and dried under vacuum. For nanoLC-MS/MS analyses dried samples were dissolved in 20 µl 0.1 % TFA and aliquots of 1.5 µl were injected.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS experiments were performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spec-trometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Nanospray-Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a trap column (5 mm x 30 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 25 cm x 75 µm nanoEase MZ HSS T3 re-versed phase column (100Å pore size, 1.8 µm particle size, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) op-erated at constant temperature of 35 °C. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 90 min gradient with the following profile: 2 % - 15 % solvent B in 37 min, 15 % - 30 % solvent B in 30 min, 30 % - 45 % solvent B in 13 min and 45 % - 55 % solvent B in 10 min. Solvents used were 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1 % formic acid in ace-tonitrile/H2O (80/20, v/v, solvent B). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated under the control of XCalibur 4.1.31.9 software. MS spectra (m/z = 300-1800) were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000 (m/z = 200) using a maximum injection time (MIT) of 100 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1 x 106. Internal calibration of the Orbitrap analyzer was performed using lock-mass ions from ambient air. MS/MS spectra of the top 30 peptide precursors per cycle were generated in the Orbitrap using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a resolution of 15000 and a normalized collision energy of 27. Further settings for MS/MS spectra included an isola-tion width of 1.6 Da, a MIT of 100 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 5 x 105.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis and protein quantification Raw files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 for protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins. Protein identification in MaxQuant was performed using the database search engine Andromeda. MS spectra and MS/MS spectra were searched against Bacillus subtilis (strain 168) protein sequence database downloaded from UniProt. Reversed se-quences as decoy database and common contaminant sequences were added automatical-ly by MaxQuant. Mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm (parts per million) for MS spectra and 20 ppm for MS/MS spectra were used. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modifica-tion and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as varia-ble modifications. The ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled with a match time window of one minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR thresholds were set to 0.01.  Two samples Welch´s t-test, principal component analysis (PCA), hierarchical clus-tering and Volcano plots were performed using Perseus version 1.6.14.0. Matches to contaminant (e.g., keratins, trypsin), to reverse databases and candi-dates only identified by site in MaxQuant were excluded from further analysis. First, nor-malized LFQ values from MaxQuant were log2 transformed. Missing values were imput-ed with random numbers from a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a down-shift of 1.8. Significant changes in protein abundance were analyzed by a two samples Welch´s t-test with a permutation-based FDR using a cut-off of 0.05 and a S0 value of 1. Volcano plots were used for pairwise comparison of sample groups. LFQ intensities of the MS data were fed into the R package proteus (v. 0.2.14)for differential expression analysis. Briefly, reverse hits, identifications only by site and potential contaminants were removed in advance, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, filtered by at least 3 occurrences in at least one condition and analyzed by the wrapper limmaDE, which is included in the proteus package. Significance level for re-jecting the null hypothesis was set to 0.05. Protein annotation to their functional category has been acquired from SubtiWiki-database. This annotation has been used for the generation of the voronoi treemaps by mapping over gene names. From the 1353 proteins, 965 proteins mapped to the database.  Voronoi treemap generation The plotting and treemap creation have been performed using the Java-Portlet Voronoi-Treemap-Portlet provided by the Quantitative Biology Center in Tübingen. It uses a java library, which computes voronoi treemaps based on the algorithm by Nocaj and Brandes. Applied on the provided SubtiWiki hierarchy, the weight of each polygon is set by the occurrences of the measured protein in the whole data<set. The color shading reflects the change of protein expression by log2 fold-changes.

### Publication Abstract
Surfactin is described as a powerful biosurfactant and is natively produced by Bacillus subtilis in notable quantities. Among other industrially relevant characteristics, antimicrobial properties have been attributed to surfactin-producing Bacillus isolates. To investigate this property, stress approaches were carried out with biotechnologically established strains of Corynebacterium glutamicum, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas putida with the highest possible amounts of surfactin. Contrary to the popular opinion, the highest growth-reducing effects were detectable in B. subtilis and E. coli after surfactin treatment of 100 g/L with 35 and 33%, respectively, while P. putida showed no growth-specific response. In contrast, other antimicrobial biosurfactants, like rhamnolipids and sophorolipids, showed significantly stronger effects on bacterial growth. Since the addition of high amounts of surfactin in defined mineral salt medium reduced the cell growth of B. subtilis by about 40%, the initial stress response at the protein level was analyzed by mass spectrometry, showing induction of stress proteins under control of alternative sigma factors &#x3c3;B and &#x3c3;W as well as the activation of LiaRS two-component system. Overall, although surfactin is associated with antimicrobial properties, relatively low growth-reducing effects could be demonstrated after the surfactin addition, challenging the general claim of the antimicrobial properties of surfactin.

### Keywords
Surfactin, Bacillus subtilis, Proteomics, Cell adaptation, Stress response, Biosurfactants

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim
Department of Bioprocess Engineering (150k), Institute of Food Science and Biotechnology (150), University of Hohenheim, Fruwirthstr. 12, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany

### Submitter
Jens Pfannstiel

### Lab Head
Dr Rudolf Hausmann
Department of Bioprocess Engineering (150k), Institute of Food Science and Biotechnology (150), University of Hohenheim, Fruwirthstr. 12, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany


