### Accession
PXD023147

### Title
Neuropeptides in Lineus longissimus larvae

### Description
The goal of this project was to identify potential neuropeptides in extracts from larvae of the nemertean species Lineus longissimus.

### Sample Protocol
Mixed larval stages were collected, rinsed with ultrapure water and dissolved in an extraction buffer (90% Methanol, 9% acetic acid, 1% distilled water). The mixture was ground and centrifuged. The supernatant was transferred, evaporated and dissolved in ultrapure water. Neuropeptide mixtures were reduced and alkylated. LC-MS analysis was performed on an EasyLC nano-UHPLC coupled with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated with an 87-min segmented gradient of 10-33-50-90% HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 7 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 10^5 charges and 3x106 charges for the MS scan. MS/MS on singly charged precursor ions was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Data was mapped to Lineus longissimus transcriptome sequences (genbank: SRX1343823). No enzyme specificity was defined. The minimal peptide length was set to four amino acids. The initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, for fragment ions a mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification. A set of expected variable modifications was defined: pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the peptide N-terminus, amidation of the peptide C-terminus, and sulfation of tyrosine. False discovery rates were set to 1% at peptide, modification site, and protein group level, estimated by the target/decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Neuropeptides are diverse signaling molecules in animals commonly acting through G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Neuropeptides and their receptors underwent extensive diversification in bilaterians and the relationships of many peptide-receptor systems have been clarified. However, we lack a detailed picture of neuropeptide evolution in lophotrochozoans as in-depth studies only exist for mollusks and annelids. Here, we analyze peptidergic systems in Nemertea, Brachiopoda, and Phoronida. We screened transcriptomes from 13 nemertean, 6 brachiopod, and 4 phoronid species for proneuropeptides and neuropeptide GPCRs. With mass spectrometry from the nemertean Lineus longissimus, we validated several predicted peptides and identified novel ones. Molecular phylogeny combined with peptide-sequence and gene-structure comparisons allowed us to comprehensively map spiralian neuropeptide evolution. We found most mollusk and annelid peptidergic systems also in nemerteans, brachiopods, and phoronids. We uncovered previously hidden relationships including the orthologies of spiralian CCWamides to arthropod agatoxin-like peptides and of mollusk APGWamides to RGWamides from annelids, with ortholog systems in nemerteans, brachiopods, and phoronids. We found that pleurin neuropeptides previously only found in mollusks are also present in nemerteans and brachiopods. We also identified cases of gene family duplications and losses. These include a protostome-specific expansion of RFamide/Wamide signaling, a spiralian expansion of GnRH-related peptides, and duplications of vasopressin/oxytocin before the divergence of brachiopods, phoronids, and nemerteans. This analysis expands our knowledge of peptidergic signaling in spiralians and other protostomes. Our annotated data set of nearly 1,300 proneuropeptide sequences and 600 GPCRs presents a useful resource for further studies of neuropeptide signaling.

### Keywords
Larva, Neuropeptides, Nemertea

### Affiliations
Comparative Developmental Biology Department of Biological Sciences University of Bergen Norway
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Hejnol
Comparative Developmental Biology Department of Biological Sciences University of Bergen Norway


