### Accession
PXD009376

### Title
Identification of Poly Ethylene Glycol (PEG) and PEG-based Detergents Using Peptide Search Engines

### Description
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is one of the most common polymer contaminations in MS samples. At present, the detection of PEG and other polymers relies largely on manual inspection of raw data which is laborious and frequently difficult due to sample complexity and retention characteristics of polymer species in reversed phase chromatography. We developed a new strategy for the automated identification of PEG molecules from MSMS data using protein identification algorithms in combination with a database containing “PEG-proteins”. Through definition of variable modifications, we extend the approach for the identification of commonly used PEG-based detergents. We exemplify the identification of different types of polymers by static nanoESI-MSMS analysis of pure detergent solutions and data analysis using Mascot. Analysis of LC-MSMS runs of a PEG contaminated sample by Mascot identified 806 PEG-spectra originating from four PEG species using a defined set of modifications covering PEG and common PEG-based detergents. Further characterization of the sample for unidentified PEG species using error tolerant and mass tolerant searches resulted in identification of 3409 and 3187 PEG related MSMS spectra, respectively. We further demonstrate the applicability of the strategy for Protein Pilot and MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Rat B104 neuroblastoma cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing 10% Fetal Calf Serum (FCS), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine until confluence. Growth media was replaced with conditioned media containing 1x N2 supplement (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine in DMEM /Ham’s F-12 media. The cells were incubated for 24 hours and supernatants collected and concentrated using 10 kDa cut off spin filters (Centricons, Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Proteins were fractionated using a Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany) operated with an isocratic flow of 0.5 ml/min 20 mM TRIS/HCl pH 8.0 by an Äkta purifier system (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany). Fractions were concentrated using 10 kDa cut off spin filters and the protein concentration was determined using a DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA). For the preparation of the contaminated sample, OLN-93 rat glial cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FCS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine, washed using 1x phosphate buffered saline (PBS), harvested by scraping, and lyzed in 4% SDS (in 0.1 M HEPES). Protein amount was measured using the DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). 50 µg of each of the biological samples was mixed with 4x Laemmli buffer23 and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 1 % acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were separated using SDS-PAGE, the gel stained by Coomassie and cut to four slices followed by in gel digestion as described elsewhere.10 Briefly, gel pieces were destained using 30% ACN, 0.07 M NH4HCO3, dehydrated using ACN, dried using a vacuum centrifuge, and rehydrated using 0.1 M NH4HCO3 containing 0.5 µg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Digestion was carried out overnight and peptides extracted by subsequent addition of 50% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 0.1 M NH4HCO3, and ACN. Solutions were combined, dried using a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 5% FA, 5% ACN and desalted using STAGE tips as described elsewhere.24 Eluates were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 µl 5% ACN, 5% FA. C18 columns were packed in fused silica spray tips generated in house with a P 2000 laser puller (Sutter, Novato, USA - column details: 20 cm length, 100 µm inner diameter, 360µm outer diameter, packing material: ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm (Dr. Maisch, Germany)). 5 µl of the peptide solution were loaded on directly on the column with 1 µl/min 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in H2O). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 99% A and 1% B (0.1% FA in ACN) to 65% A and 35% B within 30 min (B104 secretome fractions) or 50 min (OLN93 samples) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Eluting peptides were ionized at 1.6 kV in the positive ion mode and analyzed with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap detector at a mass range between 400 and 1200 m/z and a resolution of 30.000. The top 10 most intense ions of each survey scan (intensity threshold 5000) were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID, 35 % normalized collision energy) in the linear ion trap part of the instrument. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds and the repeat count to 1.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur *.raw files were converted to *.mgf files using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched using Mascot 2.5.1 (www.matrixscience.com) with a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. Variable modifications were defined according to the detergent analyzed (see Table S1). For static nanospray data, the PEG database was used. For biological samples, either SwissProt (555426 entries, release date: 8/2016) or a combination of SwissProt and the PEG database was used (no taxonomy specified). Trypsin was specified as enzyme, 1 missed cleavage site allowed and Brij35, and Brij58, Triton X-100, Triton X-114, NP-40, Tween20, and Tween80 were selected at J as variable modifications. Error tolerant25 and mass tolerant6 searches were performed for the contaminated secretome samples using only the PEG database. For mass tolerant searches a mass error window of ± 250 Da for the precursor ion and 0.6 Da for fragment ions was defined by modification of the *.mgf file header.6 For Protein Pilot (version 4.1, ABSciex, Foster City, USA), the data dictionary and parameter translation files were modified by defining the chemical formula of C2H4O as J, representing one PEG monomer. Peptide identification and protein grouping were performed with the paragon algorithm (version 4.0.0.0.459) using the standard workflow searching either against the PEG database or simultaneously against SwissProt Rat (7928 entries, release date: 9/2015) and the PEG database. In MaxQuant, “Alanine to PEG substitution” (A to J, “-CHN”) was defined in Andromeda as novel modification and used as fixed modification for database searching. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8.4 with the following setup: as database, the “A database” (File S2) was generated consisting of 100 A proteins representing the different PEG polymers. Searches were performed with an initial precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Enzymatic cleavage was defined as trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated from searches against a reversed database, and set to 0.01. Search results from all algorithms were further analyzed using MS Excel as well as Perl- and R-scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) is one of the most common polymer contaminations in mass spectrometry (MS) samples. At present, the detection of PEG and other polymers relies largely on manual inspection of raw data, which is laborious and frequently difficult due to sample complexity and retention characteristics of polymer species in reversed-phase chromatography. We developed a new strategy for the automated identification of PEG molecules from tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data using protein identification algorithms in combination with a database containing "PEG-proteins". Through definition of variable modifications, we extend the approach for the identification of commonly used PEG-based detergents. We exemplify the identification of different types of polymers by static nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry (nanoESI-MS/MS) analysis of pure detergent solutions and data analysis using Mascot. Analysis of liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) runs of a PEG-contaminated sample by Mascot identified 806 PEG spectra originating from four PEG species using a defined set of modifications covering PEG and common PEG-based detergents. Further characterization of the sample for unidentified PEG species using error-tolerant and mass-tolerant searches resulted in identification of 3409 and 3187 PEG-related MS/MS spectra, respectively. We further demonstrate the applicability of the strategy for Protein Pilot and MaxQuant.

### Keywords
Peptide search engine, Peg, Automated, Poly ethylene glycol, Polymer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Researcher 
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany

### Submitter
Shiva Ahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany


