### Accession
PXD025172

### Title
Yeast TRAPPIII complex cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
A comprehensive analysis of the structure and function of the yeast TRAPPIII complex

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking was performed using DSSO linker and the data was aquired through MS2-MS3 aquisition strategy

### Data Protocol
MaXLinker software was utilized to perform the cross-link searches.

### Publication Abstract
The GTPase Rab1 is a master regulator of the early secretory pathway and is critical for autophagy. Rab1 activation is controlled by its guanine nucleotide exchange factor, the multisubunit TRAPPIII complex. Here, we report the 3.7&#xa0;&#xc5; cryo-EM structure of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae TRAPPIII complex bound to its substrate Rab1/Ypt1. The structure reveals the binding site for the Rab1/Ypt1 hypervariable domain, leading to a model for how the complex interacts with membranes during the activation reaction. We determined that stable membrane binding by the TRAPPIII complex is required for robust activation of Rab1/Ypt1 in vitro and in vivo, and is mediated by a conserved amphipathic &#x3b1;-helix within the regulatory Trs85 subunit. Our results show that the Trs85 subunit serves as a membrane anchor, via its amphipathic helix, for the entire TRAPPIII complex. These findings provide a structural understanding of Rab activation on organelle and vesicle membranes.

### Keywords
Trapp, Cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Cornell University, USA
Cornell University

### Submitter
Kumar Yugandhar

### Lab Head
Dr Haiyuan Yu
Cornell University, USA


