### Accession
PXD009707

### Title
Candidate Treponema pallidum biomarkers uncovered in human urine samples from MSM individuals with syphilis using a multi-platform mass spectrometry approach

### Description
Background A molecular diagnostic test that could directly evaluate Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum antigens in urine would greatly facilitate the prompt diagnosis of syphilis.  Methods A multi-platform high resolution shotgun proteomics approach was used to investigate the presence of T. pallidum proteins in male urine samples collected from individuals with and without syphilis. Study participants were included in an observational cohort study conducted at the Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium from 2014 to 2017. In total, N = 60 individuals were included in this sub-study, including n = 36 with early symptomatic stage (primary/secondary), n = 13 early latent and n = 5 late latent stage and n = 6 controls. Almost all participants were HIV-positive (56/60; 93 %) and identified as men who have sex with men (MSM) (59/60; 98 %). Sixteen (27 %) individuals were serum PCR positive for T. pallidum at the time of diagnosis. Ten pools containing urine from six participants (±1.5 mL per individual) were created based on clinical staging. Urine protein was extracted from the pools by a two-step molecular weight cut-off centrifugal filtration to remove large proteins and non-protein material. Samples were digested, subjected to multi-dimensional liquid chromatographic separation based on hydrophobicity and were analysed with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF) and/or liquid chromatography- electrospray ionization quadruple ion mobility time-of-flight high-definition mass spectrometry (LC/ESI-Q-IM-TOF) in data dependent (MALDI-TOF/TOF) and data independent HDMSE (ESI-IM-Q-TOF) acquisition modes. Results In total, 26 peptides corresponding to four unique T. pallidum proteins were uncovered in four different pooled urine samples, from n = 3 symptomatic (primary/secondary stage; PSS) and n = 1 latent stage pool. Peptides from GTPase Obg (Tp0742) were detected in two separate PSS pooled samples. Protein designations are listed as in the currently annotated T. pallidum proteome available at the UniProt database (Proteome ID: UP000014259) which is related to the genome assembly and annotation ID GCA_000410535.2 listed on the European Nucleotide Archive. Eleven peptides from an uncharacterized protein (Tp0369) and 8 peptides from a protein annotated as the Borrelia-like p83/100 protein (Tp0486) were detected in two different PSS pooled samples. A protein annotated as an ABC superfamily transport protein (Tp0804) was uncovered in a latent stage pooled sample. BLAST analyses revealed low peptide sequence similarity with other pathogenic and commensal prokaryotes and human proteins. Conclusions High resolution mass spectrometric analyses of protein extracts from pooled urine samples resulted in the detection of four T. pallidum proteins. This is the first successful account of applying proteomics approaches to detect treponemal antigens in clinical samples. These proteins could represent potential biomarkers for downstream diagnostic applications.

### Sample Protocol
In total, 10 pooled patient urine samples were analysed, five of which were technical replicates containing the same urine samples as the MALDI-TOF/TOF MS/MS analyses. These were prepared from fresh aliquots of urine, with the exception of three samples (two samples from pool 2 and one control sample), for which there was no additional aliquot available thus previously thawed samples were used in these cases. Five additional pools were prepared, corresponding to primary/secondary stage n = 2, secondary n = 2 and early latent stage n = 1 pools. Following protein acetone precipitation, samples were resuspended in 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) buffer and 10 mM DTT at pH 8.7. For the denaturation and reduction process, all samples were incubated at 60 °C for one hour. Subsequently, proteins in all fractions were diluted in 50 mM ABC and alkylated by adding 200 mM iodoacetamide in isopropanol for 10 min at ambient temperature in the dark. Proteomics-grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added at a 30:1 protein-to-enzyme ratio and 5 % ACN was added to each sample. Prior to the 1D chromatographic peptide separation, dried peptide samples were suspended in 300 µL 0.1 % FA to obtain a concentration of approximately 1 µg/µl. Approximately 400 ng of peptides were separated on a NanoACQUITY System (Waters Corp.) with direct injection on a NanoACQUITY column (UPLC 1.7 μm BEH130 100 μm × 100 mm C18) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LC-gradients were obtained by a combination of mobile phase A (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO) and mobile phase B (80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA), with a column temperature maintained at 45 °C. All 10 pooled samples were run twice, with a 60 min and a 120 min LC gradient, respectively. All samples were analysed on a Synapt G2Si instrument (Waters Corporation) by HDMSE with an in-house optimized collision energy look up table (ultradefinition MSE)

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Symphony (Waters). After peak picking (Apex3D), ion sticks were cleaned using Select3D and pseudo MSMS spectra were generated using Peptide3D. The data were searched using IAdb (Ion accounting) against a database concatenating T. pallidum database containing the UniProt proteomes IDs UP000014259 (corresponding to the resequenced Nichols strain genome [28]), a UniProt human proteome (Accessed June 2016) and contaminants from the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/), with methylthio (C) as fixed modification and deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; syphilis; treponema pallidum; biomarker discovery; antigen test; urine; data independent acquisition; proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Deforce
Laboratory for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


