### Accession
PXD007829

### Title
Aspergillus oryzae LC-MSMS -  Comparative proteomic analysis: SclR is importantly involved in carbohydrate metabolism in Aspergillus oryzae

### Description
We previously identified the bHLH transcription factor SclR and found that the loss of SclR function led to significant phenotypic changes, such as rapid protein degradation and cell lysis in dextrin-polypeptone-yeast extract liquid medium. Therefore, this study presents a comparative assessment at the proteome level of the intracellular differences between an sclR-disrupted strain and a control strain using isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling for quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Strains, Media, and Cultivation The A. oryzae sclR gene-disrupted strain, ∆sclR (∆ku70::ptrA, ∆sclR::pyrG) (Jin et al. 2009) and the control RkuN16ptr1(pyrG) (∆ku70::ptrA, ∆pyrG，pyrG+) were used for the quantitative proteomic analysis. DPY medium (2% dextrin, 1% polypeptone, 0.5% yeast extract, 0.5% KH2PO4, and 0.05% MgSO4•7H2O, pH 5.8) was used for the liquid cultivation of A. oryzae. A total of 106 conidia of each strain were cultivated in 100 ml of DPY liquid medium at 30 °C for 3 days and three independent cultures experiments were performed for each strain. The mycelia were collected by filtration through a Miracloth (Calbiochem, Germany), washed with sterilized Milli-Q water and then rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen for future use in the protein extraction procedure.    Protein separation, protein digestion, and peptide extraction Samples of 20 mg wet weight were lysed 1 ml lysis buffer (7 M urea, 4% SDS, mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in 30 mM HEPES, pH 7.4). The samples were sonicated on ice with a Q800R sonicator (QSONICA, Newton, Connecticut, USA) and the sonication conditions were 5 s pulse on, 15 s pulse off, and 180 W of power for 10 min. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 13000 × g and 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred into a new tube, and the amount of protein was determined with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bonn, Germany). A sample of 100 μg of lysed protein was treated with DTT and iodoacetamide. The proteins were precipitated with pre-chilled (-20 °C) acetone, and washed twice with a mixture of 50% acetone and 50% ethanol. Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, 100 mM) containing 0.1% SDS was used to resuspend 100 µg of acetone-precipitated protein pellets in a volume of 100 μl, and then the proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 by incubating the reaction at 37 °C for 16 h. The peptide mixtures were desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column (100 mg, 1 cc; Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and subsequently used for the Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling.   TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS with High Collision Dissociation (HCD) MS/MS analysis The TMT Label Reagents were equilibrated to room temperature before use. To each 0.8 mg vial, 41 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile was added, then 41 µl of the TMT Label Reagent was carefully added to each sample and the purified samples were chemically labeled with the TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and incubated for 2 h at room temperature according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The control samples were labeled with 126, 127N, and 127C; the ∆sclR samples were labeled with 128N, 128C, and 129N. The labeled peptides were combined and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. The labeled samples were acidified with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 (100 mg, 1 cc; Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and then fractionated by HPLC. The HPLC solvents were a mobile phase A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and mobile phase B (10 mM ammonium formate and 90% acetonitrile, pH 10). The labeled peptide mixture was loaded and fractionated on a BEH C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 1.7 µm, 130 Å) by ACQUITY UPLC® H-Class System (Waters Corporation, Germany) at flow rate of 250 µl/min. The eluted fractions were collected using an automated fraction collector, and combined in 12 fractions for further LC-MS/MS analysis. The elution gradient for the peptides was as follows: 0-0.01 min (0% B), 0.01-35 min (0-45% B), 35-37 min (45-80% B), 37-40 min (80% B), and 40-42 min (0% B). The peptides eluted from the reverse-phase column were directly sprayed and fragmented by an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). The mass spectrometer was operated with the following settings: ESI voltage, 2 kV; inlet capillary temperature, 300 °C; full-scan automatic gain control (AGC) target, 5 x 105 ions at 60,000 resolution; scan range, 400-1600 m/z; Orbitrap full-scan maximum injection time, 50 ms; MS/MS scan AGC target, 2 x 105 ions at 30,000 resolution; maximum rejection, 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were initially processed with Proteome Discovery 1.4 (Thermo Fisher). A KEGG pathway and Gene Ontology functional categories enrichment analysis of the resulting clustered proteins were performed by using the KOBAS 3.0 (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/), which is a web server for gene/protein functional annotation and functional gene set enrichment. A Benjamini-Hochberg corrected P-value < 0.05 was used as the threshold to denote the significance of enrichment. The protein sequence, the associated genes and functional information were provided by UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/).

### Publication Abstract
The helix-loop-helix (HLH) family of transcriptional factors is a key player in a wide range of developmental processes in organisms from mammals to microbes. We previously identified the bHLH transcription factor SclR in Aspergillus oryzae and found that the loss of SclR function led to significant phenotypic changes, such as rapid protein degradation and cell lysis in dextrin-polypeptone-yeast extract liquid medium. The result implied that SclR is potentially important in both traditional fermentative manufacturing and commercial enzyme production in A. oryzae because of its effect on growth. Therefore, this study presents a comparative assessment at the proteome level of the intracellular differences between an sclR-disrupted strain and a control strain using isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling for quantification. A total of 5447 proteins were identified, and 568 were differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Of the DEPs, 251 proteins were increased by 1.5-fold, and 317 proteins were decreased by 1.5-fold in an sclR-disrupted strain compared to the control. The comparison of the quantitative TMT results revealed that SclR was mainly involved in carbon metabolism, especially carbohydrate metabolism. In addition, an enzyme profile by a semi-quantitative method (API-ZYM) indicated that three enzymes (&#x3b2;-galactosidase, &#x3b1;-glucosidase, and &#x3b1;-mannosidase) were significantly less active in the &#x2206;sclR strain than in the control. Moreover, quantitative RT-PCR showed that the expression of certain genes was changed similarly to their corresponding proteins. These results suggested that a possible function of SclR during growth of A. oryzae is its important involvement in carbohydrate metabolism.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Aspergillus oryzae, Bhlh

### Affiliations
Nanjing Forestry University
College of Biology and the Environment, Nanjing Forestry University

### Submitter
Feng-Jie Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Feng-Jie Jin
College of Biology and the Environment, Nanjing Forestry University


