### Accession
PXD039211

### Title
Metalloprotease-mediated cleavage of CD95 Ligand: QTOF Xevo  XS data

### Description
CD95 is a member of the TNF receptor superfamily that is ubiquitously expressed in healthy and pathological tissues. Stimulation of CD95 by its physiological ligand CD95L induces its oligomerization leading in turn to the transduction of either apoptotic or non-apoptotic signals. CD95L can exist as both membrane-anchored and soluble forms (sCD95L), the latter resulting from the proteolytic cleavage of the former. Candidate proteases able to achieve CD95L cleavage were identified as matrix metalloproteases (MMP) due to their demonstrated ability to cleave other TNF superfamily ligands. The main goal of this study was to systematically identify the MMP family members capable of cleaving CD95L and subsequently determine the corresponding cleavage sites. By using different orthogonal biochemical approaches and combining them with molecular modeling, we confirmed data from the literature regarding CD95L cleavage by MMP-3 and MMP-7. Moreover, we found that MMP-2 and MMP-12 can cleave CD95L and characterized their resulting cleavage sites. This study provides a systematic approach to analyze the cleavage of CD95L, which until now had only been poorly described.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analyses, a series of 5 peptides including an N-terminal histidine tag and a Linker/spacer interposed between the 6xHis Tag and the amino acid sequence, specifically chosen for each peptide sequence, were designed (MS1, MS2, MS3, MS4, MS5,  Hisx6-GGGGS-QLFHLQKELAELRESTSQ, Hisx6 -SGGGGS-RESTSQMHTAS, Hisx6-GGGGS-HTASSLEKQIGHPSP, Hisx6-GGGGS-IGHPSPPPEKKELRKVAH, Hisx6-GGGGS-KKELRKVAHLTGKSNSRS respectively) in order to obtain a post-cleavage fragment large enough to be detected by the mass spectrometer (between 15 and 25 residues). All of these peptides were synthesized by Genscript. The peptide samples MS1, MS2, MS3, MS4, MS5 (15 µg corresponding to 15 µL) were processed with MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-7 and MMP-12 for 1 hour at 37°C. In order to eliminate the large MW contaminants, present in the post-proteolysis final solution each sample was filtered through a 10kDa membrane (Merck Amicon Ultra-0,5, Membrane Ultracel-10, PMNL 10kDa) at 14.000g for 35min at 4°C. Samples intended for analysis by TimsTOF underwent purification using a C18 reversed-phase chromatography Micro Spin Column (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions. This phase was crucial to eliminate any saline contaminants, detergents and metalloprotease fragments derived from the proteolytic process. A Speed-Vac was then used to evaporate all the solvent containing ACN and obtain the dry product (45 ° C / 3h). The dry final product was then resuspended in an LC LOAD solution to the final concentration 1 mg/mL. Samples were then analyzed using an Acquity LC chromatographic system coupled in line with Xevo G2-XS QTOF mass spectrometer via an electrospray source (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts). Samples were dissolved in 50 µL 0.1% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid) and 1 µL was injected on a C18 Hypersil Gold column (150mm x 1 mm, ThermoScientific, San Jose, California) at 50 µL/min. After 1 min at 2% ACN, 0.1% FA, a linear gradient from 2 to 20% ACN in 0.1% FA was applied in 19 min. The regeneration step and equilibration were performed in the next 10 min. The oven temperature was kept constant at 37.5°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode and DDA (Data-Dependent Acquisition) with a survey scan from m/z 300-2000. The 3 most intense multicharged ions from the survey scans were selected and fragmented with CID (Collision-Induced Dissociation).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were first transformed in mgf files using PLGS 3.0.0 (Waters) and peptides were identified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 15 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively, and no enzyme specificity was selected. Oxidation (+15.995, M) was set as variable modification. Peptides were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
CD95 is a member of the TNF receptor superfamily that is ubiquitously expressed in healthy and pathological tissues. Stimulation of CD95 by its physiological ligand CD95L induces its oligomerization leading in turn to the transduction of either apoptotic or nonapoptotic signals. CD95L can exist as both membrane-anchored and soluble forms (sCD95L), the latter resulting from the proteolytic cleavage of the former. Candidate proteases able to achieve CD95L cleavage were identified as matrix metalloproteases (MMP) due to their demonstrated ability to cleave other TNF superfamily ligands. The main goal of this study was to systematically identify the MMP family members capable of cleaving CD95L and subsequently determine the corresponding cleavage sites. By using different orthogonal biochemical approaches and combining them with molecular modelling, we confirmed data from the literature regarding CD95L cleavage by MMP-3 and MMP-7. Moreover, we found that MMP-2 and MMP-12 can cleave CD95L and characterized their resulting cleavage sites. This study provides a systematic approach to analyse the cleavage of CD95L, which until now had only been poorly described.

### Keywords
Cd95l, Proteolytic cleavage, Metalloprotease

### Affiliations
Inserm  UMR_S  1242,  Chemistry  Oncogenesis  Stress  Signaling,  University  of  Rennes,  Rennes,France.
CNRS

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Chevet
Inserm  UMR_S  1242,  Chemistry  Oncogenesis  Stress  Signaling,  University  of  Rennes,  Rennes,France.


