### Accession
PXD047197

### Title
Chromatin targeting of the RNF12/RLIM E3 ubiquitin ligase controls gene-specific transcription

### Description
Protein ubiquitylation regulates key biological processes including transcription. This is exemplified by the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF12/RLIM, which is mutated in an X-linked intellectual disability disorder and controls developmental gene expression by ubiquitylating the REX1 transcription factor. However, the precise mechanisms by which ubiquitylation patterns specific transcriptional programmes are not known. Here, we show that genomic targeting of RNF12 selectively programmes developmental transcription. RNF12 is recruited to specific genomic locations by recognising a distinct consensus sequence motif, which enables co-localisation with REX1. Surprisingly, RNF12 chromatin recruitment is achieved via the non-catalytic basic region (BR) and comprises a previously unappreciated autoinhibitory mechanism. Furthermore, RNF12 chromatin targeting is critical for REX1 ubiquitylation and downstream RNF12-dependent gene regulation. Our results demonstrate a key role for chromatin in regulation of the RNF12-REX1 axis and provides insight into mechanisms by which spatial control of protein ubiquitylation enables specific programming of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE slices were cut out and proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested on-bead using filter-aided sample preparation with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase chormatography and were eluted using a 60 mins gradient. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.0 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following CID activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with normalized collision energy of 28-31% depending on charge state and precursor selection range.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database search using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) label-free quantification with standard settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Transcription, Rnf12/rlim, E3 ubiquitin ligase

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus MC


