### Accession
PXD040562

### Title
Astrocytes express aberrant immunoglobulins as putative gatekeeper of astrocytes to neuronal progenitor conversion

### Description
Using multi-omics analyses including RNAseq, RT-PCR, RACE-PCR, and shotgun proteomic with enrichment strategies, we demonstrated that newborn rat astrocytes produce neural immunoglobulin constant and variable heavy chains as well as light chains. However, their edification is different from the ones found in B cells and resembles aberrant immunoglobulins as observed in several cancers. Moreover, the complete enzymatic V(D)J recombination complex has also been identified in astrocytes. In addition, the constant heavy chain is also present in astrocytes adult rats, whereas in primary astrocytes from human fetal astrocytes we identified constant and variable kappa chains as well as the substitution lambda chains known to be involved in pre-B cells. To gather insights into the function of these neural IgGs, CRISPR-Cas9 IgG2B constant heavy chain (IgH6), overexpression, proximal labeling of rat astrocytes IgH6 and targets identification through 2D gels were performed. In CRISPR-Cas9 IgG2B KO, overexpression of factors involved in hematopoietic cells, neural stem cells and the regulation of neuritogenesis have been identified. Moreover, overexpression of IgG2B in astrocytes induces the CRTC1-CREB-BDNF signaling pathway known to be involved in gliogenesis whereas CRISPR-Cas9 IgG2B KO triggers the BMP/YAP1/TEAD3 pathway activated in astrocytes dedifferentiation into neural progenitors. Proximal labeling experiments revealed that IgG2B is N-glycosylated by the OST complex, addressed to vesicle membranes containing the ATPase complex; and behaves partially like CD98hc through its association with LAT1. Proximity-dependent biotin labeling experiments suggest that proximal IgG2B-LAT1 interaction occurs concomitantly with MACO-1 and C2CD2L, at the heart of a potentially novel cell signaling platform. Finally, we demonstrated that these chains are synthesized individually and associated to recognize specific targets. Indeed, intermediate filaments Eif4a2 and Pdia6 involved in astrocyte fate constitute targets for these neural IgGs. Taken together, we hypotheses that aberrant neural IgG chains may act as gatekeepers of astrocytes fate.

### Sample Protocol
Forty micrograms of protein cell extracts were reduced using an equivalent volume of reduction buffer (Dithiothreitol-DTT 0.1 M) for 40 min at 56°C. After adjusting the volume to 200 µL with denaturing buffer 8M Urea, 0,1M Tris-HCL, H2O), the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 minutes. Two hundred microliters of the denaturing buffer were again added and followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 30 minutes. The filtrate was discarded and 100 µL of alkylation solution (0.05 M Iodoacetamide in denaturing buffer) was added. The samples were then incubated in the dark for 20 minutes at room temperature and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 25 minutes. One hundred microliters of 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate Buffer were added and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g during 25 minutes. This step was repeated two times. One hundred microliters of Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer 50 mM were added and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g during 25 minutes. This step was repeated twice. Filters were transferred into a new collection tube and 1.6 µg of Trypsin was loaded. After overnight incubation at 37°C, samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 25 minutes and filters were washed with 50 µL of 0.5 M NaCl. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 25 minutes, 10 µL of H2O-5% TFA were loaded to stop the digestion and samples were dried using SpeedVac. After their resuspension with 20 µL of H2O-0.1%TFA, samples were desalted using C18 Millipore ZipTip and eluted with 20 µl of elution solution (80% ACN / 20% H2O-0.1%TFA). The solution was then dried using the SpeedVac. Dried samples were solubilized in a resuspension solution (2% ACN / 80% formic acid 0.1%) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The samples were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC1000 system equipped with a Proxeon trap column (75 μm ID x 2 cm, 3 μm, Thermo Scientific,) and a C18 packed-tip column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 μm ID x 50 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific). The digested peptides were separated using an increasing amount of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid from 2 to 30% for 2 hours at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A voltage of 2.4 kV was applied by the liquid junction to electrospray the eluent using the nanospray source. A highresolution mass spectrometer Q-ExactiveTM Thermo ScientificTM 490 was coupled to the chromatography system to acquire the 10 most intense ions of MS1 analysis (Top 10) in a data492 dependent mode. The MS analyses were performed in positive mode at a resolving power of 70,000 FWHM, using an automatic gain control target of 3e6, the default charge state was set at 2 and a maximum injection time at 120 ms. For full scan MS, the scan range was set between m/z 300 to 1600. For ddMS², the scan range was between m/z 200 to 2000, 1 Microscan was acquired at 17,500 FWHM, an AGC was set at 5e4 ions and an isolation window of m/z 4,0 was used.

### Data Protocol
Shot-gun proteomics data analysis RAW data obtained from the nLC-MS/MS run were treated using MaxQuant v1.6.1.0 using the LFQ annotation of the protein identified. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the Decoy version of the complete proteome for Rattus norvegicus of the UniProt database (Release June 2014, 33,675 entries) combined with 262 commonly detected contaminants. Statistical analyses were carried out using Perseus software after filtering for “reverse”, and “contaminant” proteins. For the comparison between control and Forskolin treated groups, a t-test was performed with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05, and p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant. A heat-map of differentially expressed proteins across the two different groups was generated. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed using ClueGO 20, on Cytoscape v3.7.1 21 37.  The AltProt database of rat is a prediction of the possible start codon around the classical Open Reading Frame (ORF), permitting the prevision of proteins on UTR, overlapping between UTR and coding sequence (CDS, and shift of ORF in +2 and +3 and conserving an initiator AUG codon. This database was combined with the reference Uniprot database on the same FASTA file. Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) was performed by MaxQuant 1.5.6.5. During this analysis, principal parameters were assigned as follows: Trypsin digestion with maximum missed cleavage of 2, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and oxidation as a variable modification. The first search peptide tolerance was adjusted at 20 ppm and the main search peptide at 6 ppm. Finally, the minimum peptide length was restricted to 6 amino acids. The length of this kind of protein, a mean of 50 to 100 amino acids, obliges to decrease the number of unique peptides identified at 1. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.5.5.3, log2(x) was then realized and results were filtrated to eliminate identification by site as well as reverse and potential contaminants. Significant variations between samples were assessed by t-test. Filtration for AltProt was applied to keep only the AltProt identified with a unique peptide and no classical protein redundancy on Majority ID. Variation of quantification was revealed by hierarchical clustering with Euclidian distance measurement. Identification of AltProt was performed using BlastP and non-redundant protein sequences to find their sequence homology with canonical and unknown proteins. The gene accession numbers were used to retrieve mRNA or ncRNA sequences from the Ensembl database.

### Publication Abstract
Using multi-omics analyses including RNAseq, RT-PCR, RACE-PCR, and shotgun proteomic with enrichment strategies, we demonstrated that newborn rat astrocytes produce neural immunoglobulin constant and variable heavy chains as well as light chains. However, their edification is different from the ones found in B cells and they resemble aberrant immunoglobulins observed in several cancers. Moreover, the complete enzymatic V(D)J recombination complex has also been identified in astrocytes. In addition, the constant heavy chain is also present in adult rat astrocytes, whereas in primary astrocytes from human fetus we identified constant and variable kappa chains as well as the substitution lambda chains known to be involved in pre-B cells. To gather insights into the function of these neural IgGs, CRISPR-Cas9 of IgG2B constant heavy chain encoding gene (Igh6), IgG2B overexpression, proximal labeling of rat astrocytes IgG2B and targets identification through 2D gels were performed. In Igh6 KO astrocytes, overrepresentation of factors involved in hematopoietic cells, neural stem cells, and the regulation of neuritogenesis have been identified. Moreover, overexpression of IgG2B in astrocytes induces the CRTC1-CREB-BDNF signaling pathway known to be involved in gliogenesis, whereas Igh6 KO triggers the BMP/YAP1/TEAD3 pathway activated in astrocytes dedifferentiation into neural progenitors. Proximal labeling experiments revealed that IgG2B is N-glycosylated by the OST complex, addressed to vesicle membranes containing the ATPase complex, and behaves partially like CD98hc through its association with LAT1. These experiments also suggest that proximal IgG2B-LAT1 interaction occurs concomitantly with MACO-1 and C2CD2L, at the heart of a potentially novel cell signaling platform. Finally, we demonstrated that these chains are synthesized individually and associated to recognize specific targets. Indeed, intermediate filaments Eif4a2 and Pdia6 involved in astrocyte fate constitute targets for these neural IgGs. Taken together, we hypothese that neural aberrant IgG chains may act as gatekeepers of astrocytes' fate.

### Keywords
Immunoglobulins, Astrocytes

### Affiliations
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192 Universite de Lille France
PRISM Laboratory 

### Submitter
Capuz Alice

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Laboratoire PRISM INSERM U1192 Universite de Lille France


