### Accession
PXD015980

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the human milieu of gamete /embryo maternal interaction

### Description
The improvement of the embryo culture media is of high relevance due to its influence on successful implantation rates, pregnancy, neonatal outcomes and potential effects in the adult life. The ideal conditions for embryo development are those naturally occurring in the female reproductive tract, i.e., the oviductal and uterine fluids. In order to shed light on the differences between chemical and natural media, we performed the first comparative study of the low abundance proteins in plasma, uterine and oviductal fluid collected, simultaneously, from healthy and fertile women that underwent a salpingectomy. The rationale for this design derives from the fact that high-abundant proteins in these fluids are usually those coming from blood serum and frequently mask the detection of low abundant proteins with a potential significant role on specific processes related to the embryo-maternal interaction. The proteomic analysis by 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS detected several proteins in higher amounts in oviductal fluid when compared to uterine and plasma samples (RL3, GSTA1, EZRI, DPYSL3, GARS, HSP90A). Such oviductal fluid proteins could be a target to improve fertilization rates and early embryo development, if used in the culture media. In conclusion, this study presents a high-throughput analysis of female reproductive tract fluids and contributes to the knowledge of oviductal and uterine secretome.

### Sample Protocol
4.1. Study population Patients who underwent a planned bilateral salpingectomy by laparoscopy were invited to participate in the study. Inclusion criteria were: premenopausal women with no hormonal treatment during the three months prior to surgery, normal menstrual cycles, and absence of uterine or tubal pathology. 3 women (out of 62 initially recruited) were selected based on their similar age (31, 33 and 39 years old), proof of healthy progeny, and because surgery was performed in the secretory phase of the menstrual cycle. Samples (UF and OV, and blood) were stored until proteomic analysis. The patients were coded as BRA52, BRA54, BRA57. 4.2. Sample collection One fasting blood sample was collected to an EDTA-containing tube and centrifuged at 1200g, 15 min, 4°C to separate the plasma fraction from blood cells. Plasma was aliquoted and frozen at -80°C until analysis. Uterine fluid was obtained with an adapted Mucat device (CDD Laboratorie) in the surgery room before the procedure. This class I medical device was adapted to be easily introduced in the uterus. Once introduced, aspiration of the fluid was performed with the integrated plunger. Aspirated volumes varied from 59 to 260 µl. Upon laparoscopic intervention, fallopian tubes were removed, transferred to ice-cold Petri dishes and dissected. Once dissected, fallopian tubes were clamped in both extremities: A- the one closest to the isthmus (the narrowest part of the tube) and B- the one contiguous to the infundibulum (the widest part of the tube). Afterwards, with an ascendant manual mechanical pressure (from the extremity A to B), the oviductal fluid accumulated at the B portion of the ampulla. Then, the clamping scissor that closed this end was opened and the fluid was aspirated with the Mucat device. Aspirated volumes varied from 49 to 70.9 µl. The fluids were collected in EDTA K2 (1,8 mg/ml) tubes and immediately centrifuged at 7000 g for 15 min at 4 °C to remove cell debris. The supernatant was aliquoted and frozen at -80°C . 4.3. Immunoaffinity depletion Samples were diluted 5-fold with 1X dilution buffer (Tris-Buffered Saline (TBS) - 10 mM Tris-HCl with 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4), filtered using a 0.45 µm pore-size spin filter and centrifuged at 9,000 g for 1 min. To deplete the 14 most abundant plasma proteins (Albumin, IgG, α1-Antitrypsin, IgA, IgM, Transferrin, Haptoglobin, α2-Macroglobulin, Fibrinogen, Complement C3, α1-Acid Glycoprotein, HDL (Apolipoproteins A-I and A-II) and LDL (mainly Apolipoprotein B)), an AKTAprime plus FPLC was used to inject 100-200 µl per sample in a Seppro IgY 14 LC5 column (Sigma-Aldrich) with a constant flow rate of 0.5 ml/min for 20 min, followed by a washing step at a flow rate of 2  ml/min for 3 min. Non bound proteins (depleted fraction) were collected in the flow-through fraction and were concentrated using Amicon™ Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units (Millipore). Concentrated samples were reconstituted in 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5 and stored at –80°C. 4.4. Tryptic digestion  Samples of 10 µg of each depleted protein were dissolved in 8 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide, according to a method previously described (López-Ferrer et al., 2004). Urea concentration was reduced to 2 M with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (final volume 40 µL) and the samples digested overnight at 37º C with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich), with a sample/ enzyme ratio of 25:1. After digestion, samples were desalted using ZipTip C18. 4.5. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometer analysis 2 µg of each digested sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC Ultra 1D plus) coupled to a high-speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 75 µm I.D. × 150 mm length, 1.7 µm particle size and 130 Å pore size (Waters). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo Scientific), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flowrate of 250 nl/min and operated under gradient elution conditions, using a 250 min gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX). All data were acquired using IDA mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software. For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scans (mass range of 350–1250 Da) were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100ms (mass range of 100–1800, total cycle time was 4 s). Switching criteria were: ion m/z greater than 350 and smaller than 1250, with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 15s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra in the form of raw data files were processed to mgf format using PeakView® 2.2 Software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and mgf files searched using Mascot Server 2.5.1, OMSSA 2.1.9, X!TANDEM 2013.02.01.1, and Myrimatch 2.2.140 against a composite target/decoy database built from the 71,785 sequences of the Homo sapiens reference proteome found at Uniprot (January 2018), together with commonly occurring laboratory contaminants. An initial 35 ppm X!TANDEM search was used to recalibrate the precursor ion mass measurements in all MS/MS spectra. Search engines were then configured to match potential peptide candidates with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13C) of 1, considering fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values1, and spectra recovered by a False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for label-free quantitative analysis using parent ion intensities. The label-free quantification (LFQ) values of protein identified in nine samples by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were analysed by hierarchical clustering, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Venn Diagram using R Core Team (2013) (R: A language and environment for statistical computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, URL http://www.R-project.org/), was used to observe if the different values would be grouped in a set of clusters corresponding to each type of sample or patient, in which each cluster would be distinct from each other and the objects within each cluster would be broadly similar to each other. Protein–protein interaction networks were estimated by STRING (Szklarczyk et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 43(Database issue): D447-52). Differential regulation was measured using linear models and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics (Madrid, Spain)[74,75]. The Targeted Mass Spectrometry (MRM/SRM) data, namely the areas corresponding to each transition and peptide, were transformed to log 2 scale and a paired sample t-test was performed to determine whether the mean difference between two sets (OF/P, OF/UF, UF/P) was zero.

### Publication Abstract
The improvement of the embryo culture media is of high relevance due to its influence on successful implantation rates, pregnancy, neonatal outcomes, and potential effects in adult life. The ideal conditions for embryo development are those naturally occurring in the female reproductive tract, i.e., the oviductal and uterine fluids. To shed light on the differences between chemical and natural media, we performed the first comparative study of the low abundance proteins in plasma, uterine, and oviductal fluid collected, simultaneously, from healthy and fertile women that underwent a salpingectomy. The rationale for this design derives from the fact that high-abundant proteins in these fluids are usually those coming from blood serum and frequently mask the detection of low abundant proteins with a potentially significant role in specific processes related to the embryo-maternal interaction. The proteomic analysis by 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS detected several proteins in higher amounts in oviductal fluid when compared to uterine and plasma samples (RL3, GSTA1, EZRI, DPYSL3, GARS, HSP90A). Such oviductal fluid proteins could be a target to improve fertilization rates and early embryo development if used in the culture media. In conclusion, this study presents a high-throughput analysis of female reproductive tract fluids and contributes to the knowledge of oviductal and uterine secretome.

### Keywords
Low abundance proteins; human reproductive fluids; salpingectomy

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary, University of Murcia, Campus Mare Nostrum, IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain
CNB-CSIC

### Submitter
Alberto Paradela

### Lab Head
Dr Pilar Coy
Department of Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary, University of Murcia, Campus Mare Nostrum, IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain


