### Accession
PXD030185

### Title
The FtsH-inactive Protein TSL2/FtsHi5 Is Required for Chloroplast Development and Proteostasis at Low Ambient Temperature in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Chloroplasts are indispensable for higher plants. The growth and development of plants are very sensitive to environmental temperature changes, and chloroplast development is also regulated by adverse environmental temperatures. However, the molecular mechanism of how plants coordinate chloroplast development and environmental temperature changes remains largely unknown. Here, a temperature-conditioned chloroplast development defect mutant tsl2 (thermo-sensitive mutant in leaf color 2) of Arabidopsis was obtained through forward genetic screening. The tsl2 mutant showed a weak yellowing phenotype at 22 °C which was more pronounced when the growth temperature was reduced to 16 °C, and was similar to that of the wild type when the temperature was increased to 29 °C. Genomic resequencing analysis revealed that TSL2 gene encodes the FtsHi5 which was shown to function in chloroplast protein import. Genetic complementation analysis showed that TSL2 rescued the chlorophyll content and thylakoid development defects in tls2 mutants at 16 °C. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) isobaric labeling revealed broad changes in the proteome composition of tsl2 chloroplasts at low temperature, reflecting impaired chloroplast biogenesis and function. Together, our data suggest that TSL2 has a significant role in chloroplast development and proteostasis especially at low environmental temperatures.

### Sample Protocol
Intact Chloroplast Isolation  Two-week-old (26°C) and three-week-old (18°C) Arabidopsis plants were homogenized in ice-cold grinding buffer (330 mM sorbitol, 30 mM Tricine-KOH, pH 8.4, 5 mM EGTA, 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaHCO3). The suspension was filtered through three layers of Miracloth (Calbiochem) and centrifuged for 5 min at 1500 g to pellet the crude chloroplast fraction. The pellet was resuspended in 300 mM sorbitol, 20 mM hepes-KOH (pH 7.6), 5 mM MgCl2, and 2.5 mM EDTA. The suspension was layered on top of a step gradient consisting of (bottom to top): 2 mL of 80% (v/v) Percoll/grinding buffer, 4 mL of 35% (v/v) Percoll/grinding buffer in a 15-mL polycarbonate tube. The gradient was centrifuged for 25 min at 3000 g and then the lower band was collected and diluted with 3 volumes of SH buffer (330 mM sorbitol, 50 mM hepes-KOH, pH 8.0, 2 mM DTT). The chloroplasts were centrifuged for 2 min at 1000 g. The pellet was resuspended in 25 mL SH buffer and centrifuged for 1 min at 1000 g. The chloroplast pellet was resuspended in 300 μL Lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor, 2 mM EDTA).  Protein Extraction, Digestion, and TMT Labeling Proteomics analyses were carried out in the company PTM BIO (Hangzhou, China). Briefly, the chloroplast pellet was resuspended in 300 μL Lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor, 2 mM EDTA), followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China) and centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. the supernatant was precipitated with cold 20% trichloroacetic acid for 2 hr at -20°C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded and the remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. Finally, the protein was dissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Before digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). For digestion, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for digestion overnight and the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. For TMT labeling, peptide was desalted with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, CA, USA) and vacuum dried. After that, peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile and added to the peptide sample. Then, the peptide mixtures were incubated for 2 hr at room temperature and pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis HPLC fractionation was performed with high pH reverse-phase HPLC. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and then directly loaded onto reversed-phase analytical columns (Agilent 300Extend C18). The peptides have a stepwise gradient of 8%~32% acetonitrile, pH 9.0, 60 minutes to separate 60 components, then the peptides were combined into 6 components, and vacuum freeze-dried for subsequent analyses. The peptides are dissolved in the mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) of liquid chromatography and then separated using the EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high-performance liquid system. The gradient was increased from 7% to 11% (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 4 min, 11% to 32% in 49 min, 32% to 80% in 4 min, and then held at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate (500 nL/min) on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were sent to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 (Thermo, CA, USA) coupled online to the UPLC in the Orbitrap with routine setting parameters.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15) was used to search the secondary mass spectrum data in this experiment. Search parameter settings: The database is Arabidopsis_thaliana_3702_PR_20210409.fasta (39342 sequences), an anti-database is added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library is added to the database to eliminate contamination in the identification results The influence of protein; the restriction enzyme digestion method is set to Trypsin (Full); the number of missing cleavage sites is set to 2; the minimum peptide length is set to 6 amino acid residues; the maximum number of peptide modifications is set to 3; the mass error tolerance of the primary precursor ion The level is set to 10 ppm, and the mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ion is 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C), TMTpro (peptide N-Terminus), and TMTpro (K) are set as fixed modifications, and Acetyl (protein N-Terminus) and Oxidation (M) are set as variable modifications. The quantitative method is set to TMTpro-16plex, and the FDR for protein, peptide, and PSM identification is set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Chloroplast biogenesis, Ftsh, Tmt, Chloroplast proteome

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of Life  Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.
College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.

### Submitter
Jinyu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jianxiang Liu
State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of Life  Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.


