### Accession
PXD017944

### Title
Proteomic analysis of scleraxis mutant tendon

### Description
Tendons play fundamental role in the musculoskeletal system and locomotion by transferring forces generated by muscles to the skeleton. Tendon injuries can occur due to sports related incidents, as a result of trauma to overuse or during disease or ageing and are among the leading causes of musculoskeletal disability. Scleraxis is a marker of the tendon lineage and appears to be induced at the earliest stage of specification of this lineage, however little is known how scleraxis is modulating tendon growth activity. This study aimed to investigate how scleraxis modulates tendon cells activity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from plantaris tendons from wild type and scleraxis mutant mice at 7 days and 14 day overload (n=4) were extracted with 4M Guanidine-HCL extraction buffer. 50µg of soluble GnHCL fraction was subjected to in solution-trypsin digest on 10 µl stratacleanTM resin followed by reduction and alkalyation in 3 mM DTT and 9 mM iodoacetamide with a trypsin at a ratio of 50:1 protein: trypsin. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fischer) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantitative analysis was performed on ProgenesisQI software (Waters, Elstree Hertfordshire, UK). In brief, msms peak list was searched against the UniProt mouse reviewed database on Mascot (v2.6 Matrix Science, London, UK) with carbamidomethylation cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, lysine and proline as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance at 0.01Da. One missed cleavage was allowed. Identified peptides hits were re-imported and assigned to proteins and filtered at a threshold score corresponding to a 1% FDR. Statistical analysis was performed on all detected features using transformed normalised abundances for one-way ANOVA. Identification of protein with two or peptides, greater 1.5 fold abundance and FDR adjusted p-value of <0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Scleraxis is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that plays a central role in promoting tenocyte proliferation and matrix synthesis during embryonic tendon development. However, the role of scleraxis in the growth and adaptation of adult tendons is not known. We hypothesized that scleraxis is required for tendon growth in response to mechanical loading and that scleraxis promotes the specification of progenitor cells into tenocytes. We conditionally deleted scleraxis in adult mice using a tamoxifen-inducible Cre-recombinase expressed from the Rosa26 locus (Scx&#x394;) and then induced tendon growth in Scx+ and Scx&#x394; adult mice via plantaris tendon mechanical overload. Compared with the WT Scx+ group, Scx&#x394; mice demonstrated blunted tendon growth. Transcriptional and proteomic analyses revealed significant reductions in cell proliferation, protein synthesis, and extracellular matrix genes and proteins. Our results indicate that scleraxis is required for mechanically stimulated adult tendon growth by causing the commitment of CD146+ pericytes into the tenogenic lineage and by promoting the initial expansion of newly committed tenocytes and the production of extracellular matrix proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Scleraxis, Tendon

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Associate Professor, HSS Reseach Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York

### Submitter
Yalda  Ashraf Kharaz

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Christopher Mendias
Associate Professor, HSS Reseach Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York


