### Accession
PXD014828

### Title
DDX3X Acts as a Live or Die Checkpoint in Stressed Cells by Regulating NLRP3 Inflammasome

### Description
The cellular stress response plays a vital role in regulating homeostasis by modulating cell survival and death. Stress granules (referred to as SGs) are cytoplasmic compartments that allow cells to survive various stressors. Defects in SG assembly and disassembly have been found to play important roles in neurodegenerative diseases, antiviral responses and cancer1–5. Inflammasomes are multi-protein heteromeric complexes that sense intracellular pathogen- and damage-associated molecular patterns and assemble into cytosolic compartments called ASC specks to facilitate caspase-1 (CASP1) activation. This activation of inflammasomes induces secretion of the leaderless proinflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18 and also drives cell fate towards pyroptosis, a form of programmed inflammatory cell death that plays major role in health and disease6–12. Cellular stress sensing can trigger both SGs and inflammasomes; however, they drive contrasting cell fate decisions during stress conditions. Crosstalk between SGs and inflammasomes to decide cell fate has not been well studied. Here we show that the induction of SGs specifically inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome activation, ASC speck formation and pyroptosis. The SG protein DDX3X interacts with NLRP3 to drive inflammasome activation in the absence of SGs. Assembly of SGs leads to the sequestration of DDX3X to inhibit NLRP3 inflammasome function. SGs and the NLRP3 inflammasome compete for DDX3X molecules to coordinate the activation of innate responses and subsequent cell fate decisions under stress conditions. Induction of SGs or loss of DDX3X in the myeloid compartment leads to decreased production of inflammasome-dependent cytokines in vivo. Our findings suggest that macrophages utilize DDX3X availability to interpret stress signals and choose between pro-survival SGs and pyroptotic ASC specks. Together, our data show the role of DDX3X in driving NLRP3 inflammasome and SG assembly, informing a new rheostat-like mechanistic paradigm for regulating live or die cell fate decisions under stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation, BMDMs were lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer (0.1% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES), and lysates were cleared by centrifugation at maximum speed for 15 min. Whole-cell lysates were incubated with 4 μg of the indicated primary antibodies on a rocking platform for 4–5 h at 4°C. Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose (Santa Cruz) beads were washed, incubated for 30 min with 3% BSA and then added to the samples. Incubation was continued for an additional 2 h on the rocking platform. The agarose beads were collected by centrifugation and washed three times with the NP-40 lysis buffer. After washes, immunoprecipitates were eluted in sample buffer and used for immunoblotting analysis. For mass spectrometry analysis, the same protocol was used, except 2 μg of antibody was used. Two biologically independent samples were used. The eluate was loaded in a 10-well 4%–20% Bis-Tris gel (BioRad) and allowed to run for 5 min, until all the sample had entered the gel. The gel was washed with deionized water twice and stained with simple blue stain. The bands were excised, and in-gel digestion was performed with a mixture of trypsin and LysC. The peptides were separated by in-line reversed phase liquid chromatography and analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package with the Andromeda search engine17. The mouse proteome was downloaded from the Uniprot database. Normalized spectral counts generated by MaxQuant were used for quantification. An empirical constant value of 0.1 was imputed for missing values and was used for statistical analysis and fold change calculations.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular stress response has a vital role in regulating homeostasis by modulating cell survival and death. Stress granules are cytoplasmic compartments that enable cells to survive various stressors. Defects in the assembly and disassembly of stress granules are linked to neurodegenerative diseases, aberrant&#xa0;antiviral responses and cancer<sup>1-5</sup>. Inflammasomes are multi-protein heteromeric complexes that sense molecular patterns that are associated with damage or intracellular pathogens, and assemble into cytosolic compartments known as ASC specks to facilitate the activation of caspase-1. Activation of inflammasomes induces the secretion of interleukin (IL)-1&#x3b2; and IL-18 and drives cell fate towards pyroptosis-a form of programmed inflammatory cell death that has major roles in health and disease<sup>6-12</sup>. Although both stress granules and inflammasomes can be triggered by the sensing of cellular stress, they drive contrasting cell-fate decisions. The crosstalk between stress granules and inflammasomes and how this informs cell fate has not been well-studied. Here we show that the induction of stress granules specifically inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome activation, ASC speck formation and pyroptosis. The stress granule protein DDX3X interacts with NLRP3 to drive inflammasome activation. Assembly of stress granules leads to the sequestration of DDX3X, and thereby the inhibition of NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Stress granules and the NLRP3 inflammasome compete for DDX3X molecules to coordinate the activation of innate responses and subsequent cell-fate decisions under stress conditions. Induction of stress granules or loss of DDX3X in the myeloid compartment leads to a decrease in the production of inflammasome-dependent cytokines in vivo. Our findings suggest that macrophages use the availability of DDX3X to interpret stress signals and choose between pro-survival stress granules and pyroptotic ASC specks. Together, our data demonstrate the role of DDX3X in driving NLRP3 inflammasome and stress granule assembly, and suggest a rheostat-like mechanistic paradigm for regulating live-or-die cell-fate decisions under stress conditions.

### Keywords
Ddx3x, Pyroptosis, Asc specks, Il-18, Inflammasome, Nlrp3, Proinflammatory cytokines, Cytoplasmic compartments, Stress granules, Il-1β, Caspase-1

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti

### Lab Head
Dr Thirumala-Devi Kanneganti
Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


