### Accession
PXD014500

### Title
Molecular basis of b-adrenergic regulation of cardiac calcium current

### Description
Increased cardiac contractility during fight-or-flight response is caused by b-adrenergic augmentation of CaV1.2 channels. It is assumed that this iconic regulation involves phosphorylation of CaV1.2 a1/b-subunits. In transgenic murine hearts expressing fully PKA phosphorylation-deficient mutant a1C/b, this regulation persists, however, suggesting involvement of extra-channel factors. We here show that PKA up-regulates cardiac CaV1.2 channels by phosphorylating the small G-protein Rad, relieving constitutive inhibition of CaV1.2. Peroxidase-catalyzed labeling in mice hearts expressing ascorbate peroxidase conjugated-a1C or b2b with multiplexed quantitative proteomics allowed tracking of thousands of proteins in proximity of CaV1.2.

### Sample Protocol
HEK cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS and 1% Pen-Strep. Cells were transfected with GFP-Rad using lipofectamine 2000. Media was changed 4-6 hours after transfection. After 24 hours, cells were treated with trypsin and spun down for 5 minutes at 1000 rpm. Cells were then resuspended in PBS with 10 uM forskolin for 5 minutes.  After washing cell pellets three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), cells were frozen at -80C. Cold cell pellets were lysed in PBS with 0.1% triton X-100 and a phosphatase inhibitor mixture by pipetting up and down several times. Lysates were homogenized by passing them through QIAshredder cartridges and incubated with GFP-trap agarose beads for 4 hours at 4C with constant rotation. Beads were washed 3 times with PBS with 0.1% (v/v) Triton and three times with detergent-free PBS and subjected to on-bead digest with trypsin, LysC or ArgC separately as described above overnight at 37C. After acidification, peptides were purified by reversed phase C18 chromatography and subjected to MS/MS analysis. For this MS2 scans were used with an isolation window of 1.2 Da and taking neutral loss of 97.9763 Da into account with multi-stage activation (MSA) set for MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched with a SEQUEST (v.28, rev. 12) based software against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the m. musculus proteome with added common contaminant proteins. For this, spectra were first converted to mzXML. Searches were performed using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursors and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. For the searches maximally 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. We searched dynamically for oxidized methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and where indicated for phospho-modification of S,T and Y residues (+79.9663 Da). We applied a target decoy database strategy and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA). The FDR for final collapsed proteins was 1%.  A modified version of the Ascore algorithm was used to quantify the confidence assignment of phosphorylation sites. Phosphorylation localized to particular residues required Ascore values > 13 (p = 0.05) for confident localization. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 scans.

### Publication Abstract
Increased cardiac contractility during the fight-or-flight response is caused by &#x3b2;-adrenergic augmentation of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2 voltage-gated calcium channels<sup>1-4</sup>. However, this augmentation persists in transgenic murine hearts expressing mutant Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2 &#x3b1;<sub>1C</sub> and &#x3b2; subunits that can no longer be phosphorylated by protein kinase A-an essential downstream mediator of &#x3b2;-adrenergic signalling-suggesting that non-channel factors are also required. Here we identify the mechanism by which &#x3b2;-adrenergic agonists stimulate voltage-gated calcium channels. We express &#x3b1;<sub>1C</sub> or &#x3b2;<sub>2B</sub> subunits conjugated to ascorbate peroxidase<sup>5</sup> in mouse hearts, and use multiplexed quantitative proteomics<sup>6,7</sup> to track hundreds of proteins in the proximity of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2. We observe that the calcium-channel inhibitor Rad<sup>8,9</sup>, a monomeric G protein, is enriched in the Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2 microenvironment but is depleted during &#x3b2;-adrenergic stimulation. Phosphorylation by protein kinase A of specific serine residues on Rad decreases its affinity for &#x3b2; subunits and relieves constitutive inhibition of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2, observed as an increase in channel open probability. Expression of Rad or its homologue Rem in HEK293T cells also imparts stimulation of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.3 and Ca<sub>V</sub>2.2 by protein kinase A, revealing an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that confers adrenergic modulation upon voltage-gated calcium channels.

### Keywords
Peroxidase catalyzed, B-adrenergic regulation, Biotin-tyramide, Cardiac calcium channel, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Sps ms3, H2o2, Denaturing purification, Isoproterenol, Biotin-phenol, Alkaline reversed phase peptide fractionation, On-bead digest, Streptavidin, Apex2, Isobaric labeling, Tmt, Cav1.2, Apex, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Systems Biology, Laboratory for Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Marian Kalocsay
Department of Systems Biology, Laboratory for Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, USA


