### Accession
PXD006646

### Title
Exercise-responsive phosphoproteins in the heart

### Description
Endurance exercise improves cardiac performance and affords protection against cardiovascular diseases but the signalling events that mediate these benefits are largely unexplored. Phosphorylation is an widely studied post-translational modification involved in intracellular signalling, and to discover novel phosphorylation events associated with exercise we have profiled the cardiac phosphoproteome response to a standardised exercise test to peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak). Male Wistar rats (346 ± 18 g) were assigned to 3 independent groups (n= 6, in each) that were familiarised with running on a motorised treadmill within a metabolic chamber. Animals performed a graded exercise test and were killed either immediately (0 h) after or 3 h after terminating the test at a standardised physiological end point (i.e. peak oxygen uptake; VO2peak). Control rats were killed at a similar time of day to the exercised animals, to minimise possible circadian effects. Cardiac proteins were digested with trypsin and phosphopeptides were enriched by selective binding to titanium dioxide (TiO2). Phosphopeptides were analysed by liquid chromatography and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry, and phosphopeptides were quantified by MS1 intensities and identified against the UniProt knowledgebase using MaxQuant (v1.3.0.5).  The VO2peak of  rats in the 0 h and 3 h groups was 66 ± 5 ml•kg-1•min-1 and 69.8 ± 5 ml•kg-1•min-1, respectively.  Proteome profiling detected 1169 phosphopeptides and one-way ANOVA found 141 significant (P<0.05 with a false discovery rate of 10 %) differences. Almost all (97 %) of the phosphosites that were responsive to exercise are annotated in the PhosphoSitePlus database but, importantly, the majority of these have not previously been associated with the cardiac response to exercise. More than two-thirds of the exercise-responsive phosphosites were different from those identified in previous phosphoproteome profiling of the cardiac response to β1-adrenergic receptor stimulation. Moreover, we report entirely new phosphorylation sites on 4 cardiac proteins, including S81 of muscle LIM protein, and identified 7 exercise-responsive kinases, including myofibrillar protein kinases such as obscurin, titin and the striated-muscle-specific serine/threonine kinase (SPEG) that may be worthwhile targets for future investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Left ventricles were pulverized in liquid nitrogen and an accurately weighed portion (100 mg) homogenized on ice in 10 volumes of 8 M urea, 4% w/v CHAPS, 40 mM Tris base including protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche Diagnostics, Lewes, UK) at 4 ºC. After centrifugation at 20,000 g, 4 ºC for 45 min the supernatant was decanted and the protein concentration measured using a modified ‘microtitre plate’ version of the Bradford assay (Sigma, Poole, Dorset, UK).  Aliquots containing 2 mg protein were reduced with 2.5 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at room temperature then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to bring the concentration of urea to 1M and sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a substrate to enzyme ratio of 50:1. After 4 h, samples were diluted threefold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing additional trypsin, and the digestion was allowed to proceed overnight. After acidification to a final concentration of 1 % (v/v) formic acid, the peptide solutions were desalted using disposable Toptip C18 columns (Glygen) and lyophilized to dryness. Phosphopeptides were selectively enriched by binding to titanium dioxide (TiO2)-coated magnetic beads (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, as described in previously [9]. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 200 μL 80 % acetontirile, 2 % formic acid and incubated for 1 min with 10 μL of slurry containing TiO2 magnetic beads. Unbound peptides and supernatant were decanted and the beads were washed three times with 200 μL binding buffer (supplied with the kit). After final decanting, the beads were incubated for 10 min with 30 μL elution buffer and the eluate was carefully removed and dried prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification  Data files (RAW format) were searched using the standard workflow of MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5; http://maxquant.org/) against a non-redundant rat protein sequence FASTA file from the UniProt/ SwissProt database modified to contain porcine trypsin sequences. The search parameters allowed 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed) and variable oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of STY residues. Precursor ion tolerances were 20 ppm for first search and 6 ppm for a second search. The MS/MS peaks were de-isotoped and searched using a 20 ppm mass tolerance. A stringent false discovery rate threshold of 1 % was used to filter candidate peptide, protein, and phosphosite identifications.   Bioinformatic Analysis Statistical analysis was performed in R version 3.3.1. Protein identifiers associated with exercise-responsive phosphopeptides were uploaded to David GO (https://david.ncifcrf.gov) [10],[11] for functional annotation and association to KEGG pathways. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the Graphical Proteomics data Explorer (GProX) [12] and protein interactions were investigating using bibliometric mining in the search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes/proteins (STRING; http://string-db.org/) [13].

### Publication Abstract
Endurance exercise improves cardiac performance and affords protection against cardiovascular diseases but the signalling events that mediate these benefits are largely unexplored. Phosphorylation is a widely studied post-translational modification involved in intracellular signalling, and to discover novel phosphorylation events associated with exercise we have profiled the cardiac phosphoproteome response to a standardised exercise test to peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak). Male Wistar rats (346&#xb1;18g) were assigned to 3 independent groups (n=6, in each) that were familiarised with running on a motorised treadmill within a metabolic chamber. Animals performed a graded exercise test and were killed either immediately (0h) after or 3h after terminating the test at a standardised physiological end point (i.e. peak oxygen uptake; VO2peak). Control rats were killed at a similar time of day to the exercised animals, to minimise possible circadian effects. Cardiac proteins were digested with trypsin and phosphopeptides were enriched by selective binding to titanium dioxide (TiO2). Phosphopeptides were analysed by liquid chromatography and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry, and phosphopeptides were quantified by MS1 intensities and identified against the UniProt knowledgebase using MaxQuant (data are available via ProteomeXchange, ID PXD006646). The VO2peak of rats in the 0h and 3h groups was 66&#xb1;5mlkg<sup>-1</sup>min<sup>-1</sup> and 69.8&#xb1;5mlkg<sup>-1</sup>min<sup>-1</sup>, respectively. Proteome profiling detected 1169 phosphopeptides and one-way ANOVA found 141 significant (P&lt;0.05 with a false discovery rate of 10%) differences. Almost all (97%) of the phosphosites that were responsive to exercise are annotated in the PhosphoSitePlus database but, importantly, the majority of these have not previously been associated with the cardiac response to exercise. More than two-thirds of the exercise-responsive phosphosites were different from those identified in previous phosphoproteome profiling of the cardiac response to &#x3b2;<sub>1</sub>-adrenergic receptor stimulation. Moreover, we report entirely new phosphorylation sites on 4 cardiac proteins, including S81 of muscle LIM protein, and identified 7 exercise-responsive kinases, including myofibrillar protein kinases such as obscurin, titin and the striated-muscle-specific serine/threonine kinase (SPEG) that may be worthwhile targets for future investigation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Exercise-response

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Sport & Exercise Sciences  Liverpool John Moores University
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Hongbo Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Jatin G Burniston
Research Institute for Sport & Exercise Sciences  Liverpool John Moores University


