### Accession
PXD002892

### Title
PCP SILAC of apoptosis initiation

### Description
Protein correlation profiling using size exclusion and blue native page analysis of protein complexes coupled with SILAC to enable the comparsion between conditions

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using in solution digestion or in gel digestions followed by C18 STAGE tip clean up.

### Data Protocol
DATA was processed using MAXQUANT 1.4.1.2 or 1.5.0 against the HUMAN uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interaction networks (interactomes) define the functionality of all biological systems. In apoptosis, proteolysis by caspases is thought to initiate disassembly of protein complexes and cell death. Here we used a quantitative proteomics approach, protein correlation profiling (PCP), to explore changes in cytoplasmic and mitochondrial interactomes in response to apoptosis initiation as a function of caspase activity. We measured the response to initiation of Fas-mediated apoptosis in 17,991 interactions among 2,779 proteins, comprising the largest dynamic interactome to date. The majority of interactions were unaffected early in apoptosis, but multiple complexes containing known caspase targets were disassembled. Nonetheless, proteome-wide analysis of proteolytic processing by terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) revealed little correlation between proteolytic and interactome changes. Our findings show that, in apoptosis, significant interactome alterations occur before and independently of caspase activity. Thus, apoptosis initiation includes a tight program of interactome rearrangement, leading to disassembly of relatively few, select complexes. These early interactome alterations occur independently of cleavage of these protein by caspases.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Jurkat, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Centre for High-throughput Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,Canada, V6T 1Z4
Foster lab, University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J Foster
Centre for High-throughput Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,Canada, V6T 1Z4


