### Accession
PXD038750

### Title
Evaluation of Two Simultaneous Metabolomic and Proteomic Extraction Protocols Assessed by Ultra-High-Performance Liq-uid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Untargeted multi-omics analysis of plasma is an emerging tool for the identification of novel biomarkers for evaluating disease prognosis and for a better understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying human disease. The successful application of metabolomic and pro-teomic approaches relies on reproducibly quantifying a wide range of metabolites and proteins. Herein, we report the results of untargeted metabolomic and proteomic analyses from blood plasma samples following analyte extraction by two frequently used solvent systems: chloro-form/methanol and methanol-only. Whole blood samples were collected from participants (n=6) at University Hospital Sharjah (UHS) hospital, then plasma was separated and extracted by two methods i. methanol precipitation and, ii. 4:3 methanol:chloroform extraction. The coverage and reproducibility of the two methods were assessed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS). The study revealed that metabolite extraction by methanol-only showed greater reproducibility for both metabolomic and proteomic quantifications than did methanol/chloroform, while yielding similar peptide coverage. However, coverage of extracted metabolites was higher with the methanol/chloroform precipitation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation.  The protein pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 100 µL denaturation buffer (6M urea and 2M thiourea in 10 mM Tris buffer at pH 8), after that proteins were quantified by modified Bradford [39]. Protein digestion and desalting. 100 µg protein samples were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) at a concentration of 1 mM, then incubated for 1h with mild agitation at 100 rpm at room temperature (RT). Then, the samples were alkylated by adding 5.5 mM iodoacetam-ide (IAA), followed by incubation in the dark for 1 h at 100 rpm and RT. At the end of each step, the pH was measured and adjusted to 8.0 if necessary. After that, 1 µg of Lysyl En-dopeptidase LysC (1:100, w/w) was added, and samples were incubated for 3 h with 100 rpm at RT. Then, samples were diluted four times using 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 1 µg trypsin (1:100 ratio) followed by incubation overnight at 100 rpm and RT prior to stopping the reaction by acidification to 1% TFA.  In desalting step, all the samples were dried then resuspended by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and filtered using C18 STAGE (Stop And Go Extraction) tips. The conditioning of C18 membranes was performed by aspirating and dispensing 100 µL 50% ACN followed by equilibration by 100 µL of 0.1% TFA. The protein samples were loaded by aspirating and dispensing the samples ten times, then the columns were washed using 0.1% TFA in 5% ACN. Then peptides were eluted into LC vials by aspiration and dispensing 100 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 60% ACN. Subsequently, the eluted peptide samples were dried using EZ-2 Plus (GeneVac, Ipswich, UK) then resuspended in 200 µL of 0.1% FA in 2% ACN prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Proteomics analysis. A nano elute (Bruker Daltonics) coupled to a quadru-pole-time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Q-TOF) was utilized to perform the LC-MS/MS analysis (Bruker Daltonics) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). 4 µL of the sample (4ug of the peptides) was injected and the separation was performed on a FIF-TEEN column C18 15cm x 75um, 1.9um (Bruker), using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in deionized Water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a 140-min gradient as follow: 0 to 5 min, 5% B; 5 to 120 min, 5–35% B; 120 to 125 min, 35-95% B; 125 to 135 min, 95% B; 135 to 135.2 min, 95-5% B; 135.2-140, 5% B. The flow rate was 0.30 µl/min. The Captive Spray ion source conditions for every injection were as follows: the drying gas flow rate was 3.0 L/min at a temp of 150°C and the capillary voltage was set at 1600 V. The acquisition involved an auto MS/MS scan with CID acquisition, which included fragmen-tation. The acquisition was performed using the positive mode at 2 Hz. The automatic in-run mass scan range was from 150 to 2200 m/z, the width of the precursor ion was ±0.5, the number of precursors was 2, the cycle time was 3.0 sec., and the threshold was 500 cts. Active exclusion was triggered after 1 spectrum and released after 2.0 min. For MS2 acquisition the data dependent acquisition (DDA) was used, and the collision energy was adjusted between 23-65 eV as a function of the m/z value.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Processing. To identify the peptides and proteins, the raw data were pro-cessed by MaxQuant [30] 1.6.17.0 using the Uniprot proteome for Homo sapiens (Proteo-me ID: UP000005640, 79,052 entries, 14 April 2022) and the Andromeda search engine. Default parameters were applied in the MS/MS database search, including methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications and carbami-domethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification. Peptide spectral matching (PSMs) was filtered with a 20-ppm precursor mass tolerance and 1% false discovery rate (FDR). For label-free quantification (LFQ), the MaxLFQ algorithm was used. In the in-silico digestion, the default trypsin/P enzymatic cleavage rule was utilized. To ensure a reliable label-free quantification, the protein groups were identified with at least two peptides as-signed and at least one being unique to the protein.

### Publication Abstract
Untargeted multi-omics analysis of plasma is an emerging tool for the identification of novel biomarkers for evaluating disease prognosis, and for developing a better understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying human disease. The successful application of metabolomic and proteomic approaches relies on reproducibly quantifying a wide range of metabolites and proteins. Herein, we report the results of untargeted metabolomic and proteomic analyses from blood plasma samples following analyte extraction by two frequently-used solvent systems: chloroform/methanol and methanol-only. Whole blood samples were collected from participants (n = 6) at University Hospital Sharjah (UHS) hospital, then plasma was separated and extracted by two methods: (i) methanol precipitation and (ii) 4:3 methanol:chloroform extraction. The coverage and reproducibility of the two methods were assessed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS). The study revealed that metabolite extraction by methanol-only showed greater reproducibility for both metabolomic and proteomic quantifications than did methanol/chloroform, while yielding similar peptide coverage. However, coverage of extracted metabolites was higher with the methanol/chloroform precipitation.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Plasma, Reproducibility, Proteomics, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah
1 - College of Pharmacy, University of Sharjah, Sharjah  2 - Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, Sharjah

### Submitter
Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Mohammad H Semreen
1 - College of Pharmacy, University of Sharjah, Sharjah  2 - Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, Sharjah


