### Accession
PXD028527

### Title
The Paulinella chromatophore N-terminome

### Description
The cercozoan amoeba Paulinella chromatophora contains photosynthetic organelles - termed chromatophores - that evolved from a cyanobacterium ~100 million years ago, independently from plastids in plants and algae. Despite its more recent origin, at least one third of the chromatophore proteome consists of nucleus-encoded proteins that are imported by an unknown mechanism across the chromatophore double envelope membranes. Chromatophore-targeted proteins fall into two classes. Proteins exceeding 250 amino acids carry a conserved N-terminal sequence extension, termed the ‘chromatophore transit peptide’ (crTP), that is presumably involved in guiding these proteins into the chromatophore. Short imported proteins do not carry discernable targeting signals. To explore whether the import of protein is accompanied by their N-terminal processing, here we used a mass spectrometry-based approach to determine protein N-termini in Paulinella chromatophora and identified N-termini of 208 chromatophore-localized proteins. Our study revealed extensive N-terminal modifications by acetylation and proteolytic processing in both, the nucleus and chromatophore-encoded fraction of the chromatophore proteome. Mature N-termini of 37 crTP-carrying proteins were identified, of which 30 were cleaved in a common processing region. Our results imply that the crTP mediates trafficking through the Golgi, is bipartite and surprisingly only the N-terminal third (‘part 1’) becomes cleaved upon import, whereas the rest (‘part 2’) remains at the mature proteins. In contrast, short imported proteins remain largely unprocessed. Finally, this work sheds light on N-terminal processing of proteins encoded in an evolutionary-early-stage photosynthetic organelle and suggests host-derived post-translationally acting factors involved in dynamic regulation of the chromatophore-encoded chromatophore proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Chromatophore Lysate Chromatophore lysate was prepared in triplicates from approximately 6 x 106 chromatophores each. Immediately following isolation, chromatophores were washed in 500 µl wash buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA) and then resuspended in 300 µl lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES pH7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 6 M Guanidine-HCl). ~200 µl acid-washed glass beads (0.4-0.6 mm diameter) were added and chromatophores were lysed by vortexing for 5 min at room temperature. Then, the mixture was heated for 10 min at 95°C, vortexed again for 5 min, and transferred to a new tube without the glass beads. Glass beads were washed with 100 µl lysis buffer and fractions were combined. Insoluble material and residual glass beads were removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 10 min, the clear lysate was transferred to a new tube, and the protein concentration determined by 660 nm Protein Assay (Pierce). Lysates, each containing 200-250 µg protein, were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) and epT.I.P.S. LoRetention tips (Eppendorf) were used during all steps. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche cOmplete) was added to all buffers used. HUNTER Protein N-terminal peptides were enriched by HUNTER SP3 protocol essentially as described in the original publication (Weng et al Mol Cell Proteomics 2019) using formaldehyde isotope CD2O to a final concentration of 30 mM and cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) to 15 mM. Mass Spectrometric Analysis and Protein Identification Analysis of samples was performed on a two-column nano-HPLC setup consisting of an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC system with a reverse-phase trap column (2 cm µPAC trapping column, PharmaFluidics) and a reverse-phase analytical column (50 cm µPAC column, PharmaFluidics) with a gradient from 2 to 30 % of solution B for 90 min (A: H2O + 0.1 % formaldehyde, B: acetonitrile + 0.1 % formaldehyde). One complete run lasted for 2 h per sample. Separated samples were introduced into a high-resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) using a nano-spray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker). Data was acquired in line-mode in a mass range from 100 to 1400 m/z at an acquisition rate of 10 Hz using the Bruker HyStar Software (v5.1, Bruker Daltonics). The top 14 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation. Fragmentation spectra were dynamically acquired with a target TIC (= total ion current) of 25k and a minimal frequency of 5 Hz and a maximal frequency of 20 Hz. Fragment spectra were acquired with stepped parameters, each with half of the acquisition time dedicated for each precursor: 80 µs transfer time, 7.5 eV collision energy, and a collision radio frequency (RF) of 1500 Vpp or 120 µs transfer time, 10 eV collision energy, and a collision RF of 1700 Vpp.

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS data was queried in a database search using MaxQuant v1.6.8.0 with the standard settings for Bruker Q-TOF instruments. Searches were carried out using 60,108 sequences translated from a P. chromatophora transcriptome and 867 sequences derived from translated chromatophore ORFs (Singer et al., 2017). A database containing common contaminants, embedded in MaxQuant, was also included in the query. A decoy database was created by enabling the “revert” option. For HUNTER queries dimethylation of lysines and protein N-termini was set as fixed label (+32.0564 Da due to CD2O). Digestion mode was changed to semispecific (free N-terminus) ArgC and Oxidation (M), acetylation (peptide N-term) and Glu/Gln -> pyro-Glu were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Requantify option was enabled and maximal peptide length for unspecific searches was set to 40 aa. The minimal number of ratio count was set to 1. N-terminal peptides identified by MaxQuant searches were further validated and annotated using MANTI (Demir et al. 2021).

### Publication Abstract
The amoeba Paulinella chromatophora contains photosynthetic organelles, termed chromatophores, which evolved independently from plastids in plants and algae. At least one-third of the chromatophore proteome consists of nucleus-encoded (NE) proteins that are imported across the chromatophore double envelope membranes. Chromatophore-targeted proteins exceeding 250 amino acids (aa) carry a conserved N-terminal extension presumably involved in protein targeting, termed the chromatophore transit peptide (crTP). Short imported proteins do not carry discernable targeting signals. To explore whether the import of proteins is accompanied by their N-terminal processing, here we identified N-termini of 208 chromatophore-localized proteins by a mass spectrometry-based approach. Our study revealed extensive N-terminal acetylation and proteolytic processing in both NE and chromatophore-encoded (CE) fractions of the chromatophore proteome. Mature N-termini of 37 crTP-carrying proteins were identified, of which 30 were cleaved in a common processing region. Surprisingly, only the N-terminal &#x223c;50 aa (part 1) become cleaved upon import. This part contains a conserved adaptor protein-1 complex-binding motif known to mediate protein sorting at the trans-Golgi network followed by a predicted transmembrane helix, implying that part 1 anchors the protein co-translationally in the endoplasmic reticulum and mediates trafficking to the chromatophore via the Golgi. The C-terminal part 2 contains conserved secondary structural elements, remains attached to the mature proteins, and might mediate translocation across the chromatophore inner membrane. Short imported proteins remain largely unprocessed. Finally, this work illuminates N-terminal processing of proteins encoded in an evolutionary-early-stage organelle and suggests host-derived posttranslationally acting factors involved in regulation of the CE chromatophore proteome.

### Keywords
Paulinella chromatophore, Protein import, Chromatophore

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschungszentrum Juelich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics, Forschungszentrum Juelich


