### Accession
PXD031800

### Title
Integrated changes in thermal stability and proteome abundance during altered growth and metabolic cell states.Integrated changes in thermal stability and proteome abundance during altered growth and metabolic cell states.

### Description
Altered thermal solubility measurement techniques are emerging as powerful tools to assess ligand binding, post-translational modification, protein-protein interactions, and many other cellular processes that affect protein state under various cellular conditions. Thermal solubility or stability profiling techniques are enabled on a global proteomic scale by employing the latest generation of isobaric tagging reagents that facilitate multiplexing capacity required to measure the proteome across thermal gradients. Key among these is thermal proteomic profiling (TPP), which requires 8-10 isobaric tags per gradient and multiple sets of proteomic analyses to measure different replicates and conditions. Furthermore, using thermal profiling techniques to measure protein state across different conditions also requires measurements of difference in protein abundance. Here, we use PISA to assess protein abundance and thermal stability.

### Sample Protocol
E.coli cells (DH5; New England Biolabs) were grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) (Bio-Basic) liquid media at 37C while agitating. Cells were harvested at OD 0.789 for log phase samples and at OD 1.76 for stationary phase samples. Samples were spun at 2500 x G for 15 minutes and the supernatant was discarded. Cells were lysed using NP-40 based lysis buffer (1mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40, 1x PBS) containing Protease inhibitor tablets (Roche).  Hek293T cells were cultured in 15cm plates (37 °C at 5% CO2) in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 complete medium (Gibco) supplemented with  10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 100 units/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 0.25 μg/mL amphotericin B (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Once cells reached 50% confluency, media was changed to RPMI-1640 medium containing either 11mM glucose (Gibco) or no glucose and harvested after 24 hours by scraping into the aformentioned NP-40 based lysis buffer (on ice).   2.2 Lysate Preparation and Protein Quantification  All lysates (from bacterial and mammalian cells) were sonicated using Branson SLPe Digital Sonifier at continuous mode with amplitude of 20% for 20 seconds three times, resting for 1 minute on ice between cycles. Lysates were then centrifuged at 20,000 x G for 15 minutes. The supernatant was collected into a new tube and total protein concentration was measured using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo-Scientific).   2.3 Thermal Gradient Application, SP3-digest, and TMT labeling.  Aliquots of 40 μg of protein in 40 μL of lysis buffer were subjected to thermal proteome profiling (TPP) with a temperature gradient of 43.0C to 59.0C for 3 minutes in a BioRad T100 thermal cycler (BioRad). Samples were allowed to rest at room temperature for 5 minutes, then centrifuged at 13,000 x G for 2 hours. For each sample, 20 μL from each temperature was pooled together into new tubes then reduced using 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated using 12 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark.         25ug aliquots of protein was also reduced and alkylated and all samples were cleaned and digested using the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol [10]. Following release from SP3 magnetic beads, peptides were suspended in 30% acetonitrile, and 5 μL of TMT16 reagents (Thermo Scientific) pre-aliquoted at a concentration of 12.5 μg/μL in anhydrous acetonitrile. The reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma), and all 16 TMT-labelled samples were combined.  2.4 High pH Reversed Phase Fractionation  The combined, TMT labeled, peptide samples were adjusted to pH <3 using formic acid (FA). Samples were then desalted using a 100 mg tC18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) with 1 mL of the following solvents: 1) methanol, 2) 50% ACN/1% FA, 3) 2 x 1% FA, 4) loaded peptide samples, 5) 2 x 1% FA, 6) elution with 50% ACN/1% FA, and 7) elution with 70% ACN/1% FA. Eluted peptides were dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator overnight. Peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium formate and sonicated twice for 12 seconds at continuous mode with amplitude of 20%. Peptides were then centrifuged at 20,000 x G for 5 minutes and subjected to High Performance Liquid Chromatography using Agilent 300Extend, 2.1 x 100 mm, 3.5-micron C18 column (Agilent, SantaClara, CA) at 250 µL/min using an elution gradient of 5% to 40% ACN (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8). A total of 96 fractions were collected and every second fraction column-wise was collected into a tube with odd-numbered columns were combined starting with the first fraction in the column, while even-numbered columns began with the second fraction, resulting in 12 samples. Combined fractions were dried using a vacuum concentrator then suspended in 100 µL of 1% FA, and desalted using home-made Stage-tips [11].  2.5 LC-FAIMS-MS2  Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using an FAIMS-HRMS2 method as previously described[6]. Briefly, each sample was resuspended in 5 μL of 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and 2 μL was injected onto a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed in-house with a 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å) using a 90 min gradient (0–2 min: 3–8% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, 2–5 min: 8–10%, 5–70 min: 10–25%, 70–80 min: 25–30%, 80–85 min: 30–100%, 85–90 min: 100%) at a flow rate of 575 nL/min. Full MS1 scans were collected using the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with maximum injection time 50 ms, and AGC 4e5. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap with CID fragmentation using an isolation window of 0.7 Da, 35% NCE, maximum injection time 35ms, and AGC 2x104.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analysed using MSFragger implemented in Fragpipe software[12] . Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and allowed, at most, two missed cleavages. Fixed modification on lysine and N-termini of peptides were set to 304.2071 Da and at 57.0215 Da on cysteines. Variable modification on methionine was set at 15.9949 Da. The precursor mass tolerance was set to +/-10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. For protein sequence database, an up-to-date protein FASTA sequence file from UniProt (human or E.coli) was used. Peptide and protein false discovery rate were filtered to <1% using philosopher in Fragpipe.

### Publication Abstract
Altered thermal solubility measurement techniques are emerging as powerful tools to assess ligand binding, post-translational modification, protein-protein interactions, and many other cellular processes that affect protein state under various cellular conditions. Thermal solubility or stability profiling techniques are enabled on a global proteomic scale by employing isobaric tagging reagents that facilitate multiplexing capacity required to measure changes in the proteome across thermal gradients. Key among these is thermal proteomic profiling (TPP), which requires 8-10 isobaric tags per gradient and generation of multiple proteomic datasets to measure different replicates and conditions. Furthermore, using TPP to measure protein thermal stability state across different conditions may also require measurements of differential protein abundance. Here, we use the proteome integral stability alteration (PISA) assay, a higher throughput version of TPP, to measure global changes in protein thermal stability normalized to their protein abundance. We explore the use of this approach to determine changes in protein state between logarithmic and stationary phase Escherichia coli as well as glucose-starved human Hek293T cells. We observed protein intensity-corrected PISA changes in 290 and 350 proteins due to stationary phase transition in E. coli and glucose starvation, respectively. These data reveal several examples of proteins that were not previously associated with nutrient states by abundance alone. These include E. coli proteins such as putative acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (aidB) and chaperedoxin (cnoX) as well as human RAB vesicle trafficking proteins and many others which may indicate their involvement in metabolic diseases such as cancer.

### Keywords
Pisa, Thermal proteomic profiling

### Affiliations
University of Prince Edward Island
Department of Biology  University of Prince Edward Island

### Submitter
J Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr J Patrick Murphy
Department of Biology  University of Prince Edward Island


