### Accession
PXD033248

### Title
Label free quantitative proteomic analysis on (-)-epicatechin (EC) and 5-(3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)-γ-valerolactone (3,4-diHPV) treated Caco-2 and Hepa1c1c7 cells

### Description
Epicatechin (EC) is a well-known dietary polyphenol and widely found in various foods, e.g., apple, cocoa, green tea, wine, etc. Its consumption has been associated with attenuation of some chronic diseases. After ingestion of EC, a large portion is passed into the large intestinal lumen where it is extensively degraded into various microbial metabolites. One of the major EC microbial metabolites is 5-(3’,4’-dihydroxyphenyl)-γ-valerolactone (3,4-diHPV). The protein expression profiles of EC or 3,4-diHPV treated Caco-2 and Hepa1c1c7 cells were studied with the help of label-free quantitative proteomics. Compared to the parent compound EC, 3,4-diHPV was able to induce upregulations of more Nrf2-related proteins in both cell lines, and the number of significant differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) induced by 3,4-diHPV in Hepa1c1c7 cells was much higher than the respective EC treatment.

### Sample Protocol
After 24 h exposure of Hepa1c1c7 and Caco-2 cells to EC or 3,4-diHPV, the cells were washed twice with PBS. Then 1.5 mL 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 was added. The cells were scraped off, transferred to 2 mL Eppendorf low binding tubes and centrifuged at 10.000 rpm (9391 × g) for three minutes. Cell pellets were washed three times with 1 mL 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, suspended in 100 µL 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 and sonicated. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) method. The protein aggregation capture (PAC) method with DTT reduction (15 mM), protein unfolding in 6M urea, alkylation with 20 mM acrylamide and trypsin digestion was applied to obtain peptides. Peptide samples were analysed by Thermo EASY nanoLC1000 - Exploris 480 analysis. All the experiments were conducted in four independent replicates.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation. The statistical analysis of the expression changes in the derived protein expression profiles was done by Perseus (1.6.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
(-)-Epicatechin (EC) is one of the most popular polyphenols present in various food products in daily life. Upon intake, it is intensively metabolized by microbiota in the large intestine. In the present study, intra- and inter-individual variations in this gut microbial conversion of EC and the concomitant formation of its major metabolites, including 5-(3',4'-dihydroxy phenyl)-&#x3b3;-valerolactone (3,4-diHPV), were identified and quantified <i>via</i> liquid chromatography triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (LC-TQ-MS) in anaerobic fecal incubations. In addition, the bioactivity of EC and 3,4-diHPV in activating Nrf2-mediated gene expression was tested quantifying their effects in the U2OS Nrf2 CALUX assay (a reporter gene assay that is used to test the potency of chemicals in activation of Nrf2 signaling), and on the expression levels of Nrf2-related proteins in Hepa1c1c7 and Caco-2 cells <i>via</i> nanoLC-MSMS. A quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was carried out to confirm selected Nrf2-regulated gene expressions at the mRNA level. Results obtained show that both intra- and inter-individual differences exist in human gut microbial EC degradation and 3,4-diHPV formation, with inter-individual differences being more distinct than intra-individual differences. The metabolite, 3,4-diHPV, showed higher potency in the U2OS Nrf2 CALUX assay than EC itself. Among the obviously altered Nrf2-related proteins, 14 and 10 Nrf2-associated proteins were upregulated to a higher extent upon 3,4-diHPV treatment than in the EC treated group for Hepa1c1c7 and Caco-2 cells, respectively. While only three and four of these Nrf2-associated proteins were induced at a higher level upon EC than upon 3,4-diHPV treatment for Hepa1c1c7 and Caco-2 cells, respectively. RT-qPCR results showed that indeed Nrf2-mediated genes (e.g., Nqo1 and Ugt1a) were only induced significantly in 3,4-diHPV treated and not in EC treated Hepa1c1c7 cells. Taken together, the results suggest that the major colonic EC metabolite, 3,4-diHPV, was more capable of inducing Nrf2-mediated gene expression than its parent compound EC. This implies that the evident inter- and intra-individual differences in the microbial conversion of EC to this major metabolite 3,4-diHPV may affect the overall health-promoting effects of EC consumption related to the Nrf2 pathway activation.

### Keywords
4’-dihydroxyphenyl)-γ-valerolactone, Hepa1c1c7, Caco-2, 5-(3’, (-)-epicatechin

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


