### Accession
PXD027182

### Title
Neuroblastoma HLA class I Immunopeptidomics

### Description
We surveyed the immunopeptidome of neuroblastoma tumors to identify tumor-specific targets derived from non-mutated self proteins originating from core-regulatory circuit proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I molecules were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification as described previously. In brief, cell pellets were lysed in 10 mM CHAPS/PBS (AppliChem/Lonza) containing 1x protease inhibitor (Complete; Roche). Mouse MHC molecules were removed using a 1 h immunoaffinity purification with H-2K-specific mAb 20-8-4S, covalently linked to CNBr-activated sepharose (GE Healthcare). Remaining HLA molecules were purified overnight using the pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32 or a mix of the pan-HLA class II-specific mAb Tü39 and the HLA-DR-specific mAb L243, covalently linked to CNBr-activated. MHC-peptide complexes were eluted by repeated addition of 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (Merck). Elution fractions E1-E4 were pooled, and free MHC ligands were isolated by ultrafiltration using centrifugal filter units (Amicon; Merck Millipore). MHC ligands were extracted and desalted from the filtrate using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Merck Millipore). Extracted peptides were eluted in 35 µl of acetonitrile (Merck)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, centrifuged to complete dryness and resuspended in 25 µl of 1% acetonitrile/0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were stored at -20°C until analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed against the human proteome as comprised in the Swiss-Prot database (www.uniprot.org, release: May 27th 2021; 20,395 reviewed protein sequences contained) using the SequestHT algorithm (3) in the Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Search was not restricted to an enzymatic specificity. Oxidized methionine was allowed as a dynamic modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined by the Percolator algorithm based on processing against a decoy database consisting of shuffled sequences. FDR was set to 1%. Peptide lengths were limited to 8-14 amino acids for MHC class I.

### Publication Abstract
The majority of oncogenic drivers are intracellular proteins, thus constraining their immunotherapeutic targeting to mutated peptides (neoantigens) presented by individual human leukocyte antigen (HLA) allotypes<sup>1</sup>. However, most cancers have a modest mutational burden that is insufficient to generate responses using neoantigen-based therapies<sup>2,3</sup>. Neuroblastoma is a paediatric cancer that harbours few mutations and is instead driven by epigenetically deregulated transcriptional networks<sup>4</sup>. Here we show that the neuroblastoma immunopeptidome is enriched with peptides derived from proteins that are essential for tumourigenesis and focus on targeting the unmutated peptide QYNPIRTTF, discovered on HLA-A*24:02, which is derived from the neuroblastoma dependency gene and master transcriptional regulator PHOX2B. To target QYNPIRTTF, we developed peptide-centric chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) using a counter-panning strategy with predicted potentially cross-reactive peptides. We further hypothesized that peptide-centric CARs could recognize peptides on additional HLA allotypes when presented in a similar manner. Informed by computational modelling, we showed that PHOX2B peptide-centric&#xa0;CARs also recognize QYNPIRTTF presented by HLA-A*23:01 and the highly divergent HLA-B*14:02. Finally, we demonstrated potent and specific killing of neuroblastoma cells expressing these HLAs in vitro and complete tumour regression in mice. These data suggest that peptide-centric&#xa0;CARs have the potential to vastly expand the pool of immunotherapeutic targets to include non-immunogenic intracellular oncoproteins and widen the population of patients who would benefit from such therapy by breaking conventional HLA restriction.

### Keywords
Phox2b, Neuroblastoma immunopeptidomics, Tumor antigens, Hla class i

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research USA
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Mark Yarmarkovich

### Lab Head
Dr John M. Maris
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research USA


