### Accession
PXD012665

### Title
Deciphering functions of VHL in Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma

### Description
VHL is the most frequently mutated gene in ccRCC.It functions via the oxygen-dependent ubiquitin-mediated degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). The stabilization and hyperactivation of HIF1 play essential roles in tumorigenesis. This is a TMT based proteomics experiment aimed to investigate the functions of VHL in ccRCC systematically.

### Sample Protocol
VHL-OE and the control cells were harvested and washed PBS, and lysed in RIPA lysis buffer followed by sonication.The supernatant after centrifugation was collected and quantified with BCA assay. Equal amount of proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA, and precipitated with cold acetone in four volumes, then the precipitation was resolved with 8 M Urea in PBS. Proteins were quantified with BCA assay again and equal amount of proteins were digested with trypsin, followed by desalting using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and labeled by TMT reagents. TMT labeling reactions were quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. The peptides labeled with TMT were mixed and desalted again with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges. The tryptic peptides were divided into 12 fractions with high-pH RPLC followed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Human database (release 17/03/2017; containing 21042 entries) using the SEQUEST searching engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software. The searching criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity required, one missed cleavage tolerance, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 6 plex on lysine or peptide N-terminal were set as the fixed modifications, oxidation on methionine was set as the variable modification, precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for all MS1 spectra acquired, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra acquired. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were validated using the Percolator provided by Proteome Discoverer software based on q-values at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Proteomic analysis was carried out in biological triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is a frequently occurring renal cancer. The Von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor VHL, a known tumor suppressor gene, is frequently mutated in about 50% of patients with ccRCC. However, it is unclear whether VHL influences the progression of ccRCC tumors expressing wild-type VHL. In the present study, we found that higher expression of VHL was correlated with the better disease-free survival (DFS) in ccRCC patients using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets. We revealed that VHL overexpression in ccRCC cells inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 (SREBP1)-regulated triglyceride synthesis, and cell proliferation. Proteomic analysis provided us a global view that VHL regulated four biological processes, including metabolism, immune regulation, apoptosis, and cell movement. Importantly, we found that VHL overexpression led to up-regulated expression of proteins associated with antigen processing and interferon-responsive proteins, thus rendering ccRCC cells more sensitive to interferon treatment. We defined an interferon-responsive signature (IRS) composed of ten interferon-responsive proteins, whose mRNA expression levels were positively correlated with DFS in ccRCC patients. Taken together, our results propose that the subset of ccRCC patients with high VHL expression benefit from immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Renal cancer; vhl; immunogenicity; proteostasis

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Songbiao Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Center for Synthetic and Systematic Biology, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China


