### Accession
PXD022329

### Title
Unbiased proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis identifies response signatures and novel susceptibilities after combined MEK and mTOR inhibition in BRAFV600E mutant glioma

### Description
The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is one of the most altered pathways in cancer. It is involved in the control of cell proliferation, invasion, metabolism, and resistance to therapy. A number of aggressive malignancies, including melanoma, colon cancer and glioma, are driven by an activating missense mutation (V600E) in one component of the pathway, BRAF. BRAF V600E mutated cancers may respond initially to MEK inhibition, but may develop resistance mediated by increased reliance on mTOR signaling. We have previously demonstrated that the combination of the MEK inhibitor trametinib with the dual mTORC1/2 inhibitor TAK228 improved survival and decreased vascularization in a BRAFV600E mutant glioma model. To elucidate the mechanism of action of, and the changes in response to, MEK and mTOR inhibition, we performed comprehensive unbiased proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterization of BRAFV600E mutant glioma xenografts after short-course treatment with trametinib and TAK228, alone and in combination. We identified distinct response signatures for each monotherapy and combination therapy and validated that combination treatment inhibited activation of the MAPK and mTOR pathways, increased apoptotic signaling and suppressed angiogenesis signaling. Furthermore, we found that trametinib and TAK228 combination treatment broadly suppressed the activity of the cyclin-dependent kinases and increased the levels of proteins (and their activating phosphorylations) involved in glycolysis, the TCA cycle, nucleotide biosynthesis and DNA replication. We also demonstrated activation of both receptor tyrosine kinase and histone deacetylase proteins. This study reports a detailed (phospho)proteomic analysis of the response of BRAFV600E mutant glioma to combined MEK and mTOR pathway inhibition and identifies a number of targetable upregulated proteins and pathways, providing new avenues for the development of additional rational combination therapies for aggressive BRAF-driven tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Cryopulverized tissue was resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 2 g/mL aprotinin, 10 g. mL leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM NaF, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (1:100 dilution), and 20 M PUGNAc). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein lysates were subjected to reduction with 5 mM 1,4-Dithiothreitol for 30 mins at RT, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 mins at RT in the dark. Urea concentration was reduced < 2M using 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Samples were subjected to tandem digestion of Lys-C (1:50) for 2 hr at RT followed by trypsin (1:50) overnight at RT. The generated peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 1% formic acid, subjected to clean-up using C-18 SepPak columns, and then dried. Desalted peptides were labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents following manufacturer’s instructions. The desalted, TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in a volume of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and subjected to basic reversed-phase chromatography with Solvent A (2% ACN, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and a non-linear gradient of Solvent B (90% ACN, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) at 1 mL/min as follows: 0% Solvent B (9 mins), 6% Solvent B (4 min), 6% to 28.5% Solvent B, (50 min), 28.% to 34% Solvent B (5.5 min), 34% to 60% Solvent B (13 min), and then held at 60% Solvent B for 8.5 min on a Agilent 4.6 mm x 250 mm RP Zorbax 300 A Extend-C18 column with 3.5 m size beads. Collected fractions were concatenated. 5% of each the fractions was aliquoted for global proteomic analysis, dried down, and resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid prior to ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. The remaining sample was utilized for phosphopeptide enrichment. The remaining 95% of the sample were further concatenated prior to phosphopeptide enrichment using immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC). Ni-NTA agarose beads were utilized to prepare Fe3+-NTA agarose beads, and then 300 g of peptides reconstituted in 80% ACN/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid were incubated with 10 L of the Fe3+-IMAC beads for 30 mins. Sample were then spun down and the supernatant containing unbound peptides was removed. The beads were washed twice and then loaded onto equilibrated C-18 Stage Tips with 80% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Tips were rinsed twice with 1% formic acid, followed by sample elution off the Fe3+-IMAC beads and onto the C-18 State Tips with 70 L of 500 mM dibasic potassium phosphate, pH 7.0 three times. C-18 Stage Tips were washed twice with 1% formic acid, followed by elution of the phosphopeptides from the C-18 Stage Tips with 50% ACN, 0.1% formic acid twice. Samples were dried down and resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid prior to ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. 1 g of peptide was separated using Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system on an in-house packed 20 cm x 75 m diameter C18 column (1.9 m Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ beads; Picofrit 10 m opening). The column was heated to 50°C using a column heater. The flow rate was 0.300 μl/min with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile (B). The peptides were separated with a 6–30% B gradient in 84 mins and analyzed using the Thermo Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Parameters were as followed MS1: resolution – 60,000, mass range – 350 to 1800 m/z, RF Lens – 30%, AGC Target 4.0e5, Max IT – 50 ms, charge state include - 2-6, dynamic exclusion – 45 s, top 20 ions selected for MS2; MS2: resolution – 50,000, high-energy collision dissociation activation energy (HCD) – 37, isolation width (m/z) – 0.7, AGC Target – 2.0e5, Max IT – 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS files were analyzed by a cloud-based proteomic pipeline developed in Johns Hopkins University to perform database search for spectrum assignments using MS-GF+ in this study against a combined human and mouse RefSeq database (version 20160914). A decoy database was used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) at PSM, peptide and protein levels. Peptides were searched with two tryptic ends, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Search parameters included 20 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.06 Da fragment ion tolerance, static modification of carbamidomethylation at cysteine (+57.02146), TMT-label modification of N-terminus and lysine (+229.16293)  and variable modifications of oxidation at methionine (+15.99491) and phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.96633). Filters used for global data analysis included one PSM per peptide and two peptides per protein, with a 1% FDR threshold at the protein level. Filters used for phosphoproteome data included one PSM per peptide and one peptide per protein, with a 1% FDR threshold at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
The mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway is one of the most frequently altered pathways in cancer. It is involved in the control of cell proliferation, invasion, and metabolism, and can cause resistance to therapy. A number of aggressive malignancies, including melanoma, colon cancer, and glioma, are driven by a constitutively activating missense mutation (V600E) in the v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF) component of the pathway. Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibition is initially effective in targeting these cancers, but reflexive activation of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling contributes to frequent therapy resistance. We have previously demonstrated that combination treatment with the MEK inhibitor trametinib and the dual mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1/2 inhibitor TAK228 improves survival and decreases vascularization in a BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> mutant glioma model. To elucidate the mechanism of action of this combination therapy and understand the ensuing tumor response, we performed comprehensive unbiased proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterization of BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> mutant glioma xenografts after short-course treatment with trametinib and TAK228. We identified 13,313 proteins and 30,928 localized phosphosites, of which 12,526 proteins and 17,444 phosphosites were quantified across all samples (data available via ProteomeXchange; identifier PXD022329). We identified distinct response signatures for each monotherapy and combination therapy and validated that combination treatment inhibited activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase and mTOR pathways. Combination therapy also increased apoptotic signaling, suppressed angiogenesis signaling, and broadly suppressed the activity of the cyclin-dependent kinases. In response to combination therapy, both epidermal growth factor receptor and class 1 histone deacetylase proteins were activated. This study reports a detailed (phospho)proteomic analysis of the response of BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> mutant glioma to combined MEK and mTOR pathway inhibition and identifies new targets for the development of rational combination therapies for BRAF-driven tumors.

### Keywords
Glioma; braf v600e; trametinib; tak228; sapanisertib; ink128; mln0128

### Affiliations
Division of Pediatric Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Oncology

### Submitter
Micah Maxwell

### Lab Head
Dr Micah Joel Maxwell
Division of Pediatric Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.


