### Accession
PXD038492

### Title
LC-MSMS of Hela cell extracts on pull down with de novo modular peptide binding proteins

### Description
we describe a general approach for de novo design of proteins made out of repeating units that bind peptides with repeating sequences such that there is a one to one correspondence between repeat units on the protein and peptide. We develop a rapid docking plus geometric hashing method to identify protein backbones and protein-peptide rigid body arrangements that are compatible with bidentate hydrogen bonds between side chains on the protein and the backbone of the peptide; the remainder of the protein sequence is then designed using Rosetta to incorporate additional interactions with the peptide and drive folding to the desired structure. We use this approach to design, from scratch, alpha helical repeat proteins that bind six different tripeptide repeat sequences--PLP, LRP, PEW, IYP, PRM and PKW-- in near polyproline 2 helical conformations.

### Sample Protocol
Polyacrylamide gel presented was cut into six pieces (1-2 mm) and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by manual in situ enzymatic digestion (the gel area containing the binder was ommited from the analysis to avoid saturation of the detector by overabundance of binder peptides). Briefly, the excised protein gel pieces were placed in a well of a 96-well microtitre plate and destained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, proteins were digested with 6 ng/μL Trypsin (Promega, UK), 0.1% Protease Max (Promega, UK) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting gel pieces were extracted with ammonium bicarbonate (100 μL, 100 mM) and ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (50/50, 100 μL) before being dried down via vacuum. Clean-up of peptide digests was carried out with HyperSep SpinTip P-20 (ThermoScientific, USA) C18 columns, using 80% acetonitrile as the elution solvent before being dried down again. The resulting peptides were and were extracted in 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile. The digest was analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of 250 nL/min. Peptides were trapped on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm x 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific, USA) before separation on PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 A, 75 μm x 75 cm EasySpray column (ThermoScientific, USA). Peptides were eluted on a 90 minute gradient with acetonitrile and interfaced via an EasySpray ionisation source to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HFX, ThermoScientific, USA). MS data were acquired in data dependent mode with a Top-25 method, high resolution scans full mass scans were carried out (R = 120,000, m/z 350 – 1750) followed by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with collision energy 27 % normalised collision energy. The corresponding tandem mass spectra were recorded (R=30,000, isolation window m/z 1.6, dynamic exclusion 50 s).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were then searched against the Uniprot human proteome database, using the Mascot search engine programme (Matrix Science, UK)18. Database search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. One missed enzyme cleavages were allowed and variable modifications for oxidation, carboxymethylation, and phosphorylation. MS/MS data were validated using the Scaffold programme (Proteome Software Inc., USA). All data were additionally interrogated manually.

### Publication Abstract
General approaches for designing sequence-specific peptide-binding proteins would have wide utility in proteomics and synthetic biology. However, designing peptide-binding proteins is challenging, as most peptides do not have defined structures in isolation, and hydrogen bonds must be made to the buried polar groups in the peptide backbone<sup>1-3</sup>. Here, inspired by natural and re-engineered protein-peptide systems<sup>4-11</sup>, we set out to design proteins made out of repeating units that bind peptides with repeating sequences, with a one-to-one correspondence between the repeat units of the protein and those of the peptide. We use geometric hashing to identify protein backbones and peptide-docking arrangements that are compatible with bidentate hydrogen bonds between the side chains of the protein and the peptide backbone<sup>12</sup>. The remainder of the protein sequence is then optimized for folding and peptide binding. We design repeat proteins to bind to six different tripeptide-repeat sequences in polyproline II conformations. The proteins are hyperstable and bind to four to six tandem repeats of their tripeptide targets with nanomolar to picomolar affinities in vitro and in living cells. Crystal structures reveal repeating interactions between protein and peptide interactions as designed, including ladders of hydrogen bonds from protein side chains to peptide backbones. By redesigning the binding interfaces of individual repeat units, specificity can be achieved for non-repeating peptide sequences and for disordered regions of native proteins.

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-msms, Gelbands

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
Medical Research Council - Laboratory of molecular biology

### Submitter
Tomos Morgan

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuel Derivery
Medical Research Council - Laboratory of molecular biology


