### Accession
PXD046017

### Title
Genetic components of Escherichia coli involved in its complex preypredator interaction with Myxococcus xanthus

### Description
Myxococcus xanthus and Escherichia coli represent a well-studied microbial predatorprey pair frequently examined in laboratory settings. While significant progress has been made in comprehending the mechanisms governing M. xanthus predation, various aspects of the response and defensive mechanisms of E. coli as prey remain elusive. In this study, the E. coli large-scale chromosome deletion library was screened, and a mutant designated as ME5012 was identified to possess remarkable resistance to predation by M. xanthus. Within the deleted region of ME5012 encompassing seven genes, the significance of dusB and fis genes in driving the observed resistant phenotype became apparent. Specifically, the deletion of fis resulted in a notable reduction in flagellum production in E. coli, contributing to a certain level of resistance against predation by M. xanthus. Meanwhile, the removal of dusB in E. coli led to diminished inducibility of myxovirescin A production by M. xanthus, accompanied by a slight increase in resistance to myxovirescin A. These findings shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying the complex interaction between M. xanthus and E. coli in a predatory context.

### Sample Protocol
ME5012 and MG1655 were delivered with three replicates for quantitative proteomic analysis through the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) methodology (Wang et al., 2016). Initially, cells were lysed to extract proteins, and they were reduced into peptides through trypsin digestion. Peptides sequentially were labeled individually with iTRAQ reagents for 2 h at room temperature. These labeled peptides were pooled and fractionated through strong cation exchange fractionation on high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, LC-20AB, Shimadzu, Japan). After drying under vacuum, the labeled samples were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS, Thermo Fisher, USA). The raw MS data were processed and analyzed to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) for mechanisms exploration of a previously described (Jeong et al., 2001; von Mering et al., 2005).

### Data Protocol
The statistically significant difference of a protein was considered with fold change (FC) >1.5 in the expression level and FDR q-value <0.05. The pathway enrichment analysis was obtained based on the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database, and top KEGG enrichment results were listed with p-value <0.05. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of DEPs was predicted through String database and was further visualized based on Degree Centrality Analysis using Cytoscape software 3.10.0 (Majeed and Mukhtar, 2023).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Myxococcus xanthus</i> and <i>Escherichia coli</i> represent a well-studied microbial predator-prey pair frequently examined in laboratory settings. While significant progress has been made in comprehending the mechanisms governing <i>M. xanthus</i> predation, various aspects of the response and defensive mechanisms of <i>E. coli</i> as prey remain elusive. In this study, the <i>E. coli</i> MG1655 large-scale chromosome deletion library was screened, and a mutant designated as ME5012 was identified to possess significantly reduced susceptibility to predation by <i>M. xanthus</i>. Within the deleted region of ME5012 encompassing seven genes, the significance of <i>dusB</i> and <i>fis</i> genes in driving the observed phenotype became apparent. Specifically, the deletion of <i>fis</i> resulted in a notable reduction in flagellum production in <i>E. coli</i>, contributing to a certain level of resistance against predation by <i>M. xanthus</i>. Meanwhile, the removal of <i>dusB</i> in <i>E. coli</i> led to diminished inducibility of myxovirescin A production by <i>M. xanthus</i>, accompanied by a slight decrease in susceptibility to myxovirescin A. These findings shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying the complex interaction between <i>M. xanthus</i> and <i>E. coli</i> in a predatory context.

### Keywords
Fis gene, Dusb gene, Myxovirescin a, Myxococcus xanthus, Escherichia coli, Predator-prey interaction, Flagellum

### Affiliations
Shandong University

### Submitter
Ning Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Zhang
Shandong University


