### Accession
PXD027746

### Title
Identification of differently expressed proteins in breast cancer progression

### Description
In this study, we identified a threshold for “danger discrimination” in macrophages after sensing specific changes in protein expression at the surface of cells with an advanced premalignant phenotype. The identification of these “danger signals” could stimulate the development of novel targeted chemoprevention and immunoprophylactic strategies. Drugs could also be developed to lower the discrimination threshold and therefore eliminate more efficiently earlier stages of premalignacy. Besides the applications for cancer prevention, a better understanding of mechanisms selected for immune tolerance could also have implications for the management of auto-immune disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell lysates were generated from a confluent 10 cm2 culture plate by scraping the cells with 100 µl of lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 10 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT, 4% CHAPS) followed by 30 min incubation on ice, 7 cycles of 30 s ON/30s OFF sonicator and centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 rpm. Extracted protein were stored at -70 °C. One hundred µg of untreated and treated samples were labelled with Cy3- and Cy5-NHS minimal-labeling DIGE dyes (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) diluted in Dimethylformamide (DMF) (Sigma) for 30 min on ice. Labeling of the two samples was reversed (reciprocal labeling) and run concurrently on a second 2D-DIGE gel to eliminate dye-dependent differences, constituting a technical replicate. First-dimension Isoelectric Point Focusing (IEF), and second-dimension SDS-PAGE were conducted as described (17) with the following modifications. Proteins were separated in the first-dimension on 18 cm pH 3-10NL IPG strips on a Protean i12 IEF Cell apparatus (Bio-Rad) for 32,000 Volt-hours. The samples were then separated on the second-dimension SDS-PAGE in 12% polyacrylamide gels in standard Tris-Glycine-SDS running buffer. After electrophoresis, the gels were fixed in a solution of 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid. The gels were imaged on a custom-built, fluorescent gel imager that housed a robotic spot-cutting head. The resultant fluorescent images were analyzed and selected spots that were then cut from the gels and identified via Nano LC-ESI-MS/MS, as described (18).

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed by the mass spectometry facility of Arizona state univeristy

### Publication Abstract
The ability of immune cells to sense changes associated with malignant transformation as early as possible is likely to be important for the successful outcome of cancer immunosurveillance. In this process, the immune system faces a trade-off between elimination of cells harboring premalignant or malignant changes, and autoimmune pathologies. We hypothesized that the immune system has therefore evolved a threshold for the stage of transformation from normal to fully malignant cells that first provides a threat (danger) signal requiring a response. We co-cultured human macrophages with a unique set of genetically related human cell lines that recapitulate successive stages in breast cancer development: MCF10A (immortalized, normal); MCFNeoT (benign hyperplasia); MCFT1 (atypical hyperplasia); MCFCA1 (invasive cancer). Using cytokines-based assays, we found that macrophages were inert towards MCF10A and MCFNeoT but were strongly activated by MCFT1 and MCFCA1 to produce inflammatory cytokines, placing the threshold for recognition between two premalignant stages, the earlier stage MCFNeoT and the more advanced MCFT1. The cytokine activation threshold paralleled the threshold for enhanced phagocytosis. Using proteomic and transcriptomic approaches, we identified surface molecules, some of which are well-known tumor-associated antigens, that were absent or expressed at low levels in MCF10A and MCFNeoT but turned on or over-expressed in MCFT1 and MCFCA1. Adding antibodies specific for two of these molecules, Annexin-A1 and CEACAM1, inhibited macrophage activation, supporting their role as cancer "danger signals" recognized by macrophages.

### Keywords
Mass spectometry, Breast cancer, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh
University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine

### Submitter
Camille Jacqueline

### Lab Head
Dr Olivera J. Finn
University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine


