### Accession
PXD018942

### Title
Syndecan-2 partners in rat left ventricular lysates

### Description
To get more insight into the role of syndecan-2, we here sought to identify interaction partners of syndecan-2 in rat left ventricle. By using three different affinity purification methods combined with mass spectrometry (AP-MS) analysis, we identified 30 novel partners and 9 partners previously described in the literature, which together make up the first cardiac syndecan-2 interactome. The three AP-MS were: 1) Immunoprecipitation of endogenous SDC2. Non-relevant IgG was used as negative control. 2) Fishing with recombinant GST-SDC2 (full length). GST and beads only were used as negative controls. 3) Pull down using a synthetic biotin-axh-SDC2cyt  peptide (cytoplasmic tail). A scrambled peptide sequence and beads only were used as negative controls.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen lefte ventricles (LV) from Wistar 230-250 g male rats were pulverized in a mortar together with liquid nitrogen, transferred to lysis buffer on ice and homogenized. Centrifugation at 100,000 x g for 60 min at 4°C followed. In the pull down experiment, LV lysates were mixed with biotinylated SDC2cyt or scrambled peptide (negative control) and rotated at 4°C ON. Streptavidin coated dynabeads were washed three times in PBS before adding LV lysate with or without peptides and rotated for 40 minutes at RT. Then the beads were washed and captured proteins bound to the beads were eluted. Proteins were precipitated in 1 ml 4x ice-cold acetone added glycoblue at -20°C ON. Following centrifugation, the pellets were air-dried before MS analysis.    In the immunoprecipitation and fishing experiments, anti-SDC2, anti-sheep IgG or anti-GST were coupled to magnetic dynabeads according to manufacturer’s protocol. The antibody coupled beads were incubated with LV lysates with or without supplementation of GST or GST-SDC2 recombinant protein and rotated ON at 4°C. After wash, captured protein complexes were eluted before precipitation. The precipitated proteins were resuspended in 20µl 6M Urea in 10mM HEPES, pH8 before reduction, alkylation and four hours in-solution lysyl endopeptidase digestion (Wako) in room temparature. Samples were diluted 4 times before over night trypsin (promega) digestion at room temperature. Following digestion, centrifugation at 14 000 x g for 10 min, trypsin inactivation by adding 100 µl 1% TFA and another round of centrifugation at 14 000 x g for 10 min followed. Desalting and upconcentration of peptides was performed before MS by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). The peptides were eluted with 80 μl 80% ACN/0.1% FA, dried, and solubilized in 7 μL 0.1 % FA for MS analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed by a nEASY-LC coupled to QExactive Plus (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) as previously described (Mathiesen et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
The  resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software for protein identification and label-free quantification and Perseus software was used for the statistical analysis  as  described in detail previously (Mathiesen et al., 2019, PMID: 30967474).

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is important in cardiac remodeling and syndecans have gained increased interest in this process due to their ability to convert changes in the ECM to cell signaling. In particular, syndecan-4 has been shown to be important for cardiac remodeling, whereas the role of its close relative syndecan-2 is largely unknown in the heart. To get more insight into the role of syndecan-2, we here sought to identify interaction partners of syndecan-2 in rat left ventricle. By using three different affinity purification methods combined with mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, we identified 30 novel partners and 9 partners previously described in the literature, which together make up the first cardiac syndecan-2 interactome. Eleven of the novel partners were also verified in HEK293 cells (i.e., AP2A2, CAVIN2, DDX19A, EIF4E, JPH2, MYL12A, NSF, PFDN2, PSMC5, PSMD11, and RRAD). The cardiac syndecan-2 interactome partners formed connections to each other and grouped into clusters mainly involved in cytoskeletal remodeling and protein metabolism, but also into a cluster consisting of a family of novel syndecan-2 interaction partners, the CAVINs. MS analyses revealed that although syndecan-2 was significantly enriched in fibroblast fractions, most of its partners were present in both cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts. Finally, a comparison of the cardiac syndecan-2 and -4 interactomes revealed surprisingly few protein partners in common.

### Keywords
Interactome, Mass spectrometry, Syndecan-2

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


