### Accession
PXD005846

### Title
Cell surface mapping and monitoring of cell surface dynamics

### Description
Here, we present a simple and robust N-linked glycoproteome enrichment protocol optimized for deep coverage of the plasma membrane proteome. The procedure was applied to characterize the cell surface proteome of 15 standard laboratory human cell lines and three primary cell types. We observed significant differences in receptor diversity and transporter abundances between primary cells and corresponding cell lines. Relative quantification using isobaric mass tagging enabled quantitative monitoring of dynamic processes on the cell surface in multiplexed experiments. We for the first time report a comprehensive analysis of the profound remodeling of the plasma membrane proteome during monocyte to macrophage differentiation of THP-1 cells. Treatment of these cells with the kinase inhibitor dasatinib (Sprycel) during differentiation severely compromised macrophage differentiation due to an off-target activity resulting in substantial morphological and functional changes and the loss of many macrophage-associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
1*107 suspension cells or a 15 cm petri dish of adherent cells at 70-80% confluency were washed twice with PBS followed by oxidation of carbohydrates with 1 mM Na-metaperiodate in pH 6.5 adjusted PBS at 4 °C for 10 min in the dark. Cells were washed twice with PBS followed by biotinylation with 1 mM Alkoxyamine-PEG4-Biotin in presence of 10 mM Aniline for 10 min at 4°C in the dark. Cells were washed three times with PBS. Suspension cells were pelleted at 340g, adherent cells were detached by scraping and pelleted at 340g. Cell pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Cell pellets were lysed by boiling for 10 min at 95 °C in 200 µl SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 60 mM Tris pH 7.6, 50 mM DTT). Samples were cooled and sonicated on ice once (Bandelin Sonopuls HD 2200) at 50% power output with 1 burst of 10 seconds. Enrichment of biotinylated proteins was performed in 96 deep well filter plates (Porvair Micrulute Combinatorial). For each enrichment 15 µL High Capacity Streptavidin Agarose resin were prepared by washing twice with Wash-Buffer 1 (WB1: 0.4 % SDS, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 400 mM NaCl). Resin was incubated with lysate for 60 min at 25 °C while shaking, followed by three times washing with WB1, eight times washing with Wash-Buffer 2 (WB2: 20 mM Tris pH 7.5 and 400 mM NaCl) and 8 times washing with Wash-Buffer 3 (WB3: 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 2 M Urea). Subsequently, resin was incubated for 45 min with 45 mM DTT in 50 mM TEAB at 25 °C followed by 30 min incubation at 25 °C with 100 mM IAA in 50 mM TEAB. Resin was washed five times with WB3 and digested over night at 25 °C in 60 µl 50 mM TEAB, 1.33 M Urea supplemented with 0.4µg trypsin. On the following day additional 0.4 µg trypsin in 50 mM TEAB was added and resin was incubated for an additional 4 hours at 25 °C. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation. For additional PNGase F elution, resin was washed five times with Wash-Buffer 4 (WB4: 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5) followed by incubation with 0.5 units PNGase F in WB4 for 3 hours at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation. For TMT-quantification experiments peptide samples were dried in vacuo, resuspended in 100 µL of 200 mM TEAB 10% ACN and labeled with 10-plex TMT (TMT10, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) reagents. The labeling reaction was performed by adding 50 µl of 25 mM TMT-label reagent dissolved in acetonitrile, incubation for 90 min at 25 °C and quenching with 2.5 % hydroxylamine in 100 mM TEAB for 15 min at 25 °C. Labeled peptides were pooled and desalted using C18 stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Samples from the THP-1 differentiation time course experiment were fractionated into 9 fractions by using reversed-phase chromatography at pH12 (1mm Xbridge column (Waters, Milford, MA)), as previously described (Kruse et al., 2011). All other samples were measured without fractionation. Samples were dried in vacuo and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water. 30% of the sample was injected into an Ultimate3000 nanoRLSC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive or Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on custom-made 50 cm × 100µm (inner diameter) C18 reversed-phase columns (Reprosil) at 40°C. Gradient elution was performed from 2% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 2 or 4 hours. Samples were online injected into Q-Exactive mass spectrometers operating with a data-dependent top10 method. MS spectra were acquired by using 70.000 resolution and an ion target of 3E6 for MS1 scans. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) scans were performed with 25% (label-free) or 35% (TMT-quantification) normalized collision energy (NCE) at 35.000 resolution (at m/z 200) and the ion target settings was set to 2E5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using an in-house pipeline (Franken et al., 2015). Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used for protein identification by using a 10 ppm mass tolerance for peptide precursors and 20 mDa (HCD) mass tolerance for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximal three missed cleavages. For label-free experiments carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation of proteins were set as variable modifications. For TMT-quantification experiments carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT modification of lysine residues were set as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation of proteins and TMT modification of peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications. The search database consisted of a customized version of the International Protein Index protein sequence database (numbers of entries: 108790, year: 2009) combined with a decoy version of this database created by using a script supplied by Matrix Science. IPI IDs of identified proteins were mapped to UniProt IDs by matching corresponding protein sequences. Unless stated otherwise, we accepted protein identifications as follows: (i) For single-spectrum to sequence assignments, we required this assignment to be the best match and a minimum Mascot score of 31 and a 10× difference of this assignment over the next best assignment. Based on these criteria, the decoy search results indicated <1% false discovery rate (FDR). (ii) For multiple spectrum to sequence assignments and using the same parameters, the decoy search results indicate <0.1% FDR. All identified proteins were quantified; FDR for quantified proteins was below 1%. In case of label-free quantification, the top3 method (Silva et al., 2006) was applied in a slightly modified form (Becher et al., 2013). In brief: for each protein the maximum intensity of the extracted ion current (XIC) of the three most intense peptide sequences was log10 transformed and averaged. The derived value is denoted as ms1 abundance and is a good proxy for protein abundance in the sample. For TMT-quantification experiments, reporter ion intensities were read from raw data and multiplied with ion accumulation times (the unit is milliseconds) so as to yield a measure proportional to the number of ions; this measure is referred to as ion area (Savitski et al., 2011). Spectra matching to peptides were filtered according to the following criteria: mascot ion score >15, signal-to-background of the precursor ion >4, and signal-to-interference >0.5 (Savitski et al., 2010). Fold-changes were corrected for isotope purity as described and adjusted for interference caused by co-eluting nearly isobaric peaks as estimated by the signal-to-interference measure (Savitski et al., 2013). Protein quantification was derived from individual spectra matching to distinct peptides by using a sum-based bootstrap algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The plasma membrane proteome plays a crucial role in inter- and intracellular signaling, cell survival, and cell identity. As such, it is a prominent target for pharmacological intervention. The relatively low abundance of this subproteome in conjunction with challenging extractability and solubility still hampers its comprehensive analysis. Here, we combined a chemical glycoprotein-tagging strategy with mass spectrometry to enable comprehensive analysis of the cell-surface glycoproteome. To benchmark this workflow and to provide guidance for cell line selection for functional experiments, we generated an inventory of the <i>N</i>-linked cell-surface glycoproteomes of 15 standard laboratory human cell lines and three primary lymphocytic cell types. On average, about 900 plasma membrane and secreted proteins were identified per experiment, including more than 300 transporters and ion channels. Primary cells displayed distinct expression of surface markers and transporters underpinning the importance of carefully validating model cell lines selected for the study of cell surface-mediated processes. To monitor dynamic changes of the cell-surface proteome in a highly multiplexed experiment, we employed an isobaric mass tag-based chemical labeling strategy. This enabled the time-resolved analysis of plasma membrane protein presentation during differentiation of the monocytic suspension cell line THP-1 into macrophage-like adherent cells. Time-dependent changes observed in membrane protein presentation reflect functional remodeling during the phenotypic transition in three distinct phases: rapid surface presentation and secretion of proteins from intracellular pools concurrent with rapid internalization of no longer needed proteins and finally delayed presentation of newly synthesized macrophage markers. Perturbation of this process using marketed receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors revealed dasatinib to severely compromise macrophage differentiation due to an off-target activity. This finding suggests that dynamic processes can be highly vulnerable to drug treatment and should be monitored more rigorously to identify adverse drug effects.

### Keywords
Primary cells, Cell surface, N-linked glycoproteomics

### Affiliations
Cellzome
Cellzome, a GSK company

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Eberl
Cellzome, a GSK company


