### Accession
PXD030956

### Title
Murine liver tolerates repeated toxic injuries through microsteatosis and mild inflammation

### Description
The liver has a remarkable capacity to regenerate and thus compensates for repeated injuries through toxic chemicals, drugs, alcohol, or malnutrition for decades. However, largely unknown is how and when alterations in the liver occur due to tolerable damaging insults. To that end, we induced repeated liver injuries over ten weeks in a mouse model injecting carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) twice a week. We lost 10% of the study animals within the first six weeks, which was accompanied by a steady deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) regardless of metabolic activity of the liver. From week six onwards, all mice survived, and in these mice ECM deposition was rather reduced suggesting ECM remodelling as a liver response contributing to better coping with repeated injuries. The data of time-resolved paired transcriptome and proteome profiling of 18 mice was subjected to multi-level network inference, using Knowledge guided Multi-Omics Network inference (KiMONo), identified multi-level key markers exclusively associated with the injury-tolerant liver response. Interestingly, pathways of cancer and inflammation were lighting up and were validated using independent data sets compiled of 1034 samples from publicly available human cohorts. Interestingly, a yet undescribed link to lipid metabolism in this damage-tolerant phase was identified. Immunostaining revealed an unexpected accumulation of small lipid droplets (microvesicular steatosis) in parallel to a recovery of catabolic processes of the liver to pre-injury levels. Further, mild inflammation was experimentally validated. Taken together, we identified week six as a critical time point to switch the liver response program from an acute response that fosters ECM accumulation to a tolerant “survival” phase with pronounced deposition of small lipid droplets in hepatocytes potentially protecting against the repetitive injury with toxic chemicals. Our data suggest that microsteatosis formation plus a mild inflammatory state represent biomarkers and probably functional liver requirements to resist chronic damage.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome profiling of liver tissue was performed on selected time points (0, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 weeks; n=3 per time point). Liver tissue was powdered using a Micro-Dismembrator (B.Braun, Micro-Dismembrator U Ball Mill), and approximately 10 mg aliquots of tissue powder were lysed in 100 µl SDS buffer (4% SDS, 1x Halt protein inhibitor, 40 mM TCEP, 160 mM CAA, 200 mM TEAB) by sonication on ice (60 sec, 80% amplitude, 0.1 sec off/0.5 sec on) and centrifugation (15 min, 14,000 rpm, 4°C). The supernatant was incubated at 95°C for 5 min and 70°C for 30 min for reduction and alkylation. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay, and 20 µg of total protein was used for subsequent tryptic digestion. Samples were prepared using a modified version of the Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol (Hughes et al. 2014). Briefly, a mix of Sera-Mag SP3 beads was added to the protein samples in a 10:1 SP3 beads/protein (wt/wt) ratio. Acetonitrile was added for a final concentration of 70% organic, and the mix was incubated for 18 min at room temperature (RT). Protein-bound beads were isolated on a magnetic rack and washed twice with 70% ethanol. A third wash was performed using 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Beads were air-dried and reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB buffer containing Trypsin Gold (Promega) in a 1:25 enzyme/protein (wt/wt) ratio. Protein digestion was performed for 14 h at 37°C. The digested peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until further use. A sample pool, consisting of 5 µg of each sample in the dataset, was generated. Peptides were then reconstituted in 50 mm HEPES (pH 8.5), and TMT10-plex reagents (ThermoFisher) were added to the samples (stocks dissolved in 100% ACN) in a 1:10 sample/TMT (wt/wt) ratio. The peptide–TMT mixture was incubated for 1 h at RT, and the labeling reaction was stopped by addition of 5% hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4%. Different samples were combined and the TMT-plexes were fractionated into 6 fractions using stage-tip Strong cation-exchange (SCX) fractionation. Stage-tips were manually prepared using 3 discs of SCX resin (Empore) and conditioned with MeOH, followed by 80% ACN, 0.5% AcOH; 0.5% AcOH; 500 mM NH4AcOH, 0.5% AcOH, 30% ACN; 20mM NH4AcOH, 0.5% AcOH, 30% ACN, and was equilibrated with 0.5% AcOH successively. Before SCX fractionation, samples were reconstituted in 0.5% AcOH, sonicated, incubated on a shaker, and loaded onto the stage tips by centrifugation. Loaded stage-tips were washed with 0.5% AcOH. For elution, descending concentrations of elution buffers (20/40/70/100/250/500 mM of NH4AcOH, 0.5% AcOH, 30% ACN) were used and the flow-through was collected. Fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C. Nano-flow LC-MS/MS was performed by coupling an EASY-nLC (Thermo Scientific, USA) to a Q Exactive HF-X – Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The fractions were dissolved in 11 µl loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN in LC-MS grade water), sonicated and incubated on a shaker. 5 µl of each fraction was used for each measurement. Peptides were delivered to an analytical column (75 µm x 30 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1, 9 µm resin, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) at a flow rate of 3 µl/min in 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water). After loading, peptides were separated using a 120 min stepped gradient from 2% to 63% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN in LC-MS grade water; solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water) at 350 nL/min flow rate. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), automatically switching between MS and MS2. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 (m/z 200) resolution after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. Tandem mass spectra were generated for up to 18 peptide precursors in the Orbitrap (isolation window 0.8 m/z) for fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 32% and a resolution of 45,000 with a target value of 100,000 charges after accumulation for a maximum of 96 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectra were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) for peak detection and quantification. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot mus musculus reference proteome database (downloaded on October 22nd, 2018) by Andromeda search engine enabling contaminants and the reversed versions of all sequences with the following search parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 3 missed cleavages allowed. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was decided by the time-dependent recalibration algorithm of MaxQuant. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins and peptides was α = 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of eight amino acids was required. Quantification mode with isobaric labels (TMT 10plex) was selected. All other parameters are defined as default settings in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The human liver has a remarkable capacity to regenerate and thus compensate over decades for fibrosis caused by toxic chemicals, drugs, alcohol, or malnutrition. To date, no protective mechanisms have been identified that help the liver tolerate these repeated injuries. In this study, we revealed dysregulation of lipid metabolism and mild inflammation as protective mechanisms by studying longitudinal multi-omic measurements of liver fibrosis induced by repeated CCl<sub>4</sub> injections in mice (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;45). Based on comprehensive proteomics, transcriptomics, blood- and tissue-level profiling, we uncovered three phases of early disease development-initiation, progression, and tolerance. Using novel multi-omic network analysis, we identified multi-level mechanisms that are significantly dysregulated in the injury-tolerant response. Public data analysis shows that these profiles are altered in human liver diseases, including fibrosis and early cirrhosis stages. Our findings mark the beginning of the tolerance phase as the critical switching point in liver response to repetitive toxic doses. After fostering extracellular matrix accumulation as an acute response, we observe a deposition of tiny lipid droplets in hepatocytes only in the Tolerant phase. Our comprehensive study shows that lipid metabolism and mild inflammation may serve as biomarkers and are putative functional requirements to resist further disease progression.

### Keywords
Integrative data analysis, Liver damage adaptation, Ccl4, Kimono, Tolerance, Liver fibrosis, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Head of Division 'Systems Biology of Signal Transduction' German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany (lab head)

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Ursula Klingmüller
Head of Division 'Systems Biology of Signal Transduction' German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany (lab head)


