### Accession
PXD029591

### Title
Intact extracellular vesicle cross-linking on vesicles derived from  MDA-MB-231 and LM2 cells

### Description
The development of any pharmaceutical requires characterization of the compound, usually be several techniques. Therefore, characterizing the protein content and biochemical state of EVs is of great importance for their useif they are to be used as biopharmaceuticals. Structural characterization of proteins in EVs remains a great challenge even for state-of-the-art technologies such as super-resolution and electron microscopy, partly due to the biophysical and biochemical heterogeneity of EVs. Here we overcome some of these challenges by using cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to structurally characterize protein complexes and the interactome of intact EVs, at an unprecedented resolution of up to 30Å. By applying XL-MS to intact EVs derived from two metastatic breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231 and LM2), we validate the presence of active forms of protein complexes that are known to play a role metastasis, revealing for example previously uncharacterized regions of Moesin. Moreover, a cross-linking data-driven molecular docking supports novel conformations of ANXA2 in LM2 EVs.

### Sample Protocol
1.Cell culture & EV isolation MDA-MB-231 and LM2 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 10 mM L-glutamine, 50 U/mL penicillin and 50 μg/mL streptomycin in a humidified incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Cells were detached using 10 mM EDTA/PBS for 5 min at 37 °C. Secretion media (SM) was prepared by depleting bovine EVs from FBS. To do so, DMEM containing 20% FBS was centrifuged ON at 100,000 x g at 4 °C in a Sorvall T-865 rotor, filtered on 0.22μm, diluted to 10% FBS and, supplemented as previously described. For EV secretion, 10 plates (15 cm diameter) at 50% confluence of cells were washed 3x with warm PBS, before addition of SM. Conditioned media (CM) containing secreted EVs was collected after 24h and 48h, fresh SM was added to replace the collected CM. The CM was spun down at 300 x g for 10 minutes to deplete cells, transferred to clean 50 mL Falcon tubes, spun down at 10,000 x g for 40 minutes to deplete cell debris and larger vesicles, transferred to clean 50 mL Falcon tubes and kept at 4ºC. The two collections were pooled and EVs were immediately pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 120,000 x g, at 4ºC for 2h in a Sorvall T-865 rotor. The pellet was resuspended by gentle pipetting in 10 mL cold PBS supplemented with 50 μg/mL DNAse Ι to break. Purified EVs were finally pelleted again by ultracentrifugation at 120,000 x g at 4ºC for 2h. The EV-pellet was resuspended in 400 μL of PBS, spun down at 10,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was collected in PBS.  2.EV crosslinking & protein digestion EVs were crosslinked using disucciminidyl suberate (DSS).  EVs were crosslinked in 0.5 mM DSS for 20 min at RT. To promote crosslinking of lower abundant species, a second round of 0.5 mM DSS was added for another 20 min at RT, and quenched with 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 for 5 min. Crosslinked EVs were then lysed by thorough vortexing in 0.5% SDC, 8 M Urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by 30 min end-to-end rotation at 4ºC and 15 cycles of sonication at 4ºC (30’’ on, 30’’ off) in a Bioruptor. Proteins were reduced with 4 mM DTT at RT for 60 min, alkylated with 16 mM IAA at RT for 30 min in the dark which was then quenched by addition of 4 mM DTT. Proteins were digested by addition of Lys-C (at a 1:50 ratio (w/w)) at 37 ºC for 2h, followed by dilution to 2 M Urea and further digestion with Trypsin (at a ratio 1:50 (w/w)) at 37 ºC ON. Protein digestions were stopped by acidification to 5% FA, and precipitated SDC was pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 x g at 4 ºC for 30 min. Supernatants were carefully collected, desalted, dried and stored at -20ºC. 3.SCX fractionation & enrichment of crosslinked peptides  Peptides were dissolved in 10% formic acid, 2.5% DMSO and loaded on a Luna 100A SCX column (50 mm × 2mm, 5 μm, Phenomenex product number 00B-4398-B0) with the help of a C18 Opti-Lynx trap column (4.6mm × 5 mm, 49 μm, Optimize Technologies product number 11-02874-TA). Solvent A consisted of 0.05% FA, 20% ACN in water and solvent B consisted of 0.05% FA, 20% ACN, and 0.5 M NaCl. The SCX gradient was: 0-10% B in 2 min, 10-40% B in 7 min, 40-80% B in 2.5 min, 80-100% B in 4 min, 100% B for 7 min.  One-minute fractions were collected and pooled into 6 or 7 approximately equal fractions by mean UV intensity. The pooled fractions were desalted with Oasis HLA 96-well μElution plate, dried and stored at –80°C.  4.LC-MS/MS of cross-linked SCX fractions Data was acquired with an Ultimate 3000 coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3µM, 2cm x 100µM) for 2 min in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, EC-C18, 2.7µM, 50cm x 75µM). Solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Trapping of peptides was performed for 2 min in 5% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Cross-linked peptides were then separated in the analytical column at a fixed flow rate of 300 nL/min as follows: each SCX fraction was separated using an optimal 95 min. linear gradient (from 9-40% to  6-35% B) followed by a 3 min steep increase to 99% B, a 5 min wash at 99% B and a 10 min re-equilibration step at 5% A.  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Peptides were ionized in a nESI source at 1.9 kV and focused at 40% amplitude of the RF lens. Full scan MS1 spectra from 350 - 2200 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 3×106 and under automated calculation of max. IT. Cycle time for MS2 fragmentation scans was set to 2 s. Only peptides with charge states 3-8 were fragmented, and dynamic exclusion was set to a duration of 16 ms. Fragmentation was done using a stepped HCD collision energy strategy (NCEs: 28, 31, 34%). Fragment ions were accumulated until a target value of 1x105 ions was reached under an automated calculation of max. IT, with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z before injection in the Orbitrap for MS2 analysis at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
1. Database search and data analysis  For cross-linked peptide analyses, spectra were extracted from “raw” files from precursors ranging between 350 and 20,000 Da, filtered by signal-to-noise ratio of 2 and converted to MGF format using Proteome Discovered software (v2.4, Thermo Scientific). MGF files were searched in pLink (v2, 10.1038/s41467-019-11337-z) against a database containing the 1000 most abundant of both MDA-MB-231 and LM2 EV proteomes and appended with the sequences of common FBS contaminants to avoid misidentification of cross-linked peptide sequences from Bos taurus. The database was further curated to remove signal peptides from the protein sequences (note that positions within proteins follow uniport numbering). DSS was set as non-cleavable cross-linker and trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme, and up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed.  Peptide length was set to between 6 and 60 amino-acids, precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 10 and 20 ppm respectively, and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. FDR was set at 1% at all levels, which was by calculated using a reverse decoy database strategy. E-scores were not computed to minimize processing times.   Cross-linking and proteomics data were analyzed using Excel and in-house built R scripts66, and plots refined with Illustrator 2020 (Adobe, USA). Spectra and site files from pLink were processed to generate the curated tables found in the result files. Only cross-links identified with sufficient spectral evidence (≥ 2 CSM per cell line) were kept while crosslinks involving histones were removed.. In cases of protein ID ambiguity due to shared crosslinked peptides between different proteins, intra-links were preferred over inter-links.   2. Molecular modelling  The AlphaFold predicted structure of Annexin A2 (Unirpot ID: P07355) was used for the molecular docking procedures. DisVis webserver (10.3389/fmolb.2021.729513, 10.1016/j.jmb.2016.11.032 and 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv333) was used to check compatibility between the crosslinks (including their symmetry mates). Molecular docking was performed with HADDOCK 2.4 web-service (10.3389/fmolb.2021.729513,10.1016/j.jmb.2015.09.014). The default parameters of HADDOCK were used with unambiguous restraints based on the crosslinks. The HADDOCK structures were scored based on the crosslinks solvent accessible surface distances (SASDs) using XLM tools (10.1016/j.str.2020.05.012). The best docking models were picked based on both the HADDOCK and the cMNXL scores (10.1016/j.str.2018.04.016). Cocomaps (10.1093/bioinformatics/btr484) was used to determine which residues were in close contact. The interface was defined as the residues predicted to be in close contact for both Annexin A2 copies in the modelled structure. For conservation analysis, all the Annexin A2 orthologs present in uniport (excluding low quality proteins) were aligned using Clustal Omega (10.1038/msb.2011.75) algorithm and the alignment and phylogenetic tree were fed to ConSruf (10.1093/nar/gkw408) to calculate the conservation score and visualize it on the protein structure.  3.4.10. MDA-MB-231 and LM2 EV and source cells proteomic characterization The proteomic characterization of the EVs and source cell proteomes has been done re-using high resolution data previously published (PMID: 31508500). Cell culture and EV-isolation conditions were the same and the reproducibility of the source cell and EV proteomes was assessed in independent biological replicates for both cells lines under such conditions. Briefly, the “raw” files from 4 biological replicates of EVs isolated from either MDA-MB-231 or LM2 cells , as well as 3 biological replicates of their source cells, were downloaded from Proteome Xchange (PXD012162) and re-searched using MaxQuant (v_1.6.5.0)65  against SwissProt human database (downloaded on 09/2019, containing 20,431 protein sequences) appended with common contaminants. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled using a minimum ratio count of 2 and both razor and unique peptides for quantification. Match between runs approach was enabled using default parameters. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm after recalibration, and fragment ions tolerance was set to 20 ppm. FDR was set at 1% for both PSM and protein level by using a reverse decoy database strategy. Only the "txt" MaxQuant output folder (containing a file with significantly changing proteins (Student's T-test) between EVs and Source cells) has been uploaded here to prevent duplications of data in this repository.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are blood-borne messengers that coordinate signalling between different tissues and organs in the body. The specificity of such crosstalk is determined by preferential EV docking to target sites, as mediated through protein-protein interactions. As such, the need to structurally characterize the EV surface precedes further understanding of docking selectivity and recipient-cell uptake mechanisms. Here, we describe an intact extracellular vesicle crosslinking mass spectrometry (iEVXL) method that can be applied for structural characterization of protein complexes in EVs. By using a partially membrane-permeable disuccinimidyl suberate crosslinker, proteins on the EV outer-surface and inside EVs can be immobilized together with their interacting partners. This not only provides covalent stabilization of protein complexes before extraction from the membrane-enclosed environment, but also generates a set of crosslinking distance restraints that can be used for structural modelling and comparative screening of changes in EV protein assemblies. Here we demonstrate iEVXL as a powerful approach to reveal high-resolution information, about protein determinants that govern EV docking and signalling, and as a crucial aid in modelling docking interactions.

### Keywords
Evs, Structural proteomics, Xl-ms, Cx-ms, Tnbc

### Affiliations
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Julia Bauzá Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


