### Accession
PXD008337

### Title
Lamin A dimer and tetramer cross-links help explain disease mutations and polymer plasticity

### Description
Lamins are intermediate filament proteins responsible for nuclear mechanical integrity. Though linked to multiple heritable diseases, lamin structure and that of other intermediate filaments remains elusive. We employed cross-linking mass spectrometry to gain structural insights into lamin A dimer and tetramer structure. While confirming the parallel coiled-coil rod, we report that, contrary to prediction, rod linker regions are highly flexible and compressible. This explains the recently reported rod shortening in the assembled polymer and aspects of intermediate filament stretch properties. We further elucidate an extended interface in lamin A tetramers where both head and tail unstructured regions flanking the rod of each dimer act as polar bridges to stabilize lamin head-to-tail assembly. Furthermore, changes in these regions between dimer and tetramer forms suggest an ordered polymer assembly. Importantly, several residues mutated in laminopathies disrupt this interface and impair assembly, potentially explaining their role in disease.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC human lamin A protein expression and purification from bacteria with R10, K8 labelling. Homo-iso-dimer or homo-/hetero-iso-dimer lamin A mixes were prepared in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.0,250 mM NaCl at a protein concentration 0.4 mg/mL. The samples were then cross-linked with a mixture of EDC and Sulfo-NHS at a weight ratio of 1:4:8.8 (lamin A:EDC:S-NHS) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Reaction was then quenched by addition of 1 M Tris at pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubated for additional 10 minutes. After running SDS-PAGE, The gel bands of cross-linked complexes were processed following standard procedures and digested peptides were fractionated using SCX-Stage-Tips. The peptides were analysed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled with a DionexUltimate 3000RSLC nano HPLC system, using a high/high strategy.    Rat liver nuclear envelopes were purified according to standard procedures developed in Schirmer lab. The samples was digested with endoproteinase Lys-C overnight and then further digested with Trypsin overnight. Alternatively FASP digestion was use.Digested peptides were fractionated using SCX-Stage-Tips  LC‐MS/MS analysis was performed using either an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer or an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer with a 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap EASY‐Spray column. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in the data‐dependent mode with the top‐speed option. For each three‐second acquisition cycle, the survey level spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated and fragmented using HCD. The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, maxium injection time of 60 ms and AGC target of 5e4. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60‐second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw data of SILAC human Lamin A homo-iso and homo-/hetero-iso-dimer mix were processed to generate peak lists by MaxQuant and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software with the following setting: cross-linker: EDC; MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme: trypsin; missed cleavages, 4; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation on methionine; R10 and K8. FDR was estimated using XiFDR on 5% residue level. The mass spectrometric raw data of Rat liver Lamin A protein ex vivo cross-linking were processed to generate peak lists by MSCovert (ProteoWizard 3.0.11417) and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software.

### Publication Abstract
Lamin A is a nuclear intermediate filament protein critical for nuclear architecture and mechanics and mutated in a wide range of human diseases. Yet little is known about the molecular architecture of lamins and mechanisms of their assembly. Here we use SILAC cross-linking mass spectrometry to determine interactions within lamin dimers and between dimers in higher-order polymers. We find evidence for a compression mechanism where coiled coils in the lamin A rod can slide onto each other to contract rod length, likely driven by a wide range of electrostatic interactions with the flexible linkers between coiled coils. Similar interactions occur with unstructured regions flanking the rod domain during oligomeric assembly. Mutations linked to human disease block these interactions, suggesting that this spring-like contraction can explain in part the dynamic mechanical stretch and flexibility properties of the lamin polymer and other intermediate filament networks.

### Keywords
Em, Silac, Cross-link mass spectrometry, Lamin a

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh,Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh,Max Born Crescent, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK


