### Accession
PXD022953

### Title
Pseudomonas syringae effector HopZ3 suppresses PTO immune pathway in tomato by acetylation

### Description
The plant pathogen Pseudomonas syringae secretes multiple effectors to suppress plant defenses. Some effectors are recognized by plants while others can function to  suppress the resulting immune responses. HopZ3 of Psy B728a is an aminotransferase targeting multiple components of both plant immune complexes  and Psy effectors, leading to the activation of these complexes. In Arabidopsis, HopZ3 acetylates the host RPM1 complex and Psy effectors AvrRpm1 and AvrB3 s. In P. syringae resistant tomato, the main immune complex includes PRF and PTO. We found that HopZ3 acts as a virulence factor on tomato by suppressing defenses triggered by Psy AvrPto1. HopZ3 interacts with members of the PTO complex and acetylates PTO, AvrPto1, SlRIPK and SlRIN4s in vitro and in planta. Mapping HopZ3-dependent acetylation sites in planta revealed that AvrPto1 is modified on histidine, serine and threonine residues. The most highly acetylated AvrPto1 residues are T91 and S94 in a loop essential for interaction with PTO. HopZ3 also acetylates, in planta, T204 and T199 in the PTO activation loop which is important for kinase activity and recognition of AvrPto1. In agreement with these findings, we showed that acetylation of either AvrPto1 or PTO by HopZ3 reduces their binding in vitro. Mutation of acetylation sites T91A or H125A/H135A in AvrPto1 does not affect PTO binding in vitro but decreases AvrPto1 recognition in tomato in the absence of HopZ3 and increases bacterial growth. We also found decreased in planta phosphorylation in the presence of HopZ3 for  some residues in AvrPto1 and PTO involved in immune signaling. Moreover, acetylation of SlRIPK by HopZ3 reduces its activity as well as phosphorylation of HopZ3 and SlRIN4s. Psy modulation of both its own avirulence effectors and their plant targets leads to decreased defenses and increased susceptibility to infection.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro and in planta PTM mapping For in vitro acetylation mapping, reactions were performed with 13C-acetyl-CoA (Acetyl-1,2-13C coenzyme A lithium salt, Sigma) to differentiate between background 12C-acetylation that occurred in E. coli during production of recombinant protein and HopZ3-mediated acetylation in vitro. Substrates were mixed with either HopZ3, the catalytically inactive HopZ3_C300A, or a substrate was incubated alone in the presence of 13C-acetyl-CoA to distinguish any background acetylation that could be chemically caused by the presence of 13C-acetyl-CoA. 1 g of purified His-HopZ3 or His-HopZ3_C300A were mixed with 3 g bead-bound substrate to which the acetylation reaction cocktail (50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 10% glycerol, 5 M IP6 and 50 M of 13C-acetyl-CoA (Sigma)) was added in a total volume of 20 l. Subsequently beads were washed twice with washing buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol), boiled in Laemmli loading buffer and processed for LC-MS/MS analysis. Data from the mass spectrometry of treated samples were analyzed for the presence of 13C-acetylated peptides in the substrate (AvrPto1, PTO, SlRIN4s, SlRIPK).             For in planta acetylation mapping, with Dex-AvrPto1-HA or Dex-PTO-HA were transiently co-expressed with Dex-HopZ3-GFP or Dex-HopZ3_C300A-GFP constructs in N. benthamiana. Plants were treated with 30 M dexamethasone for 16 h to induce protein expression. Proteins were extracted with lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Scientific), 2 M sodium butyrate (TOCRIS bioscience) and 3 M trichostatin A (Sigma). Clarified total protein lysate was incubated for 3 h with anti-HA magnetic beads (Medical and Biological Laboratories Co., LTD) at 4 °C. After washing the beads three times with the lysis buffer, proteins were eluted by boiling with Laemmli loading buffer. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. PTM mapping of AvrPto1 and PTO was repeated with independent experiments.   LC-MS/MS Analysis Trypsin digestion and HPLC were performed as described [9]. Mass Spectrometry was performed at the Medical Genome Facility Proteomics Core at Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN. Samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer, using a 60,000 RP survey scan, m/z 375-1950, with lockmasses, followed by 15 HCD CID scans on only doubly and triply charged precursors between 375 Da and 1950 Da.

### Data Protocol
Inclusion lists of expected acetylated or phosphorylated tryptic in-silico peptide ion masses were generated (in-house software) and were loaded into instrument method. Using the FASTA sequence file for AvrPto1, PTO, tomato RIN4_1-3, SlRIPK, and/or HopZ3, we modeled the following modifications: (formyl n-term, oxidation (M), acetyl (K, H, S, T), 13C heavy acetyl (K, H, S, T), phospho (S, T), myristoylation (N-terminal G)), the produced m/z ions were filtered for 2+ and 3+ expected ions, then combined into a *.csv file ready to load into the QE instrumentation method. Ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 seconds. The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org). Database searching of the 160610_Greenberg_db9 database (3412 entries),  The second in planta experiment was quantified by TIC (total ion current) via Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Q-exactive, Lc-msms, Hopz3, Plant effectors, Pto, Acetylation, Ptms

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jean T. Greenberg
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA


