### Accession
PXD040424

### Title
Essential role of the Pax5 C-terminal domain in controlling B cell commitment and development

### Description
Pax5 controls B-cell commitment, development and immunity by repressing B-lineage-inappropriate genes and activating B-cell-specific genes. In addition to the N-terminal DNA-binding paired domain, Pax5 contains a conserved octapeptide, partial homeodomain and C-terminal sequences with transactivating and inhibitory potential. To understand how the C-terminal domains of Pax5 contribute to the repression and activation function of Pax5, we performed Pax5 pulldown combined with mass spectrometry to identify coactivator or corepressor complexes that bind to the C-terminal regions of Pax5.

### Sample Protocol
The nuclear extraction of in vitro cultured pro-B cells (1-2 x 108) was performed as described in McManus et al., 2011. Immunoprecipitation was performed with an anti-Pax5 paired domain antibody (Adams et al., 1992). For this, 10 ml Protein A Mag Sepahrose Xtra beads (GE Healthcare) per 1 mg nuclear extract were pre-cleared by incubation with PBS containing 1 mg/ml bovine serum albumin for 2 h at 4 C. Subsequently, the nuclear extract was incubated with the beads for 2 h at 4 C with rotation followed by washing five times with ice-cold wash buffer containing detergents (20 mM Tris pH8.0, 1.5m M MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 250 mM NaCl, 0.15% NP-40) and seven times with ice-cold wash buffer without detergents (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl). Pelleted beads were covered with wash buffer without detergents and stored at -20C until further processing for mass spectrometry.   Beads were resuspended in 40ul of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), supplemented with 400 ng of lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Corporation) and incubated for 4 hours on a Thermo-shaker with 1200 rpm at 37°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and reduced with 1 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma) for 30 minutes at 60°C and alkylated in 4 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Fluka) for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the sample was digested with 400 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at 37°C over night. The digest was acidified by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Pierce) to 1%. A similar aliquot of each sample (10%) was analysed by LC-MS/MS.  The nano HPLC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 25 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (PepMap Acclaim C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 30°C. Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min, starting with the mobile phases 98% A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and linearly increasing to 35% B over the next 180 minutes. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in data-dependent mode, performing a full scan (m/z range 350-1200, resolution 60,000, target value 1E6) at 3 different compensation voltages (CV -45, -60, -75), followed each by MS/MS scans of the most abundant ions for a cycle time of 0.9 (CV -45, -60) or 0.7 (CV -75) seconds. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an HCD collision energy of 30%, isolation width of 1.0 m/z, resolution of 30.000, target value at 2E5, minimum intensity of 2.5E4 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (include charge state 2-6) were excluded for 45 s. The monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) mode was set to Peptide and the exclude isotopes feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MS Amanda v2.0.0.16129. The peptide and fragment mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm, the maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic enzymatic specificity without proline restriction. Peptide and protein identification was performed in two steps. For the initial search the RAW-files were searched against the uniprot mouse reference database (21,961 sequences; 11,726,931 residues), supplemented with common contaminants and sequence of Pax5, using the following search parameters:  Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein using the Percolator algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer. A sub-database of proteins identified in this search was generated for further processing. For the second search, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the same settings as above plus considering additional variable modifications: Phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, Ubiquitin on lysin, mono-, di- and trimethylation on lysine and arginine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and glutamine to pyro-glutamate conversion at peptide N-terminal glutamine, acetylation on protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS. Identifications were filtered again to 1 % FDR on protein and PSM level. Additionally an MSAmanda score cut-off of at least 150 was applied. Peptides were subjected to label-free quantification using IMP-apQuant. Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides and applying intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ,). Proteins were filtered to be identified by a minimum of 3 quantified peptides. Protein abundance was normalized to equal amounts of the bait (Pax5) per condition. Statistical significance of differentially abundant proteins was determined using limma. Mitochondrial proteins were considered as contaminants and excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The B cell regulator Pax5 consists of multiple domains whose function we analyzed in vivo by deletion in Pax5. While B lymphopoiesis was minimally affected in mice with homozygous deletion of the octapeptide or partial homeodomain, both sequences were required for optimal B cell development. Deletion of the C-terminal regulatory domain 1 (CRD1) interfered with B cell development, while elimination of CRD2 modestly affected B-lymphopoiesis. Deletion of CRD1 and CRD2 arrested B cell development at an uncommitted pro-B cell stage. Most Pax5-regulated genes required CRD1 or both CRD1 and CRD2 for their activation or repression as these domains induced or eliminated open chromatin at Pax5-activated or Pax5-repressed genes, respectively. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that the activating function of CRD1 is mediated through interaction with the chromatin-remodeling BAF, H3K4-methylating Set1A-COMPASS, and H4K16-acetylating NSL complexes, while its repressing function depends on recruitment of the Sin3-HDAC and MiDAC complexes. These data provide novel molecular insight into how different Pax5 domains regulate gene expression to promote B cell commitment and development.

### Keywords
Co-activators, Gene repression, Co-repressors, Pax5, C-terminal regulatory domains, Gene activation

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC)

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Meinrad Busslinger
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC)


