### Accession
PXD034618

### Title
Adaptation of a microbial community to demand-oriented biological methanation

### Description
Background: Biological conversion of the surplus of renewable electricity to CH4 could support energy storage and strengthen the power grid. Biological methanation (BM) is closely linked to the activity of biogas-producing bacterial community and methanogenic Archaea in particular.  During reactor operations, the microbiome is often subject to various changes whereby the microorganisms are challenged to adapt to the new conditions. In this study, a hydrogenotrophic-adapted microbial community in a laboratory-scale BM fermenter was monitored for its pH, gas production, conversion yields and composition. To investigate the robustness of BM regarding power oscillations, the biogas microbiome was exposed to five H2 starvations patterns for several hours.

### Sample Protocol
A metaproteomics workflow established by Heyer and colleagues [55] was applied to characterize the microbial community of the BM during the H2-feeding experiments. A metaproteomic workflow followed the techniques explained in [15,55,56]. Briefly, a phenol extraction method using a ball-mill was applied to disrupt cells and extract proteins [56]. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol, resuspended in urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 0.01 g/mL dithiothreitol) and quantified with an amido-black assay [56]. Extraction of proteins (25 µg) from urea buffer was done with ice-cold 100% acetone overnight at −20°C; proteins were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE method [56]. Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie, overnight. To extract proteins from the gels, lanes were divided into ten equal slices and processed by tryptic in-gel digestion presented as new workflow in the “B6” step by Heyer et al., [56]. Before LC-MS/MS measurement, the obtained vacuum-dried peptides were resuspended in 30 μL of chromatographic mobile phase A (LC-MS water, 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid). Of each sample, the solution was subsequently centrifuged for 30 min, 4°C, at 13000g, and 28 μL transferred into an HPLC vial. Five microliters of each sample peptides were injected and separated by liquid chromatography  system (UltiMate® 3000 nano splitless reversed-phase nano HPLC; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich) equipped with a reversed-phase trap column (nano trap cartridge, 300 μm inner diameter ×5 mm; packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, nanoViper, Bremen, Germany) and a reversed-phase separation column packed with (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter and 500 mm length, Bremen, Germany). The separation was started from 5% and continued with liner increase to 35% mobile phase B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 99%) over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. The liquid chromatography was coupled online to a timsTOFTM Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen). The timsTOFTM Pro was equipped with a captive spray ionization (CSI) source operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1400 V, 3 l/min dry gas, and 200°C dry temperature, [56]. For each sample, a data dependent MS/MS spectral acquisition (DDA) in a parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode was performed [57].

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and visualization Results of the DDA experiments were converted to Mascot generic file format (∗mgf) and searched by MASCOT (version 2.6, Matrix Science, England) against the obtained BM metagenome. The parameters for the protein database search are presented in Additional file 8 (Tab. S13.1). Subsequently, mgf files and dat files were loaded into the MetaProteomeAnalyzer (MPA) software (version 3.0) released in 2015 [58]. Three different types of search engines were used for peptide spectral matching: X!Tandem [59], OMSSA [60] and MASCOT (version 2.6, Matrix Science, London, England) [61]. General parameter settings of MPA are shown in Additional file 2 (Tab. S13.2).  A false discovery rate of 1% was used for all samples. The results of MPA search were exported for the peptides and assigned to the BM metagenome database. The aligned metaproteins matrix were further imported in the excel file for further analysis.  Results were visualized using MATLAB (version R2020b; Mathworks, Inc.). PAST4.03 software was used for statistical analyses (PCA) [62]. For details: see Additional file 5 and 7. In order to exclude intracellular enzymes (proteases, peptidases and GH and GT) of microorganisms that degrade biomass, the location of proteins (extra-, intracellular or transmembrane) was determined utilizing the online tool SignalP 6.0 Server (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/service.php?SignalP) [63] (for details: see the Additional file 10 and 11). Using KEGG database webpage and the KEGG mapper tool (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway3.html), the pathways of the central carbon metabolism were reconstructed for the core community members of the BM process (for details: see Additional file 6 and 9. Significant changes in means of selected samples in BM-24/0 and BM-12/12 are colour coded (i.e., t-test BM-24/0 and BM-12/12; p-value<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetoclastic methanogens, Hydrogenotrophic methanogens, Power to methane, Renewable energy, Metaproteomics, Microbial food-web, Biological methanation, Biogas upgrade, Hydrogen starvation

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg


