### Accession
PXD013523

### Title
Papillary renal cell carcinomas rewire glutathione metabolism

### Description
Papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) is a malignant kidney cancer with a prevalence of 7-20% of all renal cell tumors. Proteome and metabolome profiles of 19 pRCC and patient-matched healthy kidney controls and transcriptome data derived from TCGA were used to elucidate the regulation of metabolic pathways and underlying molecular mechanisms. Glutathione (GSH), a main reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger, was tremendously increased in pRCC type I, II, and metastatic type II and can be regarded as a new hallmark in this malignancy. Isotope tracing revealed an increased de novo synthesis rate of GSH and a glutamine addiction in pRCC derived cell lines. Furthermore, a rewiring of the main pathways involved in ATP and glucose synthesis was observed on the protein level: the abundance of enzymes involved in gluconeogenesis and of the respiratory chain was found to be significantly reduced in pRCC. In contrast, transcripts encoding for the respiratory chain were not regulated, which prompts for non-genetic profiling. The main molecular characteristics of pRCC are the increased GSH synthesis to cope with ROS stress, the deficient anabolic glucose synthesis, and the compromised oxidative phosphorylation, which could be exploited in novel anti-cancer strategies.

### Sample Protocol
About 10 mg frozen tissue per sample was homogenized under denaturing conditions with a FastPrep instrument (three times for 60 s, 6.5 m x s-1) in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8, followed by sonication for 5 min, boiled at 95°C for 5 min and precipitated with acetone at -20°C overnight. Lyophilized proteins were dissolved in 6 M guanidiniumchlorid, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM chloroacetamide, and 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. Samples were boiled for 5 min at 95 ◦C and sonicated for 15 min in a water sonicator. The lysates were diluted 1:10 with nine times volume of 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris, 8.5 pH, followed by trypsin digestion (1:100) at 37 ◦C overnight. Subsequent, the peptides were purified with C18 columns. For whole proteome profiling, 90 µg of each sample was fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Five µg of each SCX fraction was used for proteome profiling.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann 2008) and searched against the human proteome database UniProtKB with 70,941 entries, released in 01/2017. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were: A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions were required. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. MaxQuant processed output files can be found in Supplemental Table S1, showing peptide and protein identification, accession numbers, % sequence coverage of the protein, q-values, and LFQ intensities. Contaminants, as well as proteins identified by site modification and proteins derived from the reversed part of the decoy database, were strictly excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Papillary renal cell carcinoma (pRCC) is a malignant kidney cancer with a prevalence of 7-20% of all renal tumors. Proteome and metabolome profiles of 19 pRCC and patient-matched healthy kidney controls were used to elucidate the regulation of metabolic pathways and the underlying molecular mechanisms. Glutathione (GSH), a main reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger, was highly increased and can be regarded as a new hallmark in this malignancy. Isotope tracing of pRCC derived cell lines revealed an increased de novo synthesis rate of GSH, based on glutamine consumption. Furthermore, profound downregulation of gluconeogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation was observed at the protein level. In contrast, analysis of the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) papillary RCC cohort revealed no significant change in transcripts encoding oxidative phosphorylation compared to normal kidney tissue, highlighting the importance of proteomic profiling. The molecular characteristics of pRCC are increased GSH synthesis to cope with ROS stress, deficient anabolic glucose synthesis, and compromised oxidative phosphorylation, which could potentially be exploited in innovative anti-cancer strategies.

### Keywords
Metabolome profiling; glutathione metabolism; metabolic reprogramming

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics
Mass Spectrometry Facility Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics

### Submitter
Ayham Alahmad

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
Mass Spectrometry Facility Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- disease: normal, Papillary Renal Cell Carcinomas
- cell type: kidney cell
- organism part: kidney
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF, Q Exactive HF
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl

