### Accession
PXD027614

### Title
Global ubiquitylation analysis of mitochondria in primary neurons identifies endogenous Parkin targets following activation of PINK1

### Description
Mutations in PINK1 and Parkin lead to Parkinson’s disease. Cell culture-based studies have demonstrated that mitochondrial depolarisation induced by chemical uncouplers can activate PINK1 and Parkin activity. Very little is known on mitochondrial depolarisation signalling in post-mitotic neurons. We have established a primary mouse cortical neuron system to investigate mitochondrial depolarisation induced changes in the proteome. We have undertaken proteomic copy-number analysis to characterise the expression levels of all known Parkinson’s proteins in cortical neurons. We have also identified proteins whose expression is up-regulated or down-regulated following mitochondrial depolarisation.

### Sample Protocol
3 biological replicates of C57Bl/6J mouse cortical neurons (2 technical duplicates each) were treated for 5 hours with 10 µM Antimycin A and 1 µM Oligomycin in DMSO at 37°C in. Neurons were lysed in  lysis buffer containing Tris⋅HCl (10mM, pH 8.0), SDS (2%, w/v), sodium orthovanadate (1 mM), sodium glycerophosphate (10 mM), sodium fluoride (50 mM), sodium pyrophosphate (5 mM), protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 ug/mL microcystin-LR. Lysates were boiled for 10 min at 95 ºC, followed by Bioruptor sonication for 10 min (30 sec on-30 sec off, 10 cycles) at 4ºC. Samples were spun at 20 000g in a centrifuge at 4ºC for 20 min. Supernatants were collected and protein concentration was determined by using the BCA kit (Pierce). 50µg of protein amount for each of the sample (n=6 O/A and n=6 DMSO) and 300µg of pooled cortical neurons for deep proteomic profile of cortical neurons were aliquoted and subjected to S-Trap assisted workflow Pooled cortical neurons tryptic peptide digest was further fractionated using high-pH RPLC fractionation and 40 fractions were used for Data dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis. Whereas O/A and DMSO treated samples were dissolved in LC buffer (3% ACN in 0.1% Formic acid (v/v)) and 2 µg peptide was injected for Data Independent acquisition (DIA) analysis.

### Data Protocol
40 high-pH fractions were analysed on Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled in line with Dionex 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatography system. Each fraction ~2 µg was dissolved in 15ul of LC buffer (3% ACN in 0.1% Formic acid (v/v)). Sample was injected onto trap column and separated on a 50cm analytical column at 300nl/min (ES803, 50cm, C18 2µ particle) and directly electro sprayed into the mass spectrometer using Easy nanoLC source. 80-minute non-linear gradient was used to separate the peptides with a total run time of 100 min for each run. Data was acquired in a DDA mode by acquiring full MS at 60,000 resolution at m/z 200 and analysed using Orbitrap mass analyser. MS2 data was acquired in a top speed for 2 seconds to acquire as many data dependent scans by using 1.2 Da isolation window using quadrupole mass filter and fragmented using normalized 30% HCD, the MS fragment ion were measured at 15,000 resolution at m/z 200 using Orbitrap mass analyser. AGC targets for MS1 was set at 300% and MS2 at 100% with a maximum ion-injection accumulation time at 25 and 80 ms respectively. For the DIA analysis, 2 µg of peptide amount from each of the cortical neurons (n=6 O/A and n=6, DMSO) treated samples were acquired on Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on trap column and eluted on an analytical column by using a non-linear gradient of 120 minute and total of 145 min run. MS1 data was acquired at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200 and measured using Orbitrap mass analyser. Variable DIA scheme was employed by using a Quadrupole mass filter in the mass range of 400-1500 m/z. Peptides were fragmented using a normalized steeped HCD collision energy (26, 28 and 30) and measured at 30,000 resolution at m/z 200 using Orbitrap mass analyser. AGC target for MS1 was set at 300% and for MS2 was set at 3000% with a maximum ion-injection accumulation time of 25 and 80 ms respectively.  DDA raw MS data was processed using Frag pipe software suite (v 15.0) using an in-built MS-Fragger search algorithm. Default closed search workflow was used and searched against Mouse Uniprot database (March 2021, 34,350 entries). Precursor mass tolerance was set at -50 and +50 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Trypsin as a strict protease by allowing a maximum missed cleavage of 2 and peptide length of 7 amino acid as minimum and 50 amino acid as maximum. Oxidation of Met and Protein N-ter Acetylation as a variable modification. Carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification were used. MS1 quantification was performed using Ionquant algorithm by allowing match between runs. 1% FDR at PSM, peptide and protein level was applied for the final output files. Protein groups table was further processed using Perseus software suite to estimate copy numbers using Histone proteomic ruler.  The DDA data was used to generate a spectral library using Spectronaut version 15 (Biognosys) pulsar search engine. This library was used for the library-based search for DIA data by using the default search parameters and enabling cross-run normalization. The search output protein groups table was exported and processed using Perseus for further analysis. Student t-test was carried out between O/A and DMSO cortical neurons by applying 1% permutation-based FDR for the identification of differentially regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pink1, Parkinsosn's disease, Protoemics, Ubiqutylation

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, Sir James Black Centre, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Miratul Muqit
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, Sir James Black Centre, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom


