### Accession
PXD028281

### Title
Age prediction from human blood plasma using proteomic and small RNA data: a comparative analysis

### Description
Aging clocks, built from comprehensive molecular data, have emerged as promising tools in medicine, forensics, and ecological research. However, few studies have compared the suitability of different molecular data types to predict age in the same cohort and whether combining them would improve predictions. Here, we explored this at the level of proteins and small RNAs in 103 human blood plasma samples. First, we used a two-step mass spectrometry approach measuring 612 proteins to select and quantify 21 proteins that changed in abundance with age. Notably, proteins increasing with age were enriched for components of the complement system. Next, we used small RNA sequencing to select and quantify a set of 315 small RNAs that changed in abundance with age. Most of these were microRNAs (miRNAs), downregulated with age, and predicted to target genes related to growth, cancer, and senescence. Finally, we used the collected data to build age-predictive models. Among the different types of molecules, proteins yielded the most accurate model (R² = 0.59 ± 0.02), followed by miRNAs as the best-performing class of small RNAs (R² = 0.54 ± 0.02). Interestingly, the use of protein and miRNA data together improved predictions (R2 = 0.70 ± 0.01). Future work using larger sample sizes and a validation dataset will be necessary to confirm these results. Nevertheless, our study suggests that combining proteomic and miRNA data yields superior age predictions, possibly by capturing a broader range of age-related physiological changes. It will be interesting to determine if combining different molecular data types works as a general strategy to improve future aging clocks.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from 19 healthy young male individuals (<31 years old) and 25 healthy old male individuals (>49 years old) were selected for Hyper-reaction monitoring-MS (HRM-MS) proteomics profiling, which was performed by Biognosys AG (Switzerland). All used solvents were HPLC-grade from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise stated.
Sample preparation and library characterization: 10 µl of each plasma sample was reduced using Biognosys’ Reduction Solution for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated using Biognosys’ Alkylation Solution for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, digestion of approximately 100 µg of protein per sample was carried out using trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C at a protein:protease ratio of 50:1. Peptides were desalted using a C18 MicroSpin plate (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried down using a SpeedVac system. Peptides were resuspended in 40 µl LC solvent A (1 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid (FA)) spiked with Biognosys’ HRM kit calibration. For HPRP fractionation, equal sample volumes were pooled according to sample group (young and elderly). The two pools were each diluted 4x in 0.2 M ammonium formate (pH 10) and applied to a C18 MicroSpin column (The Nest Group). The peptides were then eluted with buffers containing 0.05 M ammonium formate and increasing acetonitrile concentrations (5, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 30 and 70% for “young” samples and 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 30 and 70% for “elderly” samples). Note that Biognosys’ standard procedure collects six fractions. Here, more fractions were generated to obtain a deeper library. The eluates were dried down, resolved in 17 µl solvent A and spiked with Biognosys’ HRM kit calibration peptides prior to mass spectrometric analyses. The final peptide concentrations in all samples and fractions were determined using a UV/VIS Spectrometer (SpectroSTAR nano, BMG Biotech).  LC-MS/MS shotgun measurements: 2 µg of peptides (1.5 µg for fraction 5% of the “young” pool) were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano-electrospray source. LC solvents were A: 1 % acetonitrile in water with 0.1 % formic acid; B: 15 % water in acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1 – 52 % solvent B in 60 minutes followed by 52 - 90 % B in 0.1 minutes and 90 % B for 10 minutes. A modified TOP15 method was used (Scheltema et al., MCP, 2014, 13, 3698-3708). The mass spectrometric data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.6.5 software (maxquant.org), the false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 1 %. A human UniProt .fasta database (Homo sapiens, 2015-08-28) was used, allowing for 2 missed cleavages and variable modifications (N-term acetylation, methionine oxidation, lysine/arginine carbamylation, asparagine/gluta-mine deamidation).  LC-MS/MS HRM measurements: 2 µg of peptides per sample were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. LC solvents were A: 1% acetonitrile in water with 0.1 % formic acid; B: 15 % water in acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1 – 52 % solvent B in 60 minutes followed by 52 - 90 % B in 10 seconds and 90 % B for 10 minutes. A DIA method with one full range survey scan and 14 DIA windows was used. HRM mass spectrometric data were analyzed using Spectronaut 10 software (Biognosys). The false discovery rate on peptide level was set to 1 %, data was filtered using row based extraction. The assay library (protein inventory) generated in this project was used for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The HRM measurements analyzed with Spectronaut were normalized using local regression normalization (Callister et al., 2006). Protein intensities measurements were log2 transformed. The significance of differential expression between the two age groups was assessed with the Mann-Whitney test. In order to account for multiple testing, False Discovery Rate adjusted p-values (q-values) were computed using the q value package (version 2.26.0) (Storey et al. 2019). 145 out of 612 proteins had q-values below 0.2 and were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Aging clocks, built from comprehensive molecular data, have emerged as promising tools in medicine, forensics, and ecological research. However, few studies have compared the suitability of different molecular data types to predict age in the same cohort and whether combining them would improve predictions. Here, we explored this at the level of proteins and small RNAs in 103 human blood plasma samples. First, we used a two-step mass spectrometry approach measuring 612 proteins to select and quantify 21 proteins that changed in abundance with age. Notably, proteins increasing with age were enriched for components of the complement system. Next, we used small RNA sequencing to select and quantify a set of 315 small RNAs that changed in abundance with age. Most of these were microRNAs (miRNAs), downregulated with age, and predicted to target genes related to growth, cancer, and senescence. Finally, we used the collected data to build age-predictive models. Among the different types of molecules, proteins yielded the most accurate model (R&#xb2; = 0.59 &#xb1; 0.02), followed by miRNAs as the best-performing class of small RNAs (R&#xb2; = 0.54 &#xb1; 0.02). Interestingly, the use of protein and miRNA data together improved predictions (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.70 &#xb1; 0.01). Future work using larger sample sizes and a validation dataset will be necessary to confirm these results. Nevertheless, our study suggests that combining proteomic and miRNA data yields superior age predictions, possibly by capturing a broader range of age-related physiological changes. It will be interesting to determine if combining different molecular data types works as a general strategy to improve future aging clocks.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Hrm-ms

### Affiliations
Biosciences and Nutrition, Riedel Lab, Karolinska Institute, Sweden
Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Jerome Salignon

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Riedel
Biosciences and Nutrition, Riedel Lab, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


