### Accession
PXD028840

### Title
A method for independent estimation of false localisation rate for phosphoproteomics

### Description
Phosphoproteomics methods are commonly employed in labs to identify and quantify the sites of phosphorylation on proteins. In recent years, various software tools have been developed, incorporating scores or statistics related to whether a given phosphosite has been correctly identified, or to estimate the global false localisation rate (FLR) within a given data set for all sites reported. These scores have generally been calibrated using synthetic data sets, and their statistical reliability on real datasets is largely unknown. As a result, there is considerable problem in the field of reporting incorrectly localised phosphosites, due to inadequate statistical control. In this work, we develop the concept of using scoring and ranking modifications on a decoy amino acid, i.e. one that cannot be modified, to allow for independent estimation of global FLR. We test a variety of different amino acids to act as the decoy, on both synthetic and real data sets, demonstrating that the amino acid selection can make a substantial difference to the estimated global FLR. We conclude that while several different amino acids might be appropriate, the most reliable FLR results were achieved using alanine and leucine as decoys, although we have a preference for alanine due to the risk of potential confusion between leucine and isoleucine amino acids. We propose that the phosphoproteomics field should adopt the use of a decoy amino acid, so that there is better control of false reporting in the literature, and in public databases that re-distribute the data.

### Sample Protocol
This study is a reanalysis of three different PRIDE datasets; PXD007058, PXD008355, PXD000612. Please see the original submissions for details on sample processing protocol.

### Data Protocol
Dataset files were searched using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP), including Comet search and PTMProphet site localisation.  The PXD007058 search database consisted of the synthetic peptides, the PXD008355 Arabidopsis search database of Araport11 sequences and the PXD000612 human search database was created from the Level 1 PeptideAtlas Tiered Human Integrated Search Proteome, containing core isoforms from neXtProt. Each search database also contained the cRAP contaminants sequences. Decoys across all three databases were generated for each entry using the Brujin method (with k=2). The following parameters were used: 7ppm  peptide mass tolerance (20ppm searching PXD007058), 0.02Da fragment bin tolerance, fully tryptic digestion, 2 missed cleavages (4 searching PXD007058), carbamidomethylation fixed modification, oxidation on M (MWP for PXD007058), phosphorylation on STYA, N-terminal acetylation, ammonia loss on QC, Pyro-Glu, deamination on NQ (and Pyrophosphorylaion on STY for PXD007058), the  max number of variable PTMs was set to 5.  Searches were also completed using different pipelines: MaxQuant including PTMScore, ProteomeDiscoverer including Mascot and ptmRS localisation and PEAKS DB search with A-score. Additional searches were made using different phosphorylated decoy amino acids: Gly, Leu, Asp, Glu and Pro.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphoproteomic methods are commonly employed to identify and quantify phosphorylation sites on proteins. In recent years, various tools have been developed, incorporating scores or statistics related to whether a given phosphosite has been correctly identified or to estimate the global false localization rate (FLR) within a given data set for all sites reported. These scores have generally been calibrated using synthetic datasets, and their statistical reliability on real datasets is largely unknown, potentially leading to studies reporting incorrectly localized phosphosites, due to inadequate statistical control. In this work, we develop the concept of scoring modifications on a decoy amino acid, that is, one that cannot be modified, to allow for independent estimation of global FLR. We test a variety of amino acids, on both synthetic and real data sets, demonstrating that the selection can make a substantial difference to the estimated global FLR. We conclude that while several different amino acids might be appropriate, the most reliable FLR results were achieved using alanine and leucine as decoys. We propose the use of a decoy amino acid to control false reporting in the literature and in public databases that re-distribute the data. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD028840.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, False localisation

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Biochemistry & Systems Biology, Universiy of Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Kerry Ramsbottom

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Andrew R Jones
Biochemistry & Systems Biology, Universiy of Liverpool, UK


