### Accession
PXD009665

### Title
Scolopendra viridis venom MS -  Venom-gland transcriptomics and venom proteomics of the giant Florida blue centipede, Scolopendra viridis

### Description
MS analysis of tryptic digests of whole venoms from two individual of the centipede Scolopendra viridis from Florida, USA.

### Sample Protocol
Quantification of venom protein samples was completed using a Qubit Protein Assay Kit and approximately 5 ug of whole venom was digested using the Calbiochem ProteoExtract All-in-One Trypsin Digestion Kit (Merch, Darmstadt, Germany) per manufacturer's instructions, resulting in approximately 4.3 ug of digested venom proteins. Digested proteinsamples were then frozen and dried using a SpeedVac.  Digested venom protein samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid to reach a final concentration of 250 ng/uL. Known concentrations of three highly-purified recombinant Escherichia coli proteins (Abcam) were mixed in specified proportions prior to digestion to yield final desired concentrations of 2,500 fmol of P31697 (Chaperone protein FimC), 250 fmol of P31658 (Protein deglycase 1), and 25 fmol of P00811 (Beta-lactamase ampC) per injection. The digested E. coli peptide mix was infused into venom samples prior to LC-MS/MS injection. A 2 uL aliquot of each sample was injected into an externally calibrated Thermo Q Exactive HF (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) in conjunction with Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano System to perform LC-MS/MS analysis. Beginning with LC, samples were aspirated into a 50 uL loop and loaded onto the trap column (Thermo u-Precolumn 5 mm, with nanoViper tubing 30 um i.d.X10 cm), with a flow rate of 300 nL/min for separation on the analytical column (Acclaim pepmap RSLC 75 uMx 15 cm nanoviper). A 60 minute linear gradient from 3% to 45% B was performed using mobile phases A (99.9% H2O (EMD Omni Solvent) and 0.1% formic acid) and B (99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid). The LC eluent was directly nanosprayed into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Thermo Excalibur 3.1.66 (Thermo Scientific) throughout the chromatographic separation. A data-dependent top-20 method was used for MS data acquisition, selecting the most abundant, not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (350-1700 m/z). Sequencing was performed using higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 10^5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Full scans (350-1700 m/z) were performed at 60,000 resolution in profile mode. MS2 were acquired in centroid mode at 15,000 resolution. A 15-second dynamic exclusion window was used and ions with a single charge, a charge more than seven, or an unassigned charge were excluded. All measurements were performed at room temperature, and each sample was run and measured in triplicate to facilitate lable-free quantification and account for any machine-related variability between samples.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using SequestHT as the search engine, custom-generated FASTA databases, and percolator to validate peptides. The SequestHT search parameters used were: enzyme name = Trypsin, maximum missed cleavage = 2, minimum peptide length = 6, maximum peptide length = 144, maximum delta Cn = 0.05, precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.2 Da, dynamic modifications,  carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da(C) and oxidation +15.995 Da(M). Protein and peptide identities were validated using Scaffold (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) software. Peptide identities were accepted based on a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identities were also accepted with an FDR of 1.0% and a minimum of one recognized peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The limited number of centipede venom characterizations have revealed a rich diversity of toxins, and recent work has suggested centipede toxins may be more rapidly diversifying than previously considered. Additionally, many identified challenges in venomics research, including assembly and annotation methods, toxin quantification, and the ability to provide biological or technical replicates, have yet to be addressed in centipede venom characterizations. We performed high-throughput, quantifiable transcriptomic and proteomic methods on two individual Scolopendra viridis centipedes from North Florida. We identified 39 toxins that were proteomically confirmed, and 481 nontoxins that were expressed in the venom gland of S. viridis. The most abundant toxins expressed in the venom of S. viridis belonged to calcium and potassium ion-channel toxins, venom allergens, metalloproteases, and &#x3b2;-pore forming toxins. We compared our results to the previously characterized S. viridis from Morelos, Mexico, and found only five proteomically confirmed toxins in common to both localities, suggesting either extreme toxin divergence within S. viridis, or that these populations may represent entirely different species. By using multiple assembly and annotation methods, we generated a comprehensive and quantitative reference transcriptome and proteome of a Scolopendromorpha centipede species, while overcoming some of the challenges present in venomics research.

### Keywords
Venom, Centipede

### Affiliations
Florida State University

### Submitter
Darin Rokyta

### Lab Head
Dr Darin R. Rokyta
Florida State University


