### Accession
PXD043244

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of mouse embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
Fibroblasts are the most common cell type in stroma and function in the support and repair of most tissues. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) are amenable to isolation and rapid growth in culture. To facilitate their use as a research tool, we have performed a comprehensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterisation of wildtype primary MEFs from C57BL/6 mice. EIF2/4 and MTOR signalling pathways were enriched in both the proteome and phosphoproteome, along with extracellular matrix (ECM) and cytoskeleton associated pathways. Consistent with this, kinase enrichment analysis identified activation of P38A, P90RSK, P70RSK, and MTOR. Cell surface markers and matrisome proteins were also annotated.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs were isolated and cultures established using published procedures (Schevzov et al., 2005). Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis was performed on cultures before their third passage. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using EasyPhos (Humphrey et al., 2018). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480. Phosphoproteome samples were separated over 70 min using a 5%-32% acetonitrile gradient. Full MS scans of m/z range 350-1200 were acquired at a resolution of 60,000, with an automatic gain control of 300% and maximum injection time 50ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired using a resolution of 15,000, standard automatic gain control, a stepped collision energy (30,36), and automatic maximum injection time. Proteome samples were separated over 90 min using a 5%-35% acetonitrile gradient. Full MS scans of m/z range 360-1500 were acquired at a resolution of 60,000, with an automatic gain control of 300% and maximum injection time 100ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired using a resolution of 15,000, standard automatic gain control, a stepped collision energy (30,36), and automatic maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 was used to search DDA data files with the Sequest HT search engine. Files were searched against the Uniprot Mus Musculus database (Sequest, downloaded 27.09.2021).

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblasts are the most common cell type in stroma and function in the support and repair of most tissues. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) are amenable to isolation and rapid growth in culture. MEFs are therefore widely used as a standard model for functional characterisation of gene knockouts, and can also be used in co-cultures, commonly to support embryonic stem cell cultures. To facilitate their use as a research tool, we have performed a comprehensive proteomic and phosphoproteomic characterisation of wild-type primary MEFs from C57BL/6 mice. EIF2/4 and MTOR signalling pathways were abundant in both the proteome and phosphoproteome, along with extracellular matrix (ECM) and cytoskeleton associated pathways. Consistent with this, kinase enrichment analysis identified activation of P38A, P90RSK, P70S6K, and MTOR. Cell surface markers and matrisome proteins were also annotated. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD043244. This provides a comprehensive catalogue of the wild-type MEF proteome and phosphoproteome which can be utilised by the field to guide future work.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Fibroblasts

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, and  Precision Medicine Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute,  NSW, 2308, Australia
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy Faculty of Health and Medicine, University of Newcastle, and Cancer Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, Callaghan, NSW, 2308, Australia

### Submitter
Nicole Verrills

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Verrills
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, College of Health, Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, and  Precision Medicine Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute,  NSW, 2308, Australia


