### Accession
PXD012348

### Title
Redundancy and Complementarity between ERAP1 and ERAP2 Revealed by their Effects on the Behçet’s Disease-Associated HLA-B*51 Peptidome

### Description
The endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidases ERAP1 and ERAP2 trim peptides to be loaded onto HLA molecules, including the main risk factor for Behçet’s disease HLA-B*51. ERAP1 is also a risk factor among HLA-B*51-positive individuals, whereas no association is known with ERAP2. This study addressed the mutual relationships between both enzymes in the processing of an HLA-bound peptidome, interrogating their differential association with Behçet’s disease. CRISPR/Cas9 was used to generate knock outs of ERAP1, ERAP2 or both from transfectant 721.221-HLA-B*51:01 cells. The surface expression of HLA-B*51 was reduced in all cases. The effects of depleting each or both enzymes on the B*51:01 peptidome were analyzed by quantitative label-free mass spectrometry. Substantial quantitative alterations of peptide length, subpeptidome balance, N-terminal residue usage, affinity and presentation of non-canonical ligands were observed. These effects were often different in the presence or absence of the other enzyme, revealing their mutual dependency. In the absence of ERAP1, ERAP2 showed similar and significant processing of B*51:01 ligands, indicating functional redundancy. The high overlap between the peptidomes of wildtype and double KO cells indicates that a large majority of B*51:01 ligands are present in the ER even in the absence of ERAP1/ERAP2. These results indicate that both enzymes have distinct, but complementary and partially redundant effects on the B*51:01 peptidome, leading to its optimization and maximal surface expression. The distinct effects of both enzymes on the HLA-B*51 peptidome provide a basis for their differential association with Behçet’s disease and suggest a pathogenetic role of the B*51:01 peptidome.

### Sample Protocol
HLA-B*51-bound peptides were isolated from 1x109 cells per individual preparation. Cells were lysed in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Igepal CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich) and a mixture of protease inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). After centrifugation, the supernatant was passed through a column containing 1mg W6/32 bound to CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) and washed with 40 column volumes each of 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0containing: 1) 150 mM NaCl, 2) 400 mM NaCl, 3) 150 mM NaCl, and 4) 80 column volumes of buffer without NaCl. Peptides were eluted with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), filtered through Vivaspin 2, cutoff 5,000 Da (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Gottingen, Germany), and concentrated in a SpeedVac. The peptide-containing fractions were pooled, dried and then desalted on C18-stage tips. Each sample was analyzed in a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer fitted with Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-capillary UHPLC (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were resolved with a 7-40% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid for 180 min and 0.15 µL/min on a capillary column pressure-packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec. The selected masses were fragmented from the survey scan of mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 300-1,800AMU at resolution of 70,000. MS/MS spectra were acquired starting at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500. The target value was set to 1x105 and the isolation window to 1.8 m/z. Peptide sequences were assigned from the MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
The peptide pools from each individual preparation were separately subjected to MS and the peptides were assigned from the MS/MS spectra using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) with the Andromeda search engine and the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 20-4-17: 70946 entries) under the following parameters: precursor ion mass and fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm, false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01 and peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) FDR 0.05, oxidation (Met), acetylation (protein N-terminus) and Gln to Pyro-Glu conversion were included as variable modifications. No fixed modifications were included. Identifications derived from the reverse database and known contaminants were eliminated

### Publication Abstract
The endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidases ERAP1 and ERAP2 trim peptides to be loaded onto HLA molecules, including the main risk factor for Beh&#xe7;et's disease HLA-B*51. ERAP1 is also a risk factor among HLA-B*51-positive individuals, whereas no association is known with ERAP2. This study addressed the mutual relationships between both enzymes in the processing of an HLA-bound peptidome, interrogating their differential association with Beh&#xe7;et's disease. CRISPR/Cas9 was used to generate knock outs of ERAP1, ERAP2 or both from transfectant 721.221-HLA-B*51:01 cells. The surface expression of HLA-B*51 was reduced in all cases. The effects of depleting each or both enzymes on the B*51:01 peptidome were analyzed by quantitative label-free mass spectrometry. Substantial quantitative alterations of peptide length, subpeptidome balance, N-terminal residue usage, affinity and presentation of noncanonical ligands were observed. These effects were often different in the presence or absence of the other enzyme, revealing their mutual dependence. In the absence of ERAP1, ERAP2 showed similar and significant processing of B*51:01 ligands, indicating functional redundancy. The high overlap between the peptidomes of wildtype and double KO cells indicates that a large majority of B*51:01 ligands are present in the ER even in the absence of ERAP1/ERAP2. These results indicate that both enzymes have distinct, but complementary and partially redundant effects on the B*51:01 peptidome, leading to its optimization and maximal surface expression. The distinct effects of both enzymes on the HLA-B*51 peptidome provide a basis for their differential association with Beh&#xe7;et's disease and suggest a pathogenetic role of the B*51:01 peptidome.

### Keywords
Erap1, Hla-b*51, Erap2, Behçet’s disease, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Eilon Barnea

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology


