### Accession
PXD021597

### Title
Identification of C2CD4A and C2CD4B binding partners in MIN6 cells

### Description
Variants close to the VPS13C/C2CD4A/C2CD4B locus are associated with altered risk of type 2 diabetes in genome-wide association studies. Whilst previous functional work has suggested roles for VPS13C and C2CD4A in disease development, none has explored the role of C2CD4B. Here, we show that systemic inactivation of C2cd4b in mice leads to marked, but highly sexually dimorphic, changes in body weight and glucose homeostasis. Female C2cd4b mice display unchanged body weight but abnormal glucose tolerance and defective in vivo, but not in vitro, insulin secretion, associated with a marked decrease in follicle stimulating hormone levels. In sharp contrast, male C2cd4b null mice displayed normal glucose tolerance but an increase in body weight and fasting glycemia after maintenance on high fat diet. No metabolic disturbances were observed after global inactivation of C2cd4a in mice, or in pancreatic β cell function at larval stages in C2cd4ab null zebrafish. These studies suggest that C2cd4b may act centrally to influence sex-dependent circuits which control pancreatic β cell function and glucose tolerance in rodents. However, the absence of sexual dimorphism in the impact of diabetes risk variants argues for additional roles for C2CD4A or VPS13C in the control of glucose homeostasis in man.

### Sample Protocol
Sample tubes with beads from the immunoprecipitation experiment were centrifuged for sedimentation and supernatant was discarded to waste. Beads were resuspended with 150µl of 1M urea (in 20mM HEPES – pH 8.0 + 1mM DTT), followed by the addition of 1.5µg of trypsin gold (Promega, PN: V5280). Samples were incubated overnight at 37oC with shaking to maintain beads suspended. Recovered supernatants were subsequently acidified to approximately 0.1%TFA, followed by de-salting using reversed-phase spin tips (Glygen Corp, PN: TT2C18) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, spin-tips were solvated and equilibrated with successive washes of 60% ACN + 0.1%FA and 1% ACN + 0.1%FA. Samples were then loaded onto the spin-tips and washed with 1% ACN + 0.1%FA and then eluted with 60% ACN + 0.1%FA. Eluents were subsequently dried to completion using a vacuum centrifuge. Dried peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY-Spray source. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18, 75μm × 75cm). A 120-minute gradient separation was used, 4-45% of buffer B (composition: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Eluted peptides were analysed by the Q-Exactive operating in positive polarity and data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions for fragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 70000 resolution (at m/z 200), followed by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) of the top 12 most abundant ions at a resolution of 17500. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets set to 3e6 and 5e4 for a maximum injection time of 50ms and 50ms respectively. A survey scan m/z range of 400 – 1800 m/z was used, with a normalised collision energy set to 27%, minimum AGC of 1e3, charge state exclusion enabled for unassigned and +1 ions and a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using the MaxQuant [1] software platform (v1.6.2.3), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot Mus musculus database (Downloaded – 04th January 2018, entries: 83,123). A reverse decoy database approach was used at a 1% FDR for peptide spectrum matches and protein identifications. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, asparagine deamidation and cyclisation of glutamine to pyro-glutamate. Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2.   Ref [1] Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ, Cox et al, MCP, 13(9): 2513-26, 2014.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C2cd4a; c2cd4b; interaction proteomics

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN United Kingdom
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Kramer
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility Hammersmith Hospital Campus Du Cane Road London, W12 0NN United Kingdom


