### Accession
PXD036097

### Title
SWATH-MS demonstrates changes to protein expression due to a phase variable methyltransferase, ModA16, in Haemophilus influenzae biotype aegyptius

### Description
Cytoplasmic DNA methyltransferases are often associated with restriction modification (R-M) systems in bacterial systems. Phase variable expression of these DNA methyltransferase results in epigenetic regulation of multiple genes as part of systems called phasevarions (phase-variable regulons). H. aegyptius is the causative agent of Brazilian Purpuric Fever (BPF), an invasive disease with high mortality, that sporadically manifests in children previously suffering conjunctivitis. We have recently described a previously unidentified allele of a phase variable Type III DNA methylstransferase in H. aegyptius, ModA16. When ModA16 is expressed, H. aegyptius strains exhibit differential methylation throughout the genome compared to when ModA16 is not expressed. This change in methylation results in altered gene expression and SWATH-MS was used to identify the resulting changes to protein expression. This dataset represents triplicate repeats from strains which express ModA16 (ON) and strains which do not (OFF).

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of H. influenzae biogroup aegyptius strain He24/F3037 enriched pair (107 CFU/ml) were harvested from sBHI, lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonante, 5mM DTT) and incubated at 56°C for 30 minutes. Cysteines of the total protein were alkylated by addition of acrylamide to a final concentration of 25mM and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark.  Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonante to reduce urea to 2 M. Trypsin (New England Biolabs, 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) was added and incubate at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic digested peptides were then desalted and purified using a Ziptip (Millipore) as per manufacturer instructions. SWATH-MS was performed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Prominence nanoLC system (Shimadzu) and TripleTOF 5600 instrument with a NanoSpray III interface (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
The proteins were identified from data-dependent acquisition data using ProteinPilot 5.1 (Sciex), searching against H. influenzae biogroup aegyptius F3037 genome (NCBI Accession GCA_008586805.1). The results from ProteinPilot were then used as an ion library to measure the abundance of peptides and proteins using PeakView 2.1 (Sciex) with standard setting. Comparison of protein relative abundance was performed based on protein intensities or ion intensities using a linear mixed-effects model with the MSstats package in R. Proteins with adjusted P values of <0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Haemophilus influenzae</i> biogroup <i>aegyptius</i> is a human-adapted pathogen and the causative agent of Brazilian purpuric fever (BPF), an invasive disease with high mortality, that sporadically manifests in children previously suffering conjunctivitis. Phase variation is a rapid and reversible switching of gene expression found in many bacterial species, and typically associated with outer-membrane proteins. Phase variation of cytoplasmic DNA methyltransferases has been shown to play important roles in bacterial gene regulation and can act as epigenetic switches, regulating the expression of multiple genes as part of systems called phasevarions (phase-variable regulons). This study characterized two alleles of the ModA phasevarion present in <i>H. influenzae</i> biogroup <i>aegyptius</i>, ModA13, found in non-BPF causing strains and ModA16, unique to BPF causing isolates. Phase variation of ModA13 and ModA16 led to genome-wide changes to DNA methylation resulting in altered protein expression. These changes did not affect serum resistance in <i>H. influenzae</i> biogroup <i>aegyptius</i> strains.

### Keywords
Haemophilus influenzae biogroup aegyptius, Phase variation, Phasevarion

### Affiliations
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland 4215, Australia
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University

### Submitter
Greg Tram

### Lab Head
Dr John M Atack
Institute for Glycomics, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Queensland 4215, Australia


