### Accession
PXD005865

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of STMN1 knockdown cells

### Description
Phosphopeptides were enriched from STMN1 knockdown cells via the TiO2 HAMMOC approach, followed by SWATH-MS data acquisition for comparative proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cellular proteins were extracted from metastatic colorectal cancer cells, and digested using trypsin. Phosphopeptides enrichment was performed using the Titansphere Phospho-TiO kit, followed by separation using reverse phase chromatography on a NanoLC-Ultra System coupled with the cHiPLC-Nanoflex system in a Trap Elute configuration. The samples were loaded on a 200 µm × 0.5 mm column (ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm) at 3 µL/min for 10 minutes and eluted on an analytical 75 µm × 15 cm column (ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm). SWATH– MS acquisition was performed on a TripleTOF 6600 LC-MS/MS system. A sample constituting a pool of tryptic digests of the samples was analyzed in the Information Dependent Mode, with precursor ions selected across the mass range of 350–1500 m/z using 250 msec accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 40 precursors per cycle from each MS spectra were selected from MS/MS analysis with 50 msec accumulation time for each precursor across a range of 100–1500 m/z and dynamic exclusion for 20 sec. Tandem mass spectrometry was recorded in high sensitivity mode with automated rolling collision energy on.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra generated from the pooled sample in the Information Dependent Mode were searched using the ProteinPilot 5.0 software to create a spectral library of all the protein and peptides detectable in the samples. Identification of the spectra was performed against the UniProt SwissProt database (40,386 entries, released on September, 2014) with search parameters specified for Homo sapiens sequences, cysteinyl alkylation by MMTS, trypsin digestion, phosphorylation emphasis and biological modifications specified within the algorithm. The detected protein threshold was set at 0.05 and a false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was also performed by searching against a decoy database consisting of reversed protein sequences from the SwissProt database.

### Publication Abstract
In this communication, we present the phosphoproteome changes in an isogenic pair of colorectal cancer cell lines, viz., the poorly metastatic HCT-116 and the highly metastatic derivative E1, upon stathmin-1 (STMN1) knockdown. The aim was to better understand how the alterations of the phosphoproteins in these cells are involved in cancer metastasis. After the phosphopeptides were enriched using the TiO<sub>2</sub> HAMMOC approach, comparative proteomics analysis was carried out using sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra-MS. Following bioinformatics analysis using MarkerView and OneOmics platforms, we identified a list of regulated phosphoproteins that may play a potential role in signaling, maintenance of cytoskeletal structure, and focal adhesion. Among these phosphoproteins, was the actin cytoskeleton regulator protein, vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), where its change in phosphorylation status was found to be concomitant with STMN1-associated roles in metastasis. We further showed that silencing of stathmin-1 altered the expression, subcellular localization and phosphorylation status of VASP, which suggested that it might be associated with remodeling of the cell cytoskeleton in colorectal cancer metastasis.

### Keywords
Stathmin-1, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Biochemistry, NUS, Singapore

### Submitter
Hwee Tong Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Maxey Chung Ching Ming
Biochemistry, NUS, Singapore


