### Accession
PXD020188

### Title
NAA80-V5 interactor screen in HeLa and HAP1 cells

### Description
Actin is N-terminally acetylated by NAA80. We aimed to characterize the NAA80 interactome.

### Sample Protocol
NAA80-V5, V5-NAA80, V5-NAA80-delP123 or lacZ-V5 plasmids were expressed in HeLa or HAP1 cells before immunoprecipitation with anti-V5. Bound proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsinized using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Tryptic peptides were desalted by stagetips and analyzed by LC/MS using a QExactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer and a 150 minute LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
The resulting RAW files were processed using Maxquant (version 1.6.1.0) and the integrated search engine Andromeda. They were searched against a human proteome database containing 20,352 annotated, canonical and isoform entries, retrieved from Uniprot on 6 Jan 2020, and a reverse decoy database automatically generated by the search engine. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and Met oxidation as variable modifications. Protease specificity was set as trypsin (C-terminal to Lys and Arg, except when followed by a Pro). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and maximum peptide mass was set to 4600 Da. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% FDR. The MaxLFQ label-free quantification algorithm (Hein et al, 2014) was used to obtain relative quantities of each protein group in the different samples. LFQ settings were as follows: minimum ratio count: 2; “Fast LFQ” was checked; and “Skip normalization” was not checked. Resulting protein group lists were processed in Perseus (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins identified only by reverse sequences and by modified sites were removed. Protein enriched by NAA80 IP were identified by making a volcano plot, with a S0 of 0.1 and FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein modifications, Nat, Actin, N-terminal acetylation, Cytoskeleton, Acetylation, Naa80

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Rasmus Ree

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Arnesen
Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Department of Surgery, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway


