### Accession
PXD017580

### Title
Proteomics Reveals Extracellular Matrix Injury in the Glomeruli and Tubulointerstitium of Kidney Allografts with Early Antibody-Mediated Rejection

### Description
Antibody-mediated rejection (AMR) accounts for >50% of kidney allograft losses. AMR is caused by donor-specific antibodies (DSA) against HLA and non-HLA antigens in the glomeruli and the tubulointerstitium, which together with high interferon gamma (IFNɣ) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα), trigger graft injury. Unfortunately, the mechanisms governing cell-specific injury in AMR remain unclear. We studied 30 for-cause kidney biopsies with early AMR, acute cellular rejection or acute tubular necrosis (‘non-AMR’). We laser-captured microdissected glomeruli and tubulointerstitium and subjected them to unbiased proteome analysis. 120/2026 glomerular and 180/2399 tubulointerstitial proteins were significantly differentially expressed in AMR vs. non-AMR biopsies (p<0.05). Basement membrane and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins were significantly decreased in both AMR compartments. We verified decreased glomerular and tubulointerstitial LAMC1 expression, and decreased glomerular NPHS1 and PTPRO expression in AMR. Cathepsin-V (CTSV) was predicted to cleave ECM-proteins in the AMR glomeruli, and CTSL, CTSS and LGMN in the tubulointerstitium. We identified galectin-1, an immunomodulatory protein upregulated in AMR glomeruli and linked to the ECM. Anti-HLA class-I antibodies significantly increased CTSV expression, and galectin-1 expression and secretion, in human glomerular endothelial cells. We also studied glutathione S-transferase omega-1 (GSTO1), an ECM-modifying enzyme, increased in the AMR tubulointerstitium. GSTO1 expression was significantly increased in TNFα-treated proximal tubular epithelial cells. IFNɣ and TNFα significantly increased CTSS and LGMN expression in these cells. Basement membranes are often remodeled in chronic AMR, and we demonstrated that this remodeling begins early in glomeruli and tubulointerstitium. Targeting ECM-remodeling in AMR may represent a new therapeutic opportunity.

### Sample Protocol
For each study case, remaining tissue from a formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded kidney biopsy was sectioned at 8μm, and stained with hematoxylin. Using a laser-capture microdissection system (Leica), the glomeruli and tubulointerstitium were then isolated and collected in a tube with 35μL of protein extraction buffer containing 10mM Tris, 1mM EDTA, and 0.002% Zwittergent in MS-grade pure water (Sigma). To obtain equal protein amounts across all samples, we standardized each section to 350,000μm2. The total protein amount per sample was below the limit of detection of standard protein quantification assays. Samples were vortexed for 2 minutes and centrifuged at 12,000G for 2 minutes. To reverse formaldehyde crosslinking, samples were heated for 90 minutes at 98ºC, being vortexed every 15 minutes. Samples were then centrifuged at 12,000G for 2 minutes and cell lysis was induced by sonication for 1h. Following another centrifugation at 12,000G for 2 minutes, proteins were then digested into peptides with 0.5μg of MS grade trypsin (Promega) diluted in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH₄HCO₃), overnight and at 37ºC. After tryptic digestion, peptides were reduced by adding 2μL of 100mM dithiothreitol in NH₄HCO₃ (final concentration 5.13mM) and heating the samples at 95ºC for 5 minutes. Samples were then acidified by addition of 10μL of 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid + 0.15% v/v formic acid in MS-grade pure water (Sigma). Peptides were extracted and desalted with 10μL OMIX C18 MB tips (Agilent), eluted in 3μL of 65% v/v acetonitrile, and diluted to 41μL with 0.1% v/v formic acid in MS-grade pure water.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the RAW files of each MS run were generated by XCalibur software v3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific). Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.28) and searched in Andromeda engine against the human Uniprot FASTA database (HUMAN5640_sProt–072016, update of July 20, 2016). Proteins and peptides were identified with a false discovery rate of 1%. For peptide identification, a minimum length of 6 amino acids was selected. The false positive rate was determined on reverse mode. Trypsin/P was selected as digestion mode, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was enabled. While cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The initial peptide tolerance against a ‘human-first-search’ database was set to 20ppm. The main search peptide mass tolerance was 40ppm, and the fragment mass MS/MS tolerance was 0.5Da. Matching between runs was selected. Normalized label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins was derived from extracted ion current information from razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of 1.   Proteomics data were analyzed using Perseus software (version_1.5.6.0). Reverse hits and contaminants were manually checked and removed. We examined the distribution of log2 transformed LFQ intensity values of all proteins quantified in each sample. In the glomerular compartment, 28 of the 30 samples had protein intensity values that followed normal distribution. One ACR and one ATN case were excluded due to poor protein recovery, and non-normal distribution. In turn, the protein intensity values of all 30 tubulointerstitial fractions followed a normal distribution. We then subjected the zero-value intensities to imputation (assuming that low abundance values were missing), from a normal distribution, with a downshift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3 standard deviations. After imputation, we determined the differentially expressed proteins between the AMR and the non-AMR groups in glomeruli and tubulointerstitium, by comparing their mean log2 transformed LFQ intensities using the two-tailed independent t-test (P<0.05), followed by Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment (Q<0.2). All proteins selected for validation were identified with at least 5 unique peptides and present in all biopsy samples, except PTPRO, which was present in 27/28 glomerular samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytokines, Laser-capture microdissection, Galectin-1, Proximal tubular epithelial cells, Remodeling, Antibody-mediated rejection, Kidney, Basement membrane, Glomeruli, Hla class-i, Cathepsins., Laminin, Systems biology, Biopsy, Proteomics, Extracellular matrix, Tubulointerstitium, Glomerular microvascular endothelial cells, Glutathione s-transferase omega-1

### Affiliations
Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, UniversityHealth Network, Toronto, Canada Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada
University Health Network

### Submitter
Sergi Clotet Freixas

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Konvalinka
Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, UniversityHealth Network, Toronto, Canada Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada


