### Accession
PXD009976

### Title
Nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase from Euphorbia characias latex

### Description
The low-resolution structure of a nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase from Euphorbia characias latex (ELNPP) has been determined in solution by means of Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS). To improve the structural resolution of ELNPP a partial sequencing after proteolytic cleavage of the protein was performed. Protein digestion followed by high-resolution HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis allowed us to identify two different peptides of 82 and 41 amino acids, respectively. These sequences exhibit a high degree of identity with other NPPs predicted sequences from several higher plants including Malus domestica, Morus notabilis, Ricinus communis, and Triticum aestivum. In particular, Triticum aestivum NPP is the protein with the highest identity level (98 identical positions) towards the obtained fragments of ELNPP. From the alignment with the entire sequence of TaNPP, the two obtained fragments contain some known conserved residues belonging to the catalytic domain of the mammalian NPP family enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase from Euphorbia characias latex was purified as previously reported (Medda et al., 2011). 60 micrograms of the puriﬁed protein were dialyzed against 50 mM ammonium hydrogen-carbonate (pH 8.0) and digested with 0.5 µg of trypsin by using the “Trypsin Singles Proteomic Grade” (Sigma-Aldrich) kit according to the manufacturer instructions. The reaction was stopped with formic acid (0.1% ﬁnal concentration) after an overnight incubation, the samples were lyophilized, dissolved in 40 µL of 0.1% aqueous formic acid (FA) and submitted to a desalting step by Cleanup C18 Pipette Tips (Agilent Technologies) before HPLC–nanoESI-high-resolution MS/MS analysis.The experiments were carried out by an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC apparatus (ThermoFisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA) equipped with a FLM-3000-Flow manager module coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite apparatus (ThermoFisher Scientific). The column used was a Zorbax 300SB-C18 (5 µm particle diameter; dimensions 1.0 x 150 mm). Eluents used were as follow: eluent A 0.1% (V/V) aqueous FA, and eluent B 0.1% (V/V) FA in acetonitrile-water 80/20. The gradient used was 0-7 min 3% B, 7-35 min from 3% to 55% B (linear), 35-41 min from 55% to 90% B, at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. The injected volume was 5 μL. MS and MS/MS spectra were collected in positive mode using the lock mass for internal mass calibration (polydimethyl cyclosiloxane, 445.1200 m/z) with the resolution of 60,000 and 30,000, respectively. The m/z range was from 300 to 2,000, and the tuning parameters were capillary temperature 250 °C, source voltage 4.0 kV, capillary voltage and tube lens voltage 48 V, and 150 V. In data-dependent acquisition mode, the three most abundant ions were selected and fragmented by using collision-induced dissociation (CID, 35% normalized collision energy for 30 ms, isolation width of 6–10 m/z, activation q of 0.25).

### Data Protocol
HPLC-ESI-MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameters of the Xtract program for the deconvolution. MS/MS data were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 program, based on SEQUEST cluster as a search engine (University of Washington, licensed to Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA) against the UniProtKB data base (September, 2016 released; UniProtKB NPP proteome.fasta, and UniprotKB viridiplantae proteome.fasta, respectively 739 and 2,432,496 reviewed and unreviewed protein sequences). For peptide matching the limits were: Xcorr scores greater than 1.5 for singly charged ions, 2.0 and 2.5 for doubly and triply charged ions, respectively. Furthermore, the cleavage specificity was set to trypsin with two missed cleavages in the bottom-up analysis. Precursor mass search tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.8 Da. BLAST analysis was performed using BLASTP® against protein sequences in the uniprotkb database (Uniprot Consortium, 2015). Sequence alignment was performed with ClustalO (1.2.3) multiple sequence alignment program of the ALIGN tool of uniprot.org (Uniprot Consortium, 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Little information is available concerning the structural features of nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterases (NPPs) of plant origin and the crystal structures of these proteins have not yet been reported. The aim of this study was to obtain insight into these aspects by carrying out a comparative analysis of the sequences of two different fragments of an NPP from the latex of the Mediterranean shrub Euphorbia characias (ELNPP) and by studying the low-resolution structure of the purified protein in solution by means of small-angle X-ray scattering. This is the first structure of a plant NPP in solution that has been reported to date. It is shown that the ELNPP sequence is highly conserved in many other plant species. Of note, the catalytic domains of these plant NPPs have the same highly conserved PDE-domain organization as mammalian NPPs. Moreover, ELNPP is a dimer in solution and this oligomerization state is likely to be common to other plant enzymes.

### Keywords
Nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase, Euphorbia characias, Msms sequencing

### Affiliations
University of Cagliari, DISVA
University of Cagliari Dep. Life and Environmental Sciences

### Submitter
Tiziana Cabras

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
University of Cagliari Dep. Life and Environmental Sciences


