### Accession
PXD008271

### Title
Time- and Polarity-dependent Proteomic Changes associated with Homeostatic Scaling at Central Synapses

### Description
In homeostatic scaling, the cellular mechanisms that detect the offset from the set-point, the duration of the offset and implement a cellular response are not well-understood. To understand the time-dependent dynamics,we manipulated activity for 2 hrs to induce the process of up or down-scaling and metabolically labelled nascent proteins using BONCAT. We analyzed the newly synthesized proteins that exhibited significant increases or decreases in expression in response to activity manipulations and identified 168 proteins. Then, to obtain a temporal trajectory of the cellular response, we compared the proteins synthesized within 2 and 24 hrs of an activity manipulation. Surprisingly, there was little overlap in the significantly regulated newly synthesized proteins identified in the early- and late-response datasets. There was, however, overlap in the functional categories that are modulated early and late, indicating that within protein function groups, different proteomic choices can be made to effect early and late homeostatic responses.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of dissociated neuron cultures.  Dissociated hippocampal neurons from postnatal day 0-2 rat pups (strain Sprague-Dawley) were prepared and maintained as previously described (Aakalu et al., 2001). Briefly, hippocampi were dissected and triturated after incubating in L-cystein-papain solution at 37°C for 15 min. Dissociated neurons were plated onto poly-D-Lysine-coated Petri dishes (MatTek) and cultured in Neurobasal A medium supplemented with B-27 and Glutamax (Invitrogen) at 37°C for 21 days. All experiments were carried out in accordance with the German Animal Welfare Act and supervised by the local government authorities and the Max Planck Society.  Sample preparation.  After a brief (30 min) methionine deprivation, two dishes of cultured neurons (~800 k cells in total) were incubated in each condition with 4 mM AHA (or methionine as a control) and treated with 20 µM Bicuculline or 1 µM Tetrodotoxin (Tocris Bioscience) for either 2h. After incubation, the neurons were washed with cold DPBS completed with protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete EDTA-free, Roche), harvested, and pelleted at 2,000x g for 5 min. The cell pellets were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at ‑80°C until further use. The pelleted neurons were resuspended in lysis buffer (100 µL, 8 M urea, 200 mM Tris [pH 8.4], 4% CHAPS, 1 M NaCl, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor) and homogenized using a pestle. The lysates were sonicated with short bursts (4x 30 s) in a cooled ultrasonic bath, followed by 5 min of benzonase digestion (1 µL of a ≥ 250 units/µL stock solution), and centrifugation for 5 min at 10,000x g. The supernatants (~200 µL) were incubated with freshly prepared catalyst solution (250 µL) and Alkyne-Sepharose slurry (50 µL) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (#C10416, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reaction mixture was gently agitated for 19 h in the dark. After centrifugation (2 min, 1,000x g), the beads were rinsed twice in H2O (900 µL each) and incubated in 250 µL SDS wash buffer (100 mM Tris [pH 8], 1% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA) containing 10 mM TCEP for 45 min at 55°C under gentle agitation. The mixture was centrifuged for 5 min at 1,000x g and the supernatants were discarded. Each sample was incubated with 250 µL SDS wash buffer containing 95 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark under gentle agitation. The samples were transferred to pre-washed (400 µL H2O, LC-MS/MS-ChromaSolv; 400 µL SDS wash buffer) Pierce Spin columns and then washed with 20 mL SDS wash buffer, 20 mL 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris [pH 8], and 20 mL 20% (v/v) acetonitrile/water. The resin was rinsed in digestion buffer (250 µL, 100 mM Tris, 2 mM CaCl2, 10% acetonitrile) and transferred to an Eppendorf tube. After centrifugation (5min, 1,000x g), the supernatant was discarded leaving a volume of ~50 µL slurry. EndoLysC (0.65 µg) was added to each tube and incubated overnight (~22 h) at 37°C with constant agitation. For subsequent tryptic digestion, each sample was incubated with 0.65 µg trypsin at 37°C overnight (~22 h) with constant agitation. The samples were rinsed twice with 500 µL H2O (0.1% TFA) and centrifuged at 1,000x g for 5 min. The collected supernatants were loaded onto C18-SepPak columns (50 mg sorbent, Waters Corp.) conditioned with 2 mL acetonitrile, 1 mL of 50% acetonitrile/water (0.5% acetic acid) in 0.5% acetic acid, and 2 mL water (0.1% TFA). The samples (~1 mL) were washed with 2 mL of water (0.1% TFA) and 200 µL of water (0.5% acetic acid). Desalted peptides were eluted with 0.5 mL of 50% acetonitrile/water (0.5% acetic acid), dried using a Speed-Vac (Eppendorf), and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis.  The dried peptide fractions were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and subsequently loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) onto a PepMap100 trapping column (C18, particle size 3 µm, L=20 mm). Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (C18, particle size <2 µM, L=50 cm, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a gradient of water (buffer A: water with 5% v/v dimethylsulfoxide and 0.1% formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 5% dimethylsulfoxide, 15% water and 80% acetonitrile (v/v/v), and 0.08% formic acid), running from 4% to 48% B in 178 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Peptides eluting from the column were ionized online using a Thermo nanoFlex ESI source and analyzed in a “Q Exactive Plus” mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 350-1,400 m/z, and sequence information were acquired by data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode using collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions (TOP12, MS resolution 70 k, MS/MS resolution 35 k, injection time: 120 ms, full parameters in Supplemental Table 8). All samples were measured in quadruplicate LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. MS data were analyzed in MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.5.1; Cox and Mann, 2008) using a customized Andromeda LFQ parameter set . In brief, spectra were matched to a Rattus norvegicus database downloaded from uniprot.org (35,953 entries, reviewed and non-reviewed) and a contaminant and decoy database. Tryptic peptides with ≥ 6 amino acids and ≤ 2 missed cleavages were included. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm, with a static modification of Cys residues (carboxyamidomethylation +57.021) and variable modifications of Met residues (oxidation +15.995), Lys residues (acetylation +42.011), Asn and Gln residues (deamidation +0.984), and N termini (carbamylation +43.006). Search results were filtered with an FDR of 0.01, and proteins identified by ≥1 unique peptide were included for subsequent analysis. Proteins were quantified in each condition by pair-wise ratio determination using ≥1 common peptide in ≥4 consecutive full scans per run for the label-free quantification (Cox et al., 2014). Bioinformatic processing. Five independent biological replicates measured in quadruplicates were processed in Perseus software package (ver. 1.5.5.3; Tyanova et al., 2016). After combining technical replicates, background proteins detected in vehicle control were subtracted from the other conditions (untreated, Bicuculline-treated, Tetrodotoxin-treated neurons). Newly-synthesized proteins identified in each biological replicate were averaged within each condition, and counted according to their numbers of biological replicates. Venn diagrams (e.g. showing the protein overlap in ≥1 biological replicate) were generated using Venn Diagram Plotter (ver. 1.5.5228.29250; PNNL). Sub-cellular localization of proteins identified in ≥ 2 biological replicates was predicted using the LocTree3 database (ver. 23‑08‑2016; Goldberg et al., 2014). Non-normalized protein intensities (non-LFQ) were log2 transformed and averaged across replicates to assess differences in overall protein abundances. LFQ intensities were normalized over experimental conditions using the central tendency adjustment method. Protein quantities were divided by a normalization factor representing the median intensity of all proteins measured in ≥2 biological replicates. The normalized log2 intensities were averaged across ≥2 biological replicates and then used for calculating the fold change of treated neurons relative to control. After filtering for the presence in ≥ 2 biological replicates (3196 proteins remaining) and for a coefficient of variation < 1 (3086 proteins remaining), these proteins were annotated using the gene ontology databases (GOBP, GOMF, GOCC, Ashburner et al., 2000) and the Panther database (Thomas et al., 2003), and protein keywords retrieved from the UniprotKB database (The UniProt Consortium., 2017). Differentially regulated groups of annotated proteins were analyzed and extracted using Perseus (1D annotation enrichment, two-sided Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 0.05), and compared to the protein fold changes after 24h (24h dataset from Schanzenbächer et al., 2016). Protein annotations of both time points were then combined and analyzed in a 2D annotation enrichment (Cox and Mann, 2012) using a p value < 0.01. Duplicates and annotation groups with more than 100 protein members were discarded. Statistical significance for protein regulation between Bicuculline/untreated, Tetrodotoxin/untreated or Bicuculline/Tetrodotoxin after 2h were measured using an ANOVA (permutation-based FDR of 0.05, S0 = 0.05, 250 randomizations), followed by post-hoc Fisher LSD p < 0.05 (in Origin 2015G Sr1, OriginLab), yielding 168 proteins. Significantly regulated proteins were annotated using the VarElect interpretation tool (Stelzer et al., 2016) by LifeMap’s GeneCards suite (Ben-Ari Fuchs et al., 2016). Cellular component ontologies enriched in the regulated proteome compared to the 5135 newly synthesized proteins as the background were analyzed in FunRich (ver. 3; Pathan et al., 2015) using a Benjamini Hochberg corrected p value < 0.05. Significantly regulated proteins in early (2h) and late response (24h, Schanzenbächer et al., 2016) were compared, and the protein overlap regulated in both treatments was calculated for each time point using Fisher LSD p < 0.05. The “degree of regulation” was calculated for the 168 and 307 regulated proteins (2h and 24h, respectively) by measuring the distance of each protein to the zero point (see manuscript). Protein fold changes of treated neurons relative to the control were calculated for each biological replicate in both time points. Time- and polarity-dependent regulation was statistically validated by an ANOVA (permutation-based FDR of 0.05, S0 = 0.05, 250 randomizations), yielding 711 differentially regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
In homeostatic scaling at central synapses, the depth and breadth of cellular mechanisms that detect the offset from the set-point, detect the duration of the offset and implement a cellular response are not well understood. To understand the time-dependent scaling dynamics we treated cultured rat hippocampal cells with either TTX or bicucculline for 2 hr to induce the process of up- or down-scaling, respectively. During the activity manipulation we metabolically labeled newly synthesized proteins using BONCAT. We identified 168 newly synthesized proteins that exhibited significant changes in expression. To obtain a temporal trajectory of the response, we compared the proteins synthesized within 2 hr or 24 hr of the activity manipulation. Surprisingly, there was little overlap in the significantly regulated newly synthesized proteins identified in the early- and integrated late response datasets. There was, however, overlap in the functional categories that are modulated early and late. These data indicate that within protein function groups, different proteomic choices can be made to effect early and late homeostatic responses that detect the duration and polarity of the activity manipulation.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Homeostatic scaling, Boncat

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics and Max Planck Institute for Brain Research
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian David Langer
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics and Max Planck Institute for Brain Research


