### Accession
PXD012939

### Title
Quantitative photo-crosslinking mass spectrometry reveals protein structure response to environmental changes

### Description
Conformational changes of protein structures depend on their chemical and physical environment. Studying conformational changes depending on environmental parameters is notoriously difficult as many methods of structural biology are affected by parameters like temperature or pH. To make such conformational changes accessible to quantitative crosslinking mass spectrometry (QCLMS) approaches, crosslinking chemistry must be invariant to different conditions. We propose this can be achieved by photo-inducible crosslinkers, which are not influenced by changes in environmental parameters. Here, we introduce a workflow combining photo-crosslinking using 4,4’-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA) with our recently developed data-independent acquisition (DIA)-QCLMS. In this study, we use this novel photo-DIA-QCLMS approach to quantify pH-dependent conformational changes in human serum albumin and cytochrome C. Both proteins show pH dependent conformational changes resulting in acidic and alkaline transitions. 93% and 95% unique residue pairs (URP) were quantifiable across triplicates for HSA and cytochrome C, respectively. Abundance changes of URPs and hence conformational changes of both proteins, were visualized using hierarchical clustering. For HSA we distinguished the N-F and the N-B form from the native conformation. Additionally, we observed for cytochrome C acidic and basic conformations. In conclusion, photo-DIA-QCLMS distinguished pH-dependent conformers of both proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Photo-crosslinking reaction and sample preparation. HSA and cytochrome C were crosslinked separately with sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4’-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA) using a protein-to-crosslinker ratio of 1:0.5 (w/w). Crosslinking was carried out in two-stages: firstly sulfo-SDA, dissolved in crosslinking buffer (20 mM HEPES-OH, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, pH 7.8) was added to the target proteins (1 µg/µL total protein concentration) and left to react in the dark for 50 minutes at room temperature. Then the sample was split into seven vials, each adjusted to a different pH, using HCl (18.5%) to lower the pH (pH 4, 5, 6, 7) and NaOH (1 mol/L) to reach basic pH (pH 8, 9, 10). The diazirine group was then photo-activated using ultraviolet light irradiation. A UVP CL-1000L UV Crosslinker (UVP, UK) at 365 nm was utilised for photo-activation. Samples were spread onto the inside of Eppendorf tube lids to form a thin film, placed on ice at a distance of 5 cm from the lamp and irradiated for 30 minutes at 200,000 µJ/cm2. The resulting crosslinked HSA and cytochrome C samples were separated by SDS-PAGE. Crosslinked monomer protein gel bands were excised, reduced, alkylated and digested using trypsin as described before34. Resultant peptides were extracted from gel bands using 80% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) and concentrated to a final ACN content of nominally 5% v/v using a Vacufuge Concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany). Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18-Stage Tips35 and eluted with 80% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v TFA prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were dried down in a Vacufuge Concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) and resuspended in 2% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA) to a final protein concentration of 0.75 μg/µL.  Data acquisition. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a quadrupole/linear ion trap/Orbitrap tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos, Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA) with a “high/high” acquisition strategy (high resolution on MS1 and MS2). 1.5 µg peptides were injected for data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) experiments. The peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptides were separated using a 85 min gradient and analysed in DDA mode as described before36. In short, mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1%v/v formic acid (FA) and mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v ACN and 0.1% v/v FA. Peptides were loaded onto the column with 2% buffer B at 0.3 μL/min flow rate and eluted at 0.25 μL/min flow rate with following gradient: 75 min linear increase from 2 to 37.5% mobile phase B followed by 7 min increase from 37.5 to 47.5% and 3 min from 47.5 to 95% mobile phase B. Precursor ions were detected in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution in the m/z range 400-1600. Ions with charge states from 3+ to 7+ were selected for fragmentation by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) and detected in the Orbitrap at 30K resolution37. In DIA mode, precursor ions were acquired using a MS1 master scan (m/z range: 400-1200, max. injection time: 60 ms, AGC target: 4×105, detector: Orbitrap, resolution: 60K), following 66 DIA scans for MS2 within a fragmentation rage of m/z 120-1200 using an isolation window width of m/z 12 and a max. injection time of 50 ms. Ions in the selected m/z window were isolated in the quadrupole, fragmented using HCD (normalised collision energy 30%) and detected in Orbitrap at 30K resolution.

### Data Protocol
Identification of crosslinked peptides. The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists and converted to mgf files using MSconvert (v. 3.0.9576)38. Xi (v. 1.6.731)39 was used for database search. The database comprised the sequences of HSA (UniProt ID: P02768), cytochrome C (P62894) separately and the reverse sequence of each of these proteins as decoys. Search parameters were: MS tolerance: 6 ppm, MS/MS tolerance: 10 ppm, enzyme: trypsin, missed cleavages: 3, crosslinker: SDA, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modification: oxidation of methionine and modification by SDA (SDA, SDA-loop, SDA-alkene, SDA-oxid, SDA-Hydro) with SDA reaction specificity at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and N-termini of proteins for the NHS-ester group. Diazirines react with all amino acid residues in proteins16,18. In a crosslink analysis, the false discovery rate (FDR) can be calculated on different information levels: PSMs, peptide pairs, residue pairs (RPs) and protein pairs40. Here we considered residue-pair FDR, which were estimated using xiFDR (v. 1.0.22.46) with the equation: FDR = TD-DD/ TT40 and filtering to only use crosslink PSMs within proteins. Other settings were left on default. Identification with 5% residue-pair FDR were accepted for quantitation.  Creation of crosslink spectral library and quantitation. Quantitation was performed on MS1 and MS2 level using Spectronaut (version 12.0.20491.13)41,42. The spectral library of crosslinked peptides was introduced as a .csv file using xiDIA-library as described before43. In short, xiDIA-library (an open source collaborative initiative available in the GitHub repository https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/xiDIA-library) was used to extract up to 10 crosslink containing fragments and up to 10 linear ones from the highest intensity b- or y-ion signals in the m/z range 300-1400. The library was imported as an external library. Protein modifications were defined manually in addition to a default list of modifications in Spectronaut: SDA-loop (82.04 Da), SDA-alkene (68.06 Da), SDA-oxid (98.04 Da), SDA-Hydro (100.05 Da), SDA-N2 (110.05 Da). MS1 and MS2 filtering was done following the Spectronaut 12 manual with the following deviations: Quantitation tab: Interference correction unticked, Minor (Peptide) Grouping: by modified sequence, Major Group Top N unticked, Minor Group Top N ticket (max 6, min 1), Minor Group Quantity: mean precursor quantity, decoy method was set to “scrambled”. Normalized data from Spectronaut (local normalization44 option) were exported to integrate feature-level quantitation data into residue-level data using a Top 3 approach.  At each pH, the standard deviation within each triplicate was quantified and the median MS1 crosslink abundance was chosen for further analysis. Crosslinks for which the largest change between median values was less than double the size of the within-triplicate standard deviation were considered to be unaffected by pH (or displaying changes within the experimental error), and therefore not considered for downstream analysis. Using this criterium, 401 of the 742 unique residue pairs (URPs) in the HSA dataset were found to display pH-dependent behaviour, while in the cytochrome C dataset 181 out of the 300 URPs were selected. Once this filtering step was applied, direct comparison between pH series was performed by using normalized crosslink abundance (XLnorm),  obtained by: XLnorm=XLpH-XLminXLmax-XLmin (1) Where XLpH is the median crosslink abundance of a URP at a given pH, XLmin is the minimum median abundance of the same crosslink across a given pH series, and XLmax is its maximum. The z score of each URP data series and the cluster was calculated using the heatmap.2 package in R.45

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Structural dynamics, Human serum albumin, Quantitation, Data-independent acquisition, Spectronaut, Photo-crosslinking, Cytochrome c, Xi, Sda, Cross-linking, Dia-qclms, Label-free, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
1 Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2 Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biologic Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh

### Submitter
Fränze Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1 Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany 2 Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biologic Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh


