### Accession
PXD039580

### Title
Benchmarking of DDA and plexDIA analysis with SILAC-labelled Hela cell samples

### Description
SILAC labelled Hela cell lysates were mixed in defined ratios and analysed using both DDA and DIA methods, to serve as a benchmark for the novel plexDIA features of DIA-NN.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells were grown in DMEM high glucose medium containing light, intermediate- and heavy Lysine and Arginine for 10 days. Lysates were prepared and mixed in two different compositions. Samples were generated from the combined lysates via the SP3 protocol (https://www.embopress.org/doi/full/10.15252/msb.20145625), using 100 µg protein input. The samples were measured on an QExactive-HF mass spectrometer in data-independent mode, coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from DDA measurements were processed using Maxquant version 2.0.3 and the Andromeda search engine. A human proteome fasta file, retrieved from the SwissProt database (version from February 2021 with 20934 entries) was used for the analysis of the samples. The enzymatic digestion was set to Trypsin/P and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. For the analysis of the nascent proteome, raw files of both the nascent proteome and global proteome samples were processed together, using Maxquant version 2.0.3. The multiplicity was set to 3, comprising of a light channel, an intermediate channel with Arg6 and Lys4 and heavy channel with Arg10 and Lys8. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation of Asparagine and Glutamine were set as variable peptide modifications. The Re-quantify function was enabled, match between runs was enabled, min SILAC ratio count was set to 0 and other search functions were left with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Dda, Silac

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg University Clinic
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Toman Bortecen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg University Clinic


