### Accession
PXD047226

### Title
VAP spatially stabilizes dendritic mitochondria to locally support synaptic plasticity

### Description
Synapses are pivotal sites of plasticity and memory formation. Consequently, synapses are energy consumption hotspots susceptible to dysfunction when their energy supplies are perturbed. Mitochondria are stabilized near synapses via the cytoskeleton and provide the local energy required for synaptic plasticity. However, the mechanisms that tether and stabilize mitochondria to support synaptic plasticity are unknown. We identified proteins exclusively tethering mitochondria to actin near postsynaptic spines. We find that VAP, the vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated protein implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, stabilizes mitochondria via actin near the spines. To test if the VAP-dependent stable mitochondrial compartments can locally support synaptic plasticity, we used two-photon glutamate uncaging for spine plasticity induction and investigated the induced and adjacent uninduced spines. We find VAP functions as a spatial stabilizer of mitochondrial compartments for up to ~60 min and as a spatial ruler determining the ~30 m dendritic segment supported during synaptic plasticity.

### Sample Protocol
Neurons co-transfected with either APEX-Matrix or APEX-OMM, along with EGFP-Mito, as a mitochondrial marker, were used for these experiments between 13-15 DIV. For biotin labeling, neuronal media was replaced with either 500 μM biotin phenol (Berry and Associates, 500 mM stock made in DMSO) or 500 μM biotin (500 mM stock made in DMSO stored at 4 °C) in NGM for 30 min at 37 °C. Neurons were treated with 1 mM H2O2 (Alfa Aesar, 100 mM stock made in water and stored at 4 °C) for 1 min. The reaction was quenched by quencher solution consisting of (in mM) 10 Trolox (Merck), 20 sodium ascorbate, and 20 sodium azide (Roth) in DPBS, pH 7.4 adjusted with NaOH (filtered and stored at 4 °C), Neurons were subsequently washed thrice in either quencher wash solution consisting of (in mM) 5 Trolox, 10 sodium ascorbate, 10 sodium azide in DPBS for immunocytochemistry analyses or quencher solution for isolation of the biotinylated proteome. Streptavidin-bound biotinylated proteins were digested on-bead using an optimized protocol 66,67. In brief, beads were washed 4 times in 1X PBS and twice in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and heated at 70 °C for 2 min with gentle agitation. 3 M urea was added, and the mixture was cooled down to RT. Bead suspension was reduced with 3.125 mM TCEP (0.5 M stock prepared in LC-MS-grade water) for 30 min at RT with constant agitation and incubated with 11.2 mM iodoacetamide (0.5 M stock prepared in LC-MS-grade water) for 30 min at RT in the dark with continuous agitation. Protein samples were digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin on Microcon-10 filters (Merck Millipore, #MRCPRT010 Ultracel YM-10). The mixture was centrifuged at 1000 rcf for 5 min, and the supernatant containing peptides was collected. Digested peptides were desalted using ZipTips (Merck) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried in a Speed-Vac, and stored at -20 °C. For mass spectrometry analyses, the dried peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano or Bruker NanoElute) on reversed-phase columns (trapping column: particle size = 3 m, C18, L = 2 cm; analytical column: PepMap (Dionex, Thermofisher: particle size = 2 m, C18, L = 50 cm) or PepSep (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, Marslev: particle size: 1.8 μm, C18, L=50 cm)). Peptides were eluted using 90 minute (Dionex) or 120 minute (Bruker) gradients (buffer A: water with 0.1% formicacid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; all solvents purchased from FluKa; gradients were ramped from 2% to 35% B at flowrates of 300 nL/min) and analyzed using an Orbitrap Elite, Q Exactive Plus (Thermofisher) or Bruker Impact-II mass spectrometer.  On Orbitrap instruments, a full MS scan from m/z 350 to 1600 was acquired at a resolution of 120,000, and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode using collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear Ion Trap (IT-MS, Orbitrap Elite) or the Orbitrap (FTFT, Q Exactive Plus). In the Bruker Impact-II, full scans from m/z 150 to 2200 were recorded and sequence information was acquired by a computer-controlled, data-dependent method with a fixed cycle and an intensity dependent acquisition speed for MS/MS-spectra between 8 and 20 Hz.

### Data Protocol
MSMS-spectra were searched against the protein database for Rattus norvegicus (TaxID 10116, Uniprot) and additionally for a database containing common MS-contaminations with trypsin as digestion enzyme using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) and Proteome Discoverer (PD) (Thermo Fisher, version 2.1). The set of stringent search constraints allowed tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages, a minimum of two valid peptides, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da (Orbitrap Elite), 20 ppm (Q Exactive Plus) or 0.05 Da (Impact-II). In addition, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, acetylation of peptide N-termini, oxidation of methionine, and biotin-labeling of tyrosine, tryptophan, and histidine were set as variable modifications. Percolator node, a machine-learning tool in PD 2.1, was used to estimate the number of false positive identifications. A high confidence q-value of less than 0.01 (False discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01) was assigned to filter both the peptide spectrum match (PSM) results and peptide results. The procedure was repeated thrice, and three technical replicates were combined. The technical overlap for high confident proteins was determined, where at least two peptides from Rattus norvegicus were needed for identification. Proteins found in the Control sample were excluded from the experimental samples. Proteins found in at least two of the three replicates were considered for further analysis. The Gene/product IDs for these proteins were searched through Gene Ontology Resource (July 2, 2018 (2022-11-03)) for ‘mitochondrion’ and (June 11, 2023 (2023-06-11)) for 'endoplasmic reticulum' as GO cellular components with Rattus norvegicus as a filter.  Overlap between the two searches was performed to find Gene/product IDs with 'mitochondrion' and 'endoplasmic reticulum' as GO annotations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Synaptic plasticity, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Max Planck Institute of Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
Max Planck Institute of Brain Research


