### Accession
PXD009503

### Title
Targeting G protein-coupled receptor signaling at the G protein level with a selective nanobody inhibitor

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) activate heterotrimeric G proteins by mediating a GDP to GTP exchange in the Gα subunit. This leads to dissociation of the heterotrimer into Gα-GTP and Gβγ dimer. The Gα-GTP and Gβγ dimer each regulate a variety of downstream pathways to control various aspects of human physiology. Dysregulated Gβγ-signaling is a central element of various neurological and cancer-related anomalies. However, Gβγ also serves as a negative regulator of Gα that is essential for G protein inactivation, and thus has the potential for numerous side effects when targeted therapeutically. Here we report a llama-derived nanobody (Nb5) that binds tightly to the Gβγ dimer. Nb5 responds to all combinations of β- and γ-subtypes and competes with other Gβγ-regulatory proteins for a common binding site on the Gβγ dimer. Despite its inhibitory effect on Gβγ-mediated signaling, Nb5 has no effect on GTP-bound Gαq and Gαs-mediated signaling events in the environment of a living cell.

### Sample Protocol
The excised SDS-PAGE band was destained in a solution containing 50% (v/v) ethanol with 5% (v/v) acetic acid in water. Next, the gel band was treated with acetonitrile and 5 μM DTT followed by its alkylation with iodoacetamide. Complete in-gel protein digestion was achieved by treatment with 50 ng of trypsin and chymotrypsin proteases prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 16 h at room temperature. Peptides were extracted by washing the gel twice with 30 μL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile with 5% (v/v) formic acid in water. Extracts were combined and evaporated to <10 μL in a Speedvac and then resuspended in 1% (v/v) acetic acid to achieve a final volume of 30 μL. Next, the sample was loaded on to a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed phase capillary chromatography column attached to a Finnigan LTQ-Obitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer system. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and these were injected into the electrospray ionization source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The nano-electrospray ion source was operated at 1.9 kV.

### Data Protocol
The digest was analyzed using the data-dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to obtain the amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. Data were analyzed by using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search whole mouse UniProtKB databases with the search program Sequest. Search parameters for peptide identification were as follows: minimum precursor mass, 350 Da; maximum precursor mass, 5000 Da; maximum missed cleavage sites, 2 for trypsin and 6 for chymotrypsin digestion; minimum peptide length, 6; maximum peptide length, 144; precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.8 Da; static modification, carbamidomethylation; dynamic modification, oxidation for trypsin and oxidation and phosphorylation for chymotrypsin digestion; maximum dynamic modifications per peptide, 4; and maximum Delta Cn (degree of match between the scores of the possible peptide spectral matches), 0.05. Sequest searches were also performed against five Gβ subtypes using the same parameters to confirm the identities of the peptides and the sequence coverage.

### Publication Abstract
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) activate heterotrimeric G proteins by mediating a GDP to GTP exchange in the G&#x3b1; subunit. This leads to dissociation of the heterotrimer into G&#x3b1;-GTP and G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; dimer. The G&#x3b1;-GTP and G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; dimer each regulate a variety of downstream pathways to control various aspects of human physiology. Dysregulated G&#x3b2;&#x3b3;-signaling is a central element of various neurological and cancer-related anomalies. However, G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; also serves as a negative regulator of G&#x3b1; that is essential for G protein inactivation, and thus has the potential for numerous side effects when targeted therapeutically. Here we report a llama-derived nanobody (Nb5) that binds tightly to the G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; dimer. Nb5 responds to all combinations of &#x3b2;-subtypes and &#x3b3;-subtypes and competes with other G&#x3b2;&#x3b3;-regulatory proteins for a common binding site on the G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; dimer. Despite its inhibitory effect on G&#x3b2;&#x3b3;-mediated signaling, Nb5 has no effect on G&#x3b1;<sub>q</sub>-mediated and G&#x3b1;<sub>s</sub>-mediated signaling events in living cells.

### Keywords
Lc-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
Case Western Reserve University

### Submitter
Sahil Gulati

### Lab Head
Dr Krzysztof Palczewski
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA


