### Accession
PXD034605

### Title
Identification of novel genes and proteoforms in Angiostrongylus costaricensis through a proteogenomic approach

### Description
Data from multiple high throughput technologies such as RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and protein mass spectrometry (MS/MS) are often used to assist in predicting eukaryote genome features such as genes, splice variants, and single nucleotide variants (SNVs). The genomes of parasitic nematodes causing neglected tropical diseases are often poorly annotated. Angiostrongylus costaricensis, a nematode that causes an intestinal inflammatory disease known as abdominal angiostrongyliasis (AA), is one example. Currently, no drugs or treatments are available for AA, a public health problem in Latin America, especially in Costa Rica and Brazil. The available genome of A. costaricensis, specific to the Costa Rica strain, is a draft version not supported by transcript- or protein-level evidence. This study used RNA-Seq and MS/MS data to perform an in-depth annotation of the A. costaricensis genome. Our prediction supplemented the reference annotation with a) novel coding and non-coding genes; b) pieces of evidence of alternative splicing generating new proteoforms; c) a list of SNVs specific to the Brazilian strain (Crissiumal). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a multi-omics approach has been used to improve the genome annotation of a parasitic nematode. We hope this supplemented genome annotation can assist the future development of drugs to treat AA caused by either Brazil strain (Crissiumal) or Costa Rica strain.

### Sample Protocol
A. costaricensis adult worms were collected as previously described [46]. Protein extracts were obtained after mechanical maceration (Sample Grinding kit, GE Healthcare) of males and females (4 mg each) in 100 µL of 0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6, containing 2% SDS. After maceration, samples were incubated in the extraction buffer for 10 min at room temperature, boiled in a water bath for 5 min, and centrifuged. The supernatants were collected, and their protein content was estimated by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method [47], using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard protein. Aliquots of each protein extract were mixed (v/v) with 0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6, containing 2% SDS and 100 mM DTT, followed by boiling for 5 min and incubation at room temperature for an additional 15 min. Then, 100 µg of the reduced extracts were subjected to the FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) protocol [48] using Microcon-30kDa ultrafiltration membranes (Merck-Millipore, Cat. No. MRCF0R030). Following conventional peptide alkylation and washing steps, two enzymes were sequentially used for protein digestion (Lys-C and trypsin, 12-18 h at 37 C each enzyme, E:S 1:100 w/w). For each biological replicate, a single final digest was desalted in POROS R2 microcolumns and processed for nLC-nESI-MS/MS. All analyses were done in the Orbitrap QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) hyphenated to the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanochromatograph, as previously described [49] unless stated otherwise. Fractionation was performed on a New Objective PicoFrit column (tip 10 μm, 75 μm inner diameter x 40 cm length) packed in-house with Reprosil Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The following mobile phases were used: (A) 0.1% formic acid in water; (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The column was eluted with a linear gradient of 2-45%B for 162 min, followed by a gradient between 45-80%B for 4 min, and finally isocratic washing with 80%B for 2 min. Each biological replicate (n = 8) was acquired in technical triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was based on the peptide-spectral matching (PSM) approach, using the Comet search algorithm, implemented in the freely available PatternLab for Proteomics computational environment (version 5) [62]. A single FASTA file containing non-redundant protein sequences from the WormBase database (9,344 entries) supplemented with in silico translated transcripts identified by the software BRAKER (12,228 entries) and with protein sequences containing SAAVs predicted by the software Pilon (16,574 entries) was used by the search engine. The "Generate Search DB" module generated a target-reverse database enriched with common MS contaminant sequences (e.g., keratins, albumin, and trypsin). Uninterpreted high-resolution MS/MS spectra were searched against this comprehensive database using Comet default parameters. Enzyme specificity was semi-specific, no proline restriction was specified for trypsin, up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and the initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 40 ppm. The following modifications were considered (up to 2 variable modifications per peptide): 1) Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed); 2) Carbamidomethyl [DEHK (including N-terminal), variable]; 3) Deamidation (NQ, variable). PSM results were filtered by the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) tool implemented in PatternLab V. The final post-processing step was adjusted to converge to reliable results showing ≤ 1% FDR at spectra, peptide, and protein levels and ≤ 10 ppm mass error for MS1 and MS2 spectra. The same identification strategy was applied for proteome quantification, although using a database containing all the above target sequences, except for those containing the SAAVs predicted by the software PILON.

### Publication Abstract
RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) and mass-spectrometry-based proteomics data are often integrated in proteogenomic studies to assist in the prediction of eukaryote genome features, such as genes, splicing, single-nucleotide (SNVs), and single-amino-acid variants (SAAVs). Most genomes of parasite nematodes are draft versions that lack transcript- and protein-level information and whose gene annotations rely only on computational predictions. <i>Angiostrongylus costaricensis</i> is a roundworm species that causes an intestinal inflammatory disease, known as abdominal angiostrongyliasis (AA). Currently, there is no drug available that acts directly on this parasite, mostly due to the sparse understanding of its molecular characteristics. The available genome of <i>A. costaricensis</i>, specific to the Costa Rica strain, is a draft version that is not supported by transcript- or protein-level evidence. This study used RNA-Seq and MS/MS data to perform an in-depth annotation of the <i>A. costaricensis</i> genome. Our prediction improved the reference annotation with (a) novel coding and non-coding genes; (b) pieces of evidence of alternative splicing generating new proteoforms; and (c) a list of SNVs between the Brazilian (Crissiumal) and the Costa Rica strain. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a multi-omics approach has been used to improve the genome annotation of <i>A. costaricensis</i>. We hope this improved genome annotation can assist in the future development of drugs, kits, and vaccines to treat, diagnose, and prevent AA caused by either the Brazil strain (Crissiumal) or the Costa Rica strain.

### Keywords
Rna-seq; mass spectrometry; nematode; genome annotation; ncrnas

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Toxinology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Esdras Matheus Gomes da Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Gisele da Costa Neves-Ferreira
Laboratory of Toxinology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil


