### Accession
PXD011440

### Title
tgPOFUT2 mediated glycosylation_pft line controls

### Description
Characterisation of glycosylation events within the key adhesin MIC2 of Toxoplasma gondii and the confirmation of tgPOFUT2 as being responsible for Fucosylation of MIC2

### Sample Protocol
MIC2 characterisation: Affinity enriched MIC2 was subjected to digestion with trypsin, gluC or enzymes sequentially.In solution digestions were undertaken using TCEP and CAA for reduction and alykation. LFQ based Total proteome analysis: Isolated Toxoplasma gondii were lysised in 6M guanidinium chloride buffer by boiling and preciated overnight with ice-cold acetone. Samples were reduction and alykation with TCEP and CAA then Digested with Trypsin. Samples were cleaned up with tC18 Seppak columns and dried.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MQ 1.5.3.1. MIC2 samples were searched with C-hexose (W:+162.05) annd O-fuc-glc(S/T: +308.11Da). For LFQ analysis standard setting were used with all biological replicates searched together with match between runs enabled. Samples were searched against T. gondii (strain ATCC 50853 / GT1) proteome (Uniprot proteome id UP000005641, downloaded 02-04-2017, 8450 entries) with the human database (human (Uniprot proteome id UP000005640- Homo sapiens, downloaded 24/10/2013, 84,843 entries)) included to account for potentially contaminating

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is a ubiquitous, obligate intracellular eukaryotic parasite that causes congenital birth defects, disease in immunocompromised individuals, and blindness. Protein glycosylation plays an important role in the infectivity and evasion of immune responses of many eukaryotic parasites and is also of great relevance to vaccine design. Here we demonstrate that micronemal protein 2 (MIC2), a motility-associated adhesin of <i>T. gondii</i>, has highly glycosylated thrombospondin repeat (TSR) domains. Using affinity-purified MIC2 and MS/MS analysis along with enzymatic digestion assays, we observed that at least seven <i>C-</i>linked and three <i>O</i>-linked glycosylation sites exist within MIC2, with &gt;95% occupancy at these <i>O</i>-glycosylation sites. We found that addition of <i>O</i>-glycans to MIC2 is mediated by a protein <i>O</i>-fucosyltransferase 2 homolog (TgPOFUT2) encoded by the <i>TGGT1</i>_<i>273550</i> gene. Even though POFUT2 homologs are important for stabilizing motility-associated adhesins and for host infection in other apicomplexan parasites, loss of TgPOFUT2 in <i>T. gondii</i> had only a modest impact on MIC2 levels and the wider parasite proteome. Consistent with this, both plaque formation and tachyzoite invasion were broadly similar in the presence or absence of TgPOFUT2. These findings indicate that TgPOFUT2 <i>O-</i>glycosylates MIC2 and that this glycan, in contrast to previous findings in another study, is dispensable in <i>T. gondii</i> tachyzoites and for <i>T. gondii</i> infectivity.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


