### Accession
PXD042156

### Title
Impact of STAU1 depletion on the protein expression profile of rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines

### Description
Two human rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines (RD, RH36, RH30, and RH18) and one none-transformed skeletal muscle cell line (HSMM-C3) cell line were studied for the impact of Staufen1 depletion on their protein expression profile. Proteomics was performed for control and Staufen1 knockdown cells (n=3). For this, we generated STAU1 knockdown cell lines using a mixture of three independent STAU1-targeting lentiviral-shRNA constructs. cells were cultured for 72 hours and then protein extraction was performed as follow: Cells were lysed in 1X RIPA buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150mM NaCl, 1mM Na2- EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM β-glycerophosphate, 1mM Na3 VO4, 1µg/ml leupeptin). Protein concentration was tested according to the BCA assay protocol (Thermofisher Scientific) and samples were used in proteomics experiment.

### Sample Protocol
For protein degradation step, the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was modified for protein digestion (ref: PMID: 19876013). Briefly, 50 μg samples were loaded onto a 10K filter (Amicon® Ultra-0.5, Millipore), and 8M urea was used to displace the original buffer. Protein reduction (with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC) and alkylation (with 10 mM IAA in 50 mM ABC) were done sequentially in the filter. A mass ratio of 1:50 between trypsin and protein was used for digestion at 37°C overnight with continuous shaking. The digested peptides were desalted using 200 μL filter-tip columns packed in-house with 10 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (200 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and dried down in a SpeedVac (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The dried samples were then reconstituted in 100 μL of 0.5% (v/v) FA, and 2 μL was loaded for MS analysis. The LCMS Analysis was done as follow. A Dionex Ultimate RS3000 was connected to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and operated with a nano-electrospray interface in positive ion mode. The solvent system consisted of buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile). Reconstituted peptides were loaded on a 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm fused silica analytical column packed in-house with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (100 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min, and the gradient was set as 5–35% buffer B in 105 min, followed by 5 min from 35%~80%, 5 min of 80%, and 5 min of re-equilibration. The spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was 300°C. One full MS scan from 350 to 1200 m/z was followed by a data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 15 most intense ions with a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 1 in 20 seconds. The mass resolution was 60,000 for MS1 and 15,000 for MS2. Real-time internal calibration by the lock mass of background ion 445.120025 was used. All data were recorded using Xcalibur software (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the peak lists of the raw files were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.3.4.0) (ref: PMID: 19029910) against the human FASTA download from Uniprot, along with the built-in contaminant sequences, including commonly observed contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; the methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation ubiquitination were set for variable modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, not allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline. Other parameters were used as default.  Further Pathway analysis was performed, on the obtained data from MaxQuant software, using IPA QIAGEN Inc. (https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuitypathway-analysis). First proteomics data was used to generate clustered heat maps indicating different protein expression patterns in three studied cell lines. Different levels of hierarchical clustering implicated similarities between or among 3 cell lines.  More specifically, the first level of hierarchical cluster showing similarities in protein expression pattern across samples. The second and third level of clustering focuses on the differences between protein profile of wildtype cells and STAU1-depleted cells as well as similarities among the replicates in each group. The generated heat map utilized colour ranges from red to green depicting high to low protein expression levels.  Next, a causal analytics tool was used for downstream effect analysis and prediction of new targets which were not detected in the proteomics experiment. Another IPA causal analytics tool called "Upstream Regulator Analysis" was utilized for the identification of potential upstream regulators.

### Publication Abstract
Elevated mitochondrial metabolism promotes tumorigenesis of Embryonal Rhabdomyosarcomas (ERMS). Accordingly, targeting oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) could represent a therapeutic strategy for ERMS. We previously demonstrated that genetic reduction of Staufen1 (STAU1) levels results in the inhibition of ERMS tumorigenicity. Here, we examined STAU1-mediated mechanisms in ERMS and focused on its potential involvement in regulating OXPHOS. We report the novel and differential role of STAU1 in mitochondrial metabolism in cancerous versus non-malignant skeletal muscle cells (NMSkMCs). Specifically, our data show that STAU1 depletion reduces OXPHOS and inhibits proliferation of ERMS cells. Our findings further reveal the binding of STAU1 to several OXPHOS mRNAs which affects their stability. Indeed, STAU1 depletion reduced the stability of OXPHOS mRNAs, causing inhibition of mitochondrial metabolism. In parallel, STAU1 depletion impacted negatively the HIF2&#x3b1; pathway which further modulates mitochondrial metabolism. Exogenous expression of HIF2&#x3b1; in STAU1-depleted cells reversed the mitochondrial inhibition and induced cell proliferation. However, opposite effects were observed in NMSkMCs. Altogether, these findings revealed the impact of STAU1 in the regulation of mitochondrial OXPHOS in cancer cells as well as its differential role in NMSkMCs. Overall, our results highlight the therapeutic potential of targeting STAU1 as a novel approach for inhibiting mitochondrial metabolism in ERMS.

### Keywords
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, Staufen1

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8M5, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Shekoufeh Almasi

### Lab Head
Dr Bernard J. Jasmin
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H 8M5, Canada


