### Accession
PXD018891

### Title
Emilin1 degradation and secretion in exosomes inactivate its tumor- and metastasis-suppressive role in melanoma mouse models

### Description
Several studies have demonstrated that melanoma-derived exosomes home in sentinel lymph nodes favoring metastasis. Here, we determined the proteomic signature in exosomes derived from lymph node metastatic models. We found a signature of genes over-expressed and proteins hyper-secreted in exosomes related to lymph node metastasis in the B16 mouse melanoma model. Out of these candidates, we found that Emilin1, a protein with an important function in lymph node physiology, was hyper-secreted in exosomes. Interestingly, we found that Emilin1 is degraded and secreted in exosomes as a mechanism favoring metastasis. Indeed, we found that Emilin1 has a tumor suppressor-like role regulating negatively cell viability and migration. Importantly, our in vivo studies demonstrate that Emilin1 overexpression reduced primary tumor growth and metastasis in mouse melanoma models. Analysis in human melanoma samples showed that cells expressing high levels of EMILIN1 are reduced in metastatic lesions. Overall, our analysis suggests a novel mechanism involved in the inactivation of Emilin1 in melanoma favouring melanoma progression and metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilized using 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Samples (10 μg) were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (30 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips. LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo FisherScientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18 5 μm, 20 mm length, NanoSeparations) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2.5 μl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm, 500 mm length and 0.075 mm ID) and separated using a 120 min linear gradient (buffer A: 4% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-2 min 6% B, 2-103 min 30% B, 103-113 min 98% B, 113-120 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.8 kV) into the mass spectrometer with a PicoTip emitter (360/20 Tube OD/ID μm, tip ID 10 μm) (New Objective), a heated capillary temperature of 325°C and S-Lens RF level of 60%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (threshold signal ≥ 800 counts and dynamic exclusion of 45 sec). MS spectra (350-1500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (400 m/z). Peptides were isolated using a 1.5 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with linear ion trap read out at a NCE of 35% (0.25 Q-value and 10 ms activation time). The ion target values were 1E6 for MS (500 ms max injection time) and 5000 for MS/MS (100 ms max injection time). Samples were analyzed twice.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.30) using the standard settings against a human (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, August 2014, 20,187 sequences) or mouse (UniProtKB/Swiss- Prot/TrEMBL, August 2014, 43,539 sequences) protein database, supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was performed with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation and N-term acetylation were variable protein modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. The results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level) and subsequently the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.1.6) for further statistical analysis. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. For mouse exosome samples, a two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. Only proteins with a q-value<0.1 and log2 ratio >1 or < -1 were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ltq velos orbitrap, Melanoma, Exosomes, Emilin

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Proteomics Unit Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)


