### Accession
PXD020369

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of signal transmission in the Mitotic Exit Network

### Description
In budding yeast, the Mitotic Exit Network (MEN), a GTPase signaling cascade integrates spatial and temporal signals to promote exit from mitosis. This signal integration requires transmission of a signal created on the cytoplasmic face of the spindle pole bodies (SPBs, functional equivalent of the centrosome in yeast) to the nucleolus, where the MEN effector protein Cdc14 resides. In this study, we show that the MEN activating signal at SPBs is relayed to Cdc14 in the nucleolus through the dynamic localization of its terminal kinase complex Dbf2-Mob1. Cdc15, the protein kinase that activates Dbf2-Mob1 at SPBs, also regulates its nuclear access. Once in the nucleus, priming phosphorylation by the Polo kinase Cdc5 targets Dbf2-Mob1 to the nucleolus. Cdc5 phosphorylates the Cdc14 nucleolar anchor Cfi1/Net1 creating a phospho-binding site for Dbf2-Mob1 which allows Dbf2-Mob1 to phosphorylate Cfi1/Net1 and Cdc14, which activates Cdc14. The mechanisms governing intracellular signal transmission that we uncovered in the MEN – regulated nuclear access and effector activation through priming kinases - may well serve as paradigms for intracellular signal transmission in general.  As for phosphoproteomics, our analyses suggest a simple model where Cdc5 and Dbf2-Mob1 phosphorylate Cfi1/Net1 to bring about the release of Cdc14 from its inhibitor. Previous studies have shown that Cfi1/Net1 is a highly phosphorylated protein. To map sites in Cfi1/Net1 that are phosphorylated in a CDC5 or MEN-dependent manner, we performed phosphoproteomics analyses on wild-type anaphase cells and cells in which Cdc5 or Cdc15 were inhibited. We synchronized wild-type, cdc5-as1 and cdc15-as1 cells in G1 with α-factor pheromone and released them into the cell cycle with the corresponding inhibitors. Cultures enriched in anaphase cells as judged by anaphase spindle formation (~70% for wild-type cells and ~95% for cdc5-as1 and cdc15-as1 cells) were collected and processed for a reproducible data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) analysis with 7 technical replicates for each sample. Also, 10 out of 12 CDC5-only sites identified in anaphase cells are already phosphorylated in cells arrested in metaphase using the microtubule depolymerizing drug nocodazole with 6 of them were also determined to be CDC5-dependent in metaphase, which is consistent with the finding that Cdc5 is already active in metaphase.

### Sample Protocol
To map phosphorylation events that depend on CDC5 or CDC15 (MEN) activity, we used the analog-sensitive alleles of CDC5 (cdc5-as1) or CDC15 (cdc15-as1) and compared phosphopeptides with and without inhibiting the kinase in anaphase (and metaphase for Cdc5) enriched cultures. To enrich for anaphase cells, we first synchronized cells in G1. Arrested cultures were then washed and released into YEP + 2% glucose + inhibitor at room temperature to progress to anaphase (~ 100 minutes). Synchronization and cell cycle stage were assessed by monitoring budding and spindle length at various time points. Spindles were visualized by immunofluorescence using an anti-tubulin antibody (Abcam ab6161). Cultures collected for the anaphase experiment harbored 74% (WT + 1-NA-PP1), 95% (cdc15-as1, 1-NA-PP1), 69% (WT + CMK), and 94% (cdc5-as1 + CMK) cells with anaphase spindles. Phosphopeptide preparation was based on previous methods. ~25 ODs of cells were harvested for each replicate (6 replicates per samples for the anaphase experiment and 3 replicates per sample for the metaphase experiment) by centrifugation (5 min at 3000 rpm). Cell pellets were washed with cold 50 mM Tris (pH = 7.5) and resuspended in cold lysis buffer containing 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH = 7.5), 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 50 mM Beta-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate and protease inhibitor cocktail (complete mini, EDTA-free, Roche). Cells were lysed under denaturing conditions by bead-beating with a chilled MiniBeadbeater (Biospec, two rounds of 3 cycles of 90 s each) and glass beads. The protein extract was then separated from the beads and insoluble material by centrifugation. Protein concentration of the lysate was determined by BCA protein assay (Pierce).  The protein extraction was ultrasonically lysed at 4°C for 2 minutes with six rounds using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology). The proteins extracted were then processed with a precipitation-based digestion protocol using trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:20 as described previously. About 500 microgram of resultant peptides from each sample were subjected for phosphopeptide enrichment, using the High-Select™ Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Scientific, A32992) according to the kit instruction, as described previously. About 1.5 ug of phosphopeptides enriched from each sample were used for DIA-MS measurement on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) platform coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source, as described previously.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data analyses were performed using Spectronaut v13 using default setting, by searching against a database of 6632 yeast open reading frames and the Swiss-prot yeast proteome database. In particular, the PTM localization option in Spectronaut v13 was enabled to locate phosphorylation sites, with the probability score cutoff >0.75, resulting Class-I peptides to be identified and quantified. Both peptide and protein FDR cutoff (Q value) were controlled at 1%, and the label-free protein quantification of proteome and phospho-proteome was performed using the default settings in Spectronaut.  To identify peptides whose phosphorylation depended on CDC5 or CDC15, we calculated the ratio as well as the p-value of peptide intensities in WT versus as1 samples. The p-values were calculated using a two-sided Student’s t-test and were adjusted for false discovery rate (FDR) of multiple hypothesis testing using the linear step-up procedure (Benjamini-Hochberg procedure). A threshold of ratio R > 2 and padj < 0.05 was used to identify hits. Additional hits were also included for peptides that were not defected in the as1 samples but were detected in at least 5 out of 7 replicates (or 4 out of 6 replicates in the metaphase experiment) of the WT samples. Peptides that were only detected in one replicate of the as1 samples but were detected in at least 5 out of 7 replicates (or 4 out of 6 replicates in the metaphase experiment) of the WT samples with a ratio > 2 were also included.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Phosphoproteomics, Dia-ms, Mitotic exit

### Affiliations
Yale University School of Medicine
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine


