### Accession
PXD023009

### Title
Plasma non-targeted peptidomics discovers potential biomarkers for major depressive disorder

### Description
Purpose There are great demands for identifying markers of major depressive disorder (MDD), which is a common mental illness with a prevalence of approximately 6%. Finding potential markers to aid MDD diagnosis is in high demand. Experimental design In this study, combination of the salt-out assisted liquid-liquid extraction (SALLE) pretreatment method and a nontargeted peptidomics approach based on nano-LC-Orbitrap/MS is primarily employed to discover the candidate peptide biomarkers from the plasma of 238 subjects. Results  A large number of peptides are enriched and identified from the plasma samples, of which 42 peptides show significant differences between MDD patients and controls by univariate statistical analysis. A diagnostic model combined four peptide markers (P1, P9, P17, P29) is established by binary logistic regression analysis, yielding an overall prediction accuracy of 91.7% and 82.2% in the discovery and validation sets, respectively.  Conclusions and clinical relevance In conclusion, the good performance of diagnostic model in both discovery and validation sets  demonstrates the robustness of peptide markers panel. It is very valuable for quantification the absolute content of four peptides and further verification.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection and clinical information Blood was collected from all volunteers on an empty stomach, from 7:00 AM to 8:00 AM. The blood was collected using a vacuum blood collection tube (BDTM P800) containing an enzyme inhibitor and anticoagulant and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min at 23 °C, next the upper layer of plasma was dispensed and stored at -80 °C until further analysis. Sample pretreatment using the SALLE method After all samples were thawed at room temperature, the samples were pretreated using the SALLE method. The process consisted of six steps: 1) Desorption: Take 500 μL of plasma and add 200 μL of 5% phosphoric acid (v/v), vortex 30 s; 2) extraction and impurity removal: we added 4 mL of 4 M dipotassium hydrogen phosphate and add 4 mL of isopropanol, mixed for 30 s, centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min, obtained the supernatant (4mL), and blew dry at 40 °C in nitrogen atmosphere; 3) Desalting: we redissolved with1 mL of isopropanol, vortexed for 30 s, centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min, taken away the supernatant (950μL); 4) Quality control sample: We took some of the above supernatant from each sample and mixed it into 6 parts for quality control samples; 5) Degreasing and redissolving: The supernatants obtained in 3) and 4) were blown dry at 40 °C under nitrogen, and dissolved in 45 μL of 15% acetonitrile (v/v) (containing 0.2% formic acid (v/v)) and 30 μL of dichloromethane, then centrifuge at 15000 rpm for 5 h; afterwards, 20 μL of the supernatant was taken for analysis.  Notably, two samples were randomly mixed into one plasma sample and we repeated analysis twice to reduce the influence of individual differences and instrument errors in the discovery set. LC-MS data acquisition The peptide extracts were analysed using LTQ-Qrbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher, USA) coupled with a Nano LC system (PicoFrit○R,Thermo Fisher, USA). The Nano LC system includes an analytical column(75 μm ID, 20 cm long) with a 10 μm emmitter tip, which was packed with C18 AQ particles (3 μm, 100 Å) and a trap column (150 μm ID, 5 cm long)filled with C18 AQ particles (5 μm, 100 Å). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile (v/v) (containing 0.2% formic acid (v/v)). In each LC-MS run, 5 μL of the sample was injected and was continuously loaded for 7 min at a 3 μL/min flow rate and a constant 2% B. The gradient profile was as follows: 0–8 min, 5% B; 8–10 min, 5–25% B; 10–47 min, 25–80% B; 47–50 min, 80–95% B; 50–52 min, 95% B at 0.3 μL/min. The sample was ionised with an ESI ion source in positive mode. The parameters of mass spectrometry were as follows: 275°C capillary temperature; 400–1500 m/z range in full scan mode; 2.2 kV spray voltage; analyser, ion trap mode, with 60000 resolution power. The injection sequence of the sample was as follows: HC sample and MDD sample were analysed by turns from small to large according to the number of samples. Additionally, six quality control (QC) samples were acquired and the same sample was injected twice in the discovery set. LC-MS/MS data acquisition The chromatographic status and mobile phase gradient profile are consistent with the above method to identify peptide ions with similar mass and retention time. MS/MS data acquisition was as follow: a full FTMS scan (60000 resolution) at mass range of 400–1800 m/z was used in scan event 1 and high-energy CID or CID MS/MS scans (30000 resolution) of the five or ten most abundant peaks from the previous full FTMS scan. Mass directed and charge-state directed MS/MS data acquisition were combined to maximise the identification efficiency of peptides.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequencing All raw LC-FTMS/MS data were imported to Peaks Studio 7.0 (BSI, Canada) for peptide sequence retrieval. The Human Uniprot database (73911 entries) was downloaded for database search. The mass tolerance of precursor ions and product ions were set at 10 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively. No enzyme was specified for cleavage. Variable PTMs, including amidation (C-terminal), acetylation (N-terminal), oxidation, methylation, cycteinylation, and S-Cyanylation were selected. The maximum number of PTMs that was allowed per peptide chain was 3. Estimation of false positives was conducted by searching all spectra against the decoy database. The cutoff of FDR (peptide sequence) for peptide identification through PEAKs was <1%.  Data analysis  The raw data obtained by Nano-LC/MS were introduced into the Progenesis QI software (Waters) for peak identification, peak alignment, and peak extraction. All raw spectral data were output as a visualisation table by Progenesis QI and all features were initially screened by the following steps: first, all single charges were excluded; then, feature peaks extracting only two isotopic distributions were deleted; next, duplicate extracted features were deleted to a feature whose the average intensity was the strongest and the partial missing values were substituted by the maximum value of the others; furthermore, features with missing values greater than 50% in all samples are neglected; finally, features with QC sample relative standard deviation (RSD) less than 75% and one-to-one correspondence in the validation set were reserved. The processed data is shown in table S1.The remaining features were imported into MetaboAnalyst 3.0 software for t-test analysis and SIMCA +14.1 software(umetrics,Umea,Sweden) for  orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) model analysis. The original data were disposed by sum normalization, logarithmic transformation, and pareto scaling before t-test analysis. Features with missing values less than 30% were treated by square root transformation and unit variance scaling before OPLS-DA model analysis. After t-test analysis, features with a significance level less than 0.05 and fold change greater than 2 or FDR (significance level) less than 0.05 were retained. When these features had the same trend in the validation set, they were selected as potential biomarkers. The appropriate features were selected as diagnostic biomarkers to establish a diagnostic model using binary logistic regression analysis (BLRA). The performance of model was judged by ROC curve analysis in both discovery and validation sets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diagnostic model, Plasma, Biomarkers, Peptidomics, Major depressive disorder

### Affiliations
Chinese academy of sciences
university of chinese academy of sciences

### Submitter
yi wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yi Wang
university of chinese academy of sciences


