### Accession
PXD031148

### Title
Modulation of the tumor promoting functions of cancer associated fibroblasts by PDE5 inhibition

### Description
Modulation of the tumor promoting functions of cancer associated fibroblasts by PDE5 inhibition increases the efficacy of chemotherapy in human preclinical models of edophageal adenocarcinoma

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in lysis buffer. Proteins were extracted. Equal amounts of protein per sample were reduced alkylated and enzymtically digested. Peptides were TMT labelled and analyzed using 2D LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submitted to PD 1.4 for target decoy search using Sequest

### Publication Abstract
The chemotherapy resistance of esophageal adenocarcinomas (EACs) is underpinned by cancer cell extrinsic mechanisms of the tumor microenvironment (TME). We demonstrate that, by targeting the tumor-promoting functions of the predominant TME cell type, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) with phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5i), we can enhance the efficacy of standard-of-care chemotherapy. In ex&#xa0;vivo conditions, PDE5i prevent the transdifferentiation of normal fibroblasts to CAF and abolish the tumor-promoting function of established EAC CAFs. Using shotgun proteomics and single-cell RNA-seq, we reveal PDE5i-specific regulation of pathways related to fibroblast activation and tumor promotion. Finally, we confirm the efficacy of PDE5i in combination with chemotherapy in close-to-patient and in&#xa0;vivo PDX-based model systems. These findings demonstrate that CAFs drive chemotherapy resistance in EACs and can be targeted by repurposing PDE5i, a safe and well-tolerated class of drug administered to millions of patients world-wide to treat erectile dysfunction.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
Proteas Bioanalytics
Proteas Bioanalytics Inc.

### Submitter
Antigoni Manousopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
Proteas Bioanalytics Inc.


