### Accession
PXD023353

### Title
20S proteasomes exported by the malaria parasite promote its growth

### Description
Mature Red Blood Cells (RBCs) lack internal organelles and canonical defense mechanisms, making them both a fascinating host cell, in general, and an intriguing choice for the deadly malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum (Pf), in particular. Pf, while growing inside its natural host, the human RBC, secretes multipurpose extracellular vesicles (EVs), yet their influence on this essential host cell remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that Pf parasites, cultured in fresh human donor blood, export within such EVs assembled and functional 20S proteasome complexes (EV-20S). The EV-20S proteasomes modulate the mechanical properties of naïve human RBCs by remodeling their cytoskeletal network. Furthermore, we identify four novel degradation targets of the exported 20S proteasome, the phosphorylated cytoskeletal proteins β-adducin, ankyrin-1, dematin and Epb4.1. Overall, our findings reveal a previously unknown 20S proteasome export mechanism employed by the human malaria parasite, which primes RBCs for parasite invasion by altering membrane stiffness, to facilitate malaria parasite growth.

### Sample Protocol
TPCK-treated soybean trypsin and trypsin inhibitor were purchased from Worthington Biochemical Corporation. Parasites were grown to the trophozoite stage and then gelatin-floated for 45 min to enrich for iRBCs. 1X108 iRBCs and control uRBCs were digested with 1 mg/ml trypsin or PBS vehicle control at 37°C for 1 hr. Next, 4 mg/ml trypsin inhibitor was added and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Samples were then lysed with 1% Triton-X 100 (Sigma) in PBS with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) on ice for 20 min, centrifuged, and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed with 1% Triton-X 100 and solubilized with 2% SDS in PBS with protease inhibitors. EVs were digested with 2 μg/ml trypsin for 15 min at 37°C, in the presence or absence of 0.1% Triton-X 100, prior to the addition of 1 mg/ml trypsin inhibitor. 21 Tryptic peptides were separated by nano-flow reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, USA). Samples were loaded onto a 20 mm pre-column with 180 μm I.D. and 5 μm C18 silica bead in 5% buffer B at a flow rate of 10 μl/min and then resolved on a 100 mm analytical column with 75 μm I.D. and 1.7 μm C18 silica beads using a 90 min gradient set at a flow rate of 0.4 μl/min from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water) to 60% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in Milli-Q water). MS data were acquired on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer fitted with a Proxeon nano-ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). High mass-accuracy MS data was obtained in a data-dependent acquisition mode with the Orbitrap resolution set to 75,000 and the top-10 multiply charged species selected for fragmentation by HCD (single charged species were ignored). The ion threshold was set to 15,000 counts for MS/MS. The CE voltage was set to 27V.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra peak lists (MGF files) were extracted from the LC-MS/MS raw data using the software package ProteomeDiscoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For peptide identification and protein inference, the MGF peak lists were searched against a composite non-redundant protein sequence database comprising common contaminants and Homo sapiens and Plasmodium falciparum sequences downloaded from UniProtKB. Mascot 2.4 (www.matrixscience.com) was used as the primary database search engine. In-house software tools (MSPro and Digger; http://repository.unimelb.edu.au/10187/18167) were used to collate and merge the peptide and protein information across biological replicates. The database search parameters consisted of carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification (+57 Da) and NH2-terminal protein acetylation (+42 Da), N-terminal Q->pyroglutamic acid (-17 Da) and oxidation of methionine (+16 Da) as variable modifications. A precursor mass tolerance of ±10 ppm, #13C defined as 1 and a fragment ion mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was used. The specified enzyme was trypsin/P, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites. The program MSPro was used as a wrapper for parsing Mascot search result files and instantiating the post-processing software tool Percolator76. The search results from the two independent biological replicates were analyzed individually and in combination in order to generate an inferred protein list for both Plasmodium falciparum and Homo sapiens (host) based on significant scoring (posterior error probabilities ≤ 1%) peptide identifications. Significant peptide matches were further categorized as unique or degenerate on the basis of peptide sequence and assigned to protein groups based on the principle of parsimony (Occam’s razor). The inferred proteins for Homo sapiens and Plasmodium falciparum were submitted to The Gene Ontology Resource (http://geneontology.org) for functional annotation and enrichment analysis. The raw mass spectrometry data were also analysed using MaxQuant v1.6.14 using default parameters plus mzTab output enabled and searched against the same composite FASTA sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Mature red blood cells (RBCs) lack internal organelles and canonical defense mechanisms, making them both a fascinating host cell, in general, and an intriguing choice for the deadly malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum (Pf), in particular. Pf, while growing inside its natural host, the human RBC, secretes multipurpose extracellular vesicles (EVs), yet their influence on this essential host cell remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that Pf parasites, cultured in fresh human donor blood, secrete within such EVs assembled and functional 20S proteasome complexes (EV-20S). The EV-20S proteasomes modulate the mechanical properties of na&#xef;ve human RBCs by remodeling their cytoskeletal network. Furthermore, we identify four degradation targets of the secreted 20S proteasome, the phosphorylated cytoskeletal proteins &#x3b2;-adducin, ankyrin-1, dematin and Epb4.1. Overall, our findings reveal a previously unknown 20S proteasome secretion mechanism employed by the human malaria parasite, which primes RBCs for parasite invasion by altering membrane stiffness, to facilitate malaria parasite growth.

### Keywords
Evs, Malaria, Rbcs, Proteasome

### Affiliations
CSL Innovation Ltd.
Department of Bimolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel

### Submitter
Eugene Kapp

### Lab Head
Dr Neta Regev-Rudzki
Department of Bimolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001, Israel


