### Accession
PXD040423

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis of  bone marrow cells of  MK-LCM WT versus KO mice

### Description
High ploidy large cytoplasmic megakaryocytes (LCM) are critical negative regulators of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and are responsible for platelet formation. Using a mouse knockout model with normal megakaryocyte numbers but essentially devoid of LCM (MK-LCM KO), we demonstrated a pronounced increase in bone marrow HSC concurrent with endogenous mobilization and extramedullary hematopoiesis. When HSC isolated from a MK-LCM KO microenvironment were transplanted in lethally irradiated mice, the absence of LCM increased HSC in BM, blood and spleen. Severe thrombocytopenia was observed in animals with diminished LCM, although there was no change in megakaryocyte ploidy distribution.   In contrast, WT HSC-generated LCM regulated a normal HSC pool and prevented thrombocytopenia. The present label-free quantitative LC-MSMS data was used to determine proteins that are differentially expressed in bone marrow cells of MK-LCM WT versus MK-LCM KO mice.

### Sample Protocol
Bones from two hind limbs of 3 x WT and 3 x KO mice were flushed in 1ml PBS supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1mM AEBSF and 1mM Na3VO4 (Sigma). For quantitative proteomics experiments, samples were digested using a single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation method (Hughes et al., 2019: Nat Protoc 14, 68-85).  Protein samples (50μg) were reduced with 5mM TCEP (Sigma) for 15min, alkylated for 30min with 50mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested with 1μg trypsin gold (Promega) for 16h at 37°C.  Peptide preparations were resuspended in 100μl 0.1% FA and 3μl aliquots separated in triplicate using a two-column chromatography setup comprising a PepMap100 C18 20mm × 75μm trap and a PepMap C18 500mm × 75μm analytical column (ThermoFisher). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5μl/min for 5min and infused into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) at 300nl/min running 120min gradients from 99% Buffer A (0.1% FA) to 40% Buffer B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher). The Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (resolution 120,000) every 3s and the top-20 multiply charged precursors selected for EThcD fragmentation (maximum fill time, 100m; AGC of 5 × 10^4 with a resolution of 30,000 for Orbitrap MS-MS scans).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and label-free quantification was accomplished using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 (Cox J & Mann M 2008: Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372). Database searches were performed against a protein database containing Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL sequences for Homo sapiens and Mus Musculus, as well as common proteomics contaminants (123,757 entries). High-resolution MS/MS data were searched with trypsin cleavage specificity allowing for two miscleavage events, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57Da) set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (+16Da), acetylation of protein N termini (+42Da), as well as pyroglutamylation of N-terminal glutamine (-17Da) or glutamate (-18Da) residues as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the main search with a maximum false discovery rate of 1.0% set for protein and peptide identifications. To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the match between runs option was enabled with the precursor match window set to 2min and an alignment window of 10min in addition to the re-quantification module.  Statistical analysis of label-free MS-based quantitative proteomics data with three biological replicates and three technical replicates was based on the peptide-level robust ridge regression method for relative protein quantification using the open-source R package MSqRob version 0.7.6 (Goeminne et al. 2016: Mol Cell Proteomics 15, 657-668;  Goeminne et al 2018: J Proteomics 171, 23-36).

### Publication Abstract
Megakaryocytes (MK) generate platelets. Recently, we and others, have reported MK also regulate hematopoietic stem cells (HSC). Here we show high ploidy large cytoplasmic megakaryocytes (LCM) are critical negative regulators of HSC and critical for platelet formation. Using a mouse knockout model (Pf4-Srsf3<sup>&#x394;/&#x394;</sup>) with normal MK numbers, but essentially devoid of LCM, we demonstrate a pronounced increase in BM HSC concurrent with endogenous mobilization and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Severe thrombocytopenia is observed in animals with diminished LCM, although there is no change in MK ploidy distribution, uncoupling endoreduplication and platelet production. When HSC isolated from a microenvironment essentially devoid of LCM reconstitute hematopoiesis in lethally irradiated mice, the absence of LCM increases HSC in BM, blood and spleen, and the recapitulation of thrombocytopenia. In contrast, following a competitive transplant using minimal numbers of WT HSC together with HSC from a microenvironment with diminished LCM, sufficient WT HSC-generated LCM regulates a normal HSC pool and prevents thrombocytopenia. Importantly, LCM are conserved in humans.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Lfq, Bone marrow

### Affiliations
CSIRO
Biologics R&D Group/ Biomedical Program CSIRO Manufacturing Bayview Ave/ Research Way, Clayton, VIC3168  Australia

### Submitter
Thomas Nebl

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Nebl
Biologics R&D Group/ Biomedical Program CSIRO Manufacturing Bayview Ave/ Research Way, Clayton, VIC3168  Australia


