### Accession
PXD003927

### Title
Absolute Quantification of 10 Centrosomal Proteins

### Description
Centrioles are essential for the formation of centrosomes and cilia. While numerical and/or structural centrosomes aberrations are implicated in cancer, mutations in centriolar and centrosomal proteins are genetically linked to ciliopathies, microcephaly and dwarfism. The evolutionarily conserved mechanisms underlying centrosome biogenesis are centered on a set of key proteins, including Plk4, Sas-6 and STIL, whose exact levels are critical to ensure accurate reproduction of centrioles during cell cycle progression. However, neither the intracellular levels of centrosomal proteins nor their stoichiometry within centrosomes are presently known. Here we have used two complementary approaches, targeted proteomics and EGFP-tagging of centrosomal proteins at endogenous loci, to measure protein abundance in cultured human cells and purified centrosomes. Our results provide a first assessment of the absolute and relative amounts of major components of the human centrosome. This quantitative information makes several predictions that will guide future mechanistic and structural studies on the assembly and function of this important organelle.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were trypsinized, washed with PBS and counted using a Scepter 2.0 cell counter (Merck- Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). After low speed centrifugation, cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 8 M Urea, 0.1% Rapigest (v/v)), subjected to 3 cycles of 30 seconds sonication and 5 minutes vortexing at 25°C. Following centrifugation at 20,000g for 5 minutes at 4°C, supernatants were analyzed for protein content using the BCA assay (Pierce, Fisher Scientific, Perbio Science Switzerland SA, Lausanne, Switzerland). 0.5-1 mg of protein was diluted with lysis buffer to a final concentration of 2.5 μg/μl. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP (Tris-2-carboxyethyl-phophine) at 37°C for 60 min, alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 30 min in the dark and incubated in 12.5 mM N-acetyl-cysteine at 25°C for 10 min. Samples were then diluted 1:4 with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and digested over night with Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w). The samples were supplemented with 250 fmol/mg of AQUA-peptides (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), before digestion was stopped and RapiGest was cleaved with 0.5% Trifluoracetic acid and 50 mM HCl. After centrifugation at 20,000g for 5 min at 4°C peptides in the supernatant were desalted by solid phase extraction according to the manufacturer’s instructions (C18 Sep- Pak Vac columns, Waters, Baden-Dättwil, Switzerland). Purified peptides were dried at 45°C under vacuum and resuspended in 200μl of 10% ACN/90% water (v/v) and subjected to Off-Gel- Electrophoresis (OGE) using 24 cm strips with a pH range from 3-10 (3100 OFFGEL Fractionator, 27 Agilent technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The 24 OGE fractions were purified using micro spin solid phase extraction C18 columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA), dried at 45°C under vacuum, resuspended in an aqueous solution containing 5% ACN/0.15% formic acid and subjected to SRM analysis in a TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Ratios between heavy labeled AQUA peptides and light endogenous peptides were determined using the Skyline software (MacLean B. et al, Bioinformatics, 2010, version 1.3). For each protein except Cep152, 2 peptides were used and average values determined; in case of Cep152, only one peptide (INEVLAAAK) recognized both long and short isoforms (Sonnen et al, 2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Absolute quantification, Mass spectrometry, Centrosome, Srm

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Biozentrum, Universtiy of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, Universtiy of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


