### Accession
PXD020481

### Title
Light-mediated discovery of surfaceome nanoscale organization and intercellular receptor interaction networks

### Description
Delineating the extracellular interaction network of the cell surface proteotype (the surfaceome) is fundamental to understanding cellular signaling function in health and disease. Here, we developed LUX-MS, an optoproteomic technology that enables the spatiotemporal and proteome-wide study of surfaceome signaling architectures at nanoscale level without the need for genetic manipulation. A tunable, light-triggered singlet oxygen generator (SOG) based mechanism mediates in-situ proximity-tagging for subsequent mass spectrometry-based identification of acute protein interactions in their native cellular context. We applied LUX-MS to the characterization of surfaceome signaling structures engaged by antibodies, small molecule drugs, biologics and intact bacteriophages across organisms and in complex environments. Cell-type resolved dissection of intercellular communication using LUX-MS thereby revealed the molecular architecture of functional immunological signaling synapses in unprecedented detail. Altogether, LUX-MS enables facebooking of the social protein networks within surfaceome signaling architectures and provides an unprecedented molecular framework for the rational design of biomedical intervention strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Delineating the extracellular interaction network of the cell surface proteotype (the surfaceome) is fundamental to understanding cellular signaling function in health and disease. Here, we developed LUX-MS, an optoproteomic technology that enables the spatiotemporal and proteome-wide study of surfaceome signaling architectures at nanoscale level without the need for genetic manipulation. A tunable, light-triggered singlet oxygen generator (SOG) based mechanism mediates in-situ proximity-tagging for subsequent mass spectrometry-based identification of acute protein interactions in their native cellular context. We applied LUX-MS to the characterization of surfaceome signaling structures engaged by antibodies, small molecule drugs, biologics and intact bacteriophages across organisms and in complex environments. Cell-type resolved dissection of intercellular communication using LUX-MS thereby revealed the molecular architecture of functional immunological signaling synapses in unprecedented detail. Altogether, LUX-MS enables facebooking of the social protein networks within surfaceome signaling architectures and provides an unprecedented molecular framework for the rational design of biomedical intervention strategies.

### Data Protocol
Raw files acquired in DDA mode were searched against corresponding SwissProt-reviewed protein databases containing common contaminants using Comet (v.2015.01) within the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v.4.7 (SPC/ISB Seattle). Peptides were required to be fully tryptic with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as a dynamic modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 1 Da (MS2 ion trap) or 0.02 Da (MS2 orbitrap), respectively. Proteins identified by at least two proteotypic peptides were quantified by integration of chromatographic traces of peptides using Progenesis QI v.4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics). Contaminant hits were removed, and proteins filtered to obtain a false discovery rate of < 1%. Raw protein abundances were exported based on non-conflicting peptides. For DIA analysis, raw files for spectral libraries acquired in DDA mode were searched against corresponding SwissProt-reviewed protein databases containing common contaminants using the Sequest HT search engine within Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were required to be fully tryptic with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For SILAC data, isotopically heavy labeled arginine (+10 Da) and lysine (+8 Da) were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 1 Da (MS2 ion trap) or 0.02 Da (MS2 orbitrap). The identified proteins were assessed using Percolator and filtered using the high peptide confidence setting in Protein Discoverer. Analysis results were then imported to Spectronaut v.13 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) for the generation of spectral libraries filtering for high confidence identification on peptide and protein level. Raw files acquired in data-independent acquisition mode were analyzed using Spectronaut v.13 with default settings. The proteotypicity filter “only protein group specific” was applied, and extracted feature quantities were exported from Spectronaut using the “Quantification Data Filtering” option. Within the R computing environment, protein abundance changes (expressed in log2) were calculated using a linear mixed effect model and tested for statistical significance using a two-sided t-test in the R package MSstats (v.3.8.6) (Choi et al. 2014). For human proteins, cell surface localization was inferred by matching protein identifications to the in silico human surfaceome (Bausch-Fluck et al. 2018). For all other organisms, cell surface localization was inferred based on UniProt GO-term annotations being either “cell surface”, “cell membrane” or “secreted”. Significantly enriched proteins (abundance fold change > 1.5 and p-value < 0.05) were considered as acute proximity candidates of the ligand- or antibody-SOG construct. The CD20 surfaceome interaction network was generated using Cytoscape (v.3.7.1) (Shannon et al. 2003). Protein topology information was retrieved and visualized using the PROTTER interactive webtool (Omasits et al. 2014). Protein structures were visualized using PyMOL Molecular Graphics System (v.2.4.0, Schrödinger, LLC.). Schematic figures were created using the BioRender web tool (https://biorender.com/).

### Publication Abstract
The molecular nanoscale organization of the surfaceome is a fundamental regulator of cellular signaling in health and disease. Technologies for mapping the spatial relationships of cell surface receptors and their extracellular signaling synapses would unlock theranostic opportunities to target protein communities and the possibility to engineer extracellular signaling. Here, we develop an optoproteomic technology termed LUX-MS that enables the targeted elucidation of acute protein interactions on and in between living cells using light-controlled singlet oxygen generators (SOG). By using SOG-coupled antibodies, small molecule drugs, biologics and intact viral particles, we demonstrate the ability of LUX-MS to decode ligand receptor interactions across organisms and to discover surfaceome receptor nanoscale organization with direct implications for drug action. Furthermore, by coupling SOG to antigens we achieved light-controlled molecular mapping of intercellular signaling within functional immune synapses between antigen-presenting cells and CD8<sup>+</sup>&#x2009;T cells providing insights into T cell activation with spatiotemporal specificity. LUX-MS based decoding of surfaceome signaling architectures thereby provides a molecular framework for the rational development of theranostic strategies.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Translational Medicine, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Maik Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Institute of Translational Medicine, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


