### Accession
PXD034978

### Title
Local burn wound environment verses systemic response: comparison of proteins and metabolites

### Description
In this study, paired blood plasma (BP) and blister fluid (BF) samples from 5 paediatric burn patients were analysed using mass spectrometry to compare their protein and metabolite composition. The relative quantification of proteins was achieved through a label-free data independent acquisition mode. The relative quantification of metabolites was achieved using a Shimadzu Smart Metabolite Database gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS) targeted assay. In total, 562 proteins and 141 individual metabolites were identified in the samples. There was 81% similarity in the proteins present in the BP and BF, with 50 and 54 unique proteins found in each sample type respectively. BF contained keratinocyte proliferation-related proteins and blood plasma contained abundant blood clotting proteins and apolipoproteins. BF contained more carbohydrates and less alpha-hydroxy acid metabolites than the BP. In this study, there were unique proteins and metabolites in BF and BP which were reflective of the local wound environment and systemic environments respectively. The results from this study demonstrate that the biomolecule content of BF is mostly the same as blood, but it also contains information specific to the local wound environment.

### Sample Protocol
Individual BF and BP samples were processed using the standard FASP digestion method described previously. The digested peptides were desalted and concentrated using custom-made Stage-Tips prepared as described elsewhere. Indexed Retention Time (iRT) peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland) were spiked into each individual sample at 1:100 ratio. The metabolites were extracted based on a previously reported plasma and serum methanol precipitation method. The derivatization was achieved through addition of 25µL of 30mg/mL methoxyamine hydrochloride in pyridine and incubation at 37°C for 120 mins with vortexing at 700 rpm. An aliquot of 25µL of N,O-Bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) was also added, with further incubation at 37°C for 60 mins with vortexing at 700 rpm. Derivatised sample was then incubate at room temperature for one hour.

### Data Protocol
The database was created based on a SwissProt human database (generated on February 12, 2019) with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and iRT peptide sequences included. The peptide ion library was generated from the DDA data of a pooled sample of a small aliquot of each individual sample and previous published DDA data using the cloud toolkit OneOmics (SCIEX) with a threshold of 1% Global false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide level. The modified peptides were excluded, the number of peptides per protein was set to 15, and the number of transitions per peptide was set to 6.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, paired blood plasma (BP) and blister fluid (BF) samples from five paediatric burn patients were analysed using mass spectrometry to compare their protein and metabolite composition. The relative quantification of proteins was achieved through a label-free data independent acquisition mode. The relative quantification of metabolites was achieved using a Shimadzu Smart Metabolite Database gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS) targeted assay. In total, 562 proteins and 141 individual metabolites were identified in the samples. There was 81% similarity in the proteins present in the BP and BF, with 50 and 54 unique proteins found in each sample type respectively. BF contained keratinocyte proliferation-related proteins and blood plasma contained abundant blood clotting proteins and apolipoproteins. BF contained more carbohydrates and less alpha-hydroxy acid metabolites than the BP. In this study, there were unique proteins and metabolites in BF and BP which were reflective of the local wound environment and systemic environments respectively. The results from this study demonstrate that the biomolecule content of BF is mostly the same as blood, but it also contains information specific to the local wound environment.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Plasma, Paediatric, Proteomics, Burns, Child, Wound fluid

### Affiliations
Queensland University of Technology
Queensland University of Technology (QUT), School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health, Centre for Children’s Health Research, South Brisbane, Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Tuo Zang

### Lab Head
Dr Leila Cuttle
Queensland University of Technology (QUT), School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health, Centre for Children’s Health Research, South Brisbane, Queensland, Australia


