### Accession
PXD018116

### Title
TMT-based proteome analysis of three Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with different protein productivity

### Description
Tandem mass tag (TMT)-based relative quantification was used to study yeast protein secretory pathway under chemostat cultures

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cell pellets were lysed in 500 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM triethylammoinium bicarbonate (TEAB), 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)), respectively. Samples were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (Matrix-C (red) FAST tubes MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 second cycles at 6.5 m/s, with 30-60 second pauses in between. Samples were centrifuged (400 x g, 2 min) then supernatants were transferred to new tubes. The supernatants were centrifuged again (21,100 x g, 10 min) to remove cell debris then supernatants were transferred to new tubes again. Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. The quantified yeast-cell-proteome reference pool was prepared from the aliquots of the lysates of S. cerevisiae CEN.PK 113-7D cells from the J. Nielsen Lab (Chalmers, Gothenburg, Sweden). Aliquots containing 30 µg of total protein from each sample and 30 µg from the reference pool were used for the TMT sample preparation. Samples were reduced by addition of 2 M DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 56°C for 30 min. The samples were then trypsin digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from Wiśniewski et al. (2009)30. In brief, reduced samples, which had been diluted by addition of 8M urea, were applied on Nanosep® 30k Omega filters (Pall Life Sciences, Port Washington, NY, USA) then 200 µl 8M urea was used to repeatedly wash away the SDS. Alkylation was performed with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in digestion buffer was added in a ratio of 1:100 relative to protein amount and then samples were incubated at 37°C overnight. Another portion of trypsin was then added and incubated for 3 h. Peptides were collected by centrifugation (11,600 x g, 10 min) and subjected to isobaric mass tagging reagent TMT® according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The labelled samples were combined into TMT sets, and then samples were concentrated using vacuum centrifugation with SDC being removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The TMT-sets were fractionated into 40 primary fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21, 2+22, … 20+40), evaporated and reconstituted in 15 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files for each TMT set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c reference proteome database was downloaded from Uniprot31 (February 2018, 6049 sequences) and used for the database search on the TMT files. A database search for each set was performed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance for identification of 600 millimass units (mmu). Tryptic peptides were accepted with 1 missed cleavage. Variable modifications of methionine oxidation, and fixed modifications of cysteine methylthiolation were used for all searches. TMT-6 on lysine and peptide N-termini was set as a fixed modification for the TMT-labeled peptides. Percolator was used for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) validation with the strict false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra with a mass tolerance of 3 milli mass units (mmu), the signal-to-noise (S/N) abundances of the reporter ions for the unique peptides were used for relative quantification. The resulting TMT reporter abundance values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 to the total peptide amount. The TMT reporter of the reference pool was used as a denominator. The false discovery rate for proteins in the datasets was set to a threshold of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Professor.  Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden;  Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden;  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden;  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Chalmers University of Technology

### Submitter
Qi Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Professor.  Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden;  Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden;  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden;  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


