### Accession
PXD029437

### Title
Longitudinal Plasma Proteomics Analysis of Acute COVID-19

### Description
The host response to COVID-19 pathophysiology over the first days of infection remains largely unclear especially the mechanisms in the blood compartment. We report here on a longitudinal proteomic analysis of acute phase COVID-19 patients, for which we used blood plasma and MRM proteomics with internal standards as well as DIA. We measured samples on admission for 49 patients, of which 21 with additional samples on days 2, 4, 7, and 14 after admission. We also measured 30 externally obtained samples from healthy individuals for comparison at baseline.

### Sample Protocol
MRM The MRM assays included internal standard peptides for 270 proteins. We were able to detect 192 proteins, of which 172 were quantified and used for further analysis. The sample digests were prepared through denaturation and reduction of the homogenate with 9M urea/20mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37ºC. Denatured proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (40 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, and then samples were diluted to reach a final urea concentration of 0.55 mM prior to tryptic digestion. Digestion was carried out at a 10:1 substrate:enzyme ratio using tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)‐treated trypsin (Worthington) for 18 hours at 37ºC. After digestion, samples were acidified with aqueous 1% formic acid (FA), and a chilled stable isotope‐labeled standard (SIS) peptide mixture was added. Samples were concentrated via solid phase extraction (SPE; 10 mg Oasis HLB cartridges; Waters), using the manufacturer's recommended protocol. The SPE column was conditioned with 100% methanol (1 mL), followed by washing with 100% H2O/0.1% FA (1 mL), the sample (diluted to 1 mL using 100% H2O/0.1% FA) was then loaded onto the column, followed by washing two times with water (1 mL each). Finally, the sample was eluted with 55% acetonitrile (can)/0.1% FA (300 μL) and lyophilized to dryness. The dried samples were rehydrated in 0.1% FA to a 1 μg/μL concentration for liquid chromatography (LC)/MRM‐MS analysis. The samples were separated on‐line with a reversed phase‐ultra high performance liquid chromatography (RP‐UHPLC) column (EclipsePlusC18 RRHD 150 × 2.1 mm i.d., 1.8 μm particle diameter; Agilent) maintained at 50°C. Peptide separations were performed at 0.4 mL⁄min over a 56‐minute run, via a multi‐step LC gradient.  The solvents were aqueous mobile phase – solvent A – with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water, and the organic mobile phase – solvent B – with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade acetonitrile.The exact gradient was as follows (time point in minutes, solution B%): 0 min, 2%; 2 min, 7%; 50 min, 30%; 53 min, 45%, 53.5 min, 80%; 55.5 min, 80%; 56 min, 2%. A post‐column equilibration of 4 minutes was used after each sample analysis. The LC system was interfaced to a triple‐quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent 6490) via a standard‐flow electrospray ionization (ESI) source, operated in the positive ion mode.  DIA With an estimated protein concentration of 70 μg/μl, fifty micrograms of each sample was denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested using Preomics iST Sample Preparation kit (Preomics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). Samples were re-suspended in Load buffer at a concentration of 1ug/ul and a data-independent acquisition (DIA) chromatogram library sample was created from a pooled aliquot of the samples. A 5µL injection was separated by on-line reverse phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system with a reversed-phase pre-column Magic C18-AQ (100µm I.D., 2.5 cm length, 5µm, 100Å), and an in-house prepared reverse phase nano-analytical column Magic C-18AQ (75µm I.D., 20 cm length, 5µm, 100Å, Michrom BioResources Inc, Auburn, CA), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  The LC system was coupled on-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Nanospray Flex NG source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC aqueous mobile phase – solvent A was with 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water, and the organic mobile phase – solvent B was with 0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile  Samples were separated by a 64-minute gradient with the following gradient (time point in minutes, solution B%): 0 min, 5%B; 50 min, 25%B; 52 min, 40%B; 54 min, 90%B; 59 min, 90%B; 60min, 5%B; 64 min, 5%B. The Orbitrap Fusion instrument parameters (Fusion Tune 3.3 software) were as follows for orbitrap (OT-MS) iontrap (OT- MS/MS) with HCD fragmentation:  Nano-electrospray ion source with spray voltage 2.55kV, capillary temperature 275 ℃.

### Data Protocol
MRM Data processing – Skyline was used to inspect the peptide response peaks and ensure accurate selection, retention time, integration, and uniformity of peak shape for the endogenous and internal standard peptide signals. For each peptide, the relative peak area ratio of the endogenous to the heavy labeled internal standard peptide was calculated. This ratio and the known concentration of internal standard peptide were used to calculate the concentration of the endogenous peptide in the sample by comparison to a standard curve generated in pooled sample. The criteria used for the standard curve regression analysis were 1/x2 regression weighting, <15% deviation in a given level's precision and accuracy for each concentration level, as well as 20% at the lower limit of quantification.  DIA Data processing – EncyclopeDIA was used to generate the library and perform protein identification and quantification. The human proteome in FASTA format was obtained from UniProtKB33 and a spectral library containing only human proteins (pan human) was obtained from the National Institute of Standards and Technology – NIST  (https://chemdata.nist.gov/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=peptidew:cdownload). These were used with the 6 gas phase fraction files from the analysis of the chromatogram library sample to create a human plasma specific chromatogram library. The library was used for identification and quantitation of the proteins in samples, with trypsin as the enzyme, CID/HCD as the fragmentation method, 10 ppm mass tolerances for the precursor, fragment, and library mass tolerances. Percolator (3.10) was used to validate the identifications with false discovery rate set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The host response to COVID-19 pathophysiology over the first few days of infection remains largely unclear, especially the mechanisms in the blood compartment. We report on a longitudinal proteomic analysis of acute-phase COVID-19 patients, for which we used blood plasma, multiple reaction monitoring with internal standards, and data-independent acquisition. We measured samples on admission for 49 patients, of which 21 had additional samples on days 2, 4, 7, and 14 after admission. We also measured 30 externally obtained samples from healthy individuals for comparison at baseline. The 31 proteins differentiated in abundance between acute COVID-19 patients and healthy controls belonged to acute inflammatory response, complement activation, regulation of inflammatory response, and regulation of protein activation cascade. The longitudinal analysis showed distinct profiles revealing increased levels of multiple lipid-associated functions, a rapid decrease followed by recovery for complement activation, humoral immune response, and acute inflammatory response-related proteins, and level fluctuation in the regulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation, secretory mechanisms, and platelet degranulation. Three proteins were differentiated between survivors and nonsurvivors. Finally, increased levels of fructose-bisphosphate aldolase B were determined in patients with exposure to angiotensin receptor blockers versus decreased levels in those exposed to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. Data are available via ProteomeXchange PXD029437.

### Keywords
Arb, Covid-19, Longitudinal analysis, Acei, Amyloid, Complement, Targeted quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center  and  Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Yassene Mohammed
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center  and  Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria


