### Accession
PXD035407

### Title
Bark beetle gut proteomics study

### Description
The present project deals with bark beetle gut total proteome from callow and black bark beetle, Ips typographus. The study aims to identify life stage-specific expression of gut proteins in bark beetles and their functional relevance.

### Sample Protocol
50 ug of proteins were loaded into the gel and stained. Gel lanes were cut and washed twice with acetonitrile (ACN) and Ammonium Bicarbonate (AMBIC). Gel pieces were then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) respectively. Proteins are then digested into peptides overnight at 37°C by adding porcine-modified trypsin in 1:50 w/w ratio. Peptides were retrieved from the gel pieces with 70% ACN/5% formic acid (FA) and dried in the SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and quantified in Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 400 ng of peptides were injected through Evosep One system (Evosep, Odense) into the QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode for data dependent acquisition (DDA). The analytical column was 15 cm long fused silica capillary (75 μm* 16 cm Pico Tip Emitter, New Objective), packed in house with C18 material ReproSil-Pur 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separate using the pre-programmed Whisper 58 min gradient for 20 samples per day. The Orbitrap acquired the full MS scan with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3x106 ions and a maximum fill time of 50 ms in a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z. The 20 most abundant peptide ions were selected from the MS for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (collision energy: 40V). Fragmentation was performed at 15,000 FWHM resolution for a target of 1x105 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Xcalibur software v 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) was used to control the MS and to acquire and visualize the RAW data.

### Data Protocol
The generated RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org), version 1.6.17.0). Files were searched against the bark beetle fasta file generated by Roy et al in September 2021. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Default parameters were used, including precursor mass error 4.5 ppm and monoisotopic fragments mass error 0.02 Da and protein filtering at FDR 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The bark beetle, <i>Ips typographus</i> (L.), is a major pest of Norway spruce, <i>Picea abies</i> (L.), causing enormous economic losses globally. The adult stage of the <i>I. typographus</i> has a complex life cycle (callow and sclerotized); the callow beetles feed ferociously, whereas sclerotized male beetles are more aggressive and pioneers in establishing new colonies. We conducted a comparative proteomics study to understand male and female digestion and detoxification processes in callow and sclerotized beetles. Proteome profiling was performed using high-throughput liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. A total of &gt;3000 proteins were identified from the bark beetle gut, and among them, 539 were differentially abundant (fold change &#xb1;2, FDR &lt;0.05) between callow and sclerotized beetles. The differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) mainly engage with binding, catalytic activity, anatomical activity, hydrolase activity, metabolic process, and carbohydrate metabolism, and hence may be crucial for growth, digestion, detoxification, and signalling. We validated selected DAPs with RT-qPCR. Gut enzymes such as NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase (CYC), glutathione S-transferase (GST), and esterase (EST) play a crucial role in the <i>I. typographus</i> for detoxification and digesting of host allelochemicals. We conducted enzyme activity assays with them and observed a positive correlation of CYC and GST activities with the proteomic results, whereas EST activity was not fully correlated. Furthermore, our investigation revealed that callow beetles had an upregulation of proteins associated with juvenile hormone (JH) biosynthesis and chitin metabolism, whereas sclerotized beetles exhibited an upregulation of proteins linked to fatty acid metabolism and the TCA cycle. These distinctive patterns of protein regulation in metabolic and functional processes are specific to each developmental stage, underscoring the adaptive responses of <i>I. typographicus</i> in overcoming conifer defences and facilitating their survival. Taken together, it is the first gut proteomic study comparing males and females of callow and sclerotized <i>I. typographus</i>, shedding light on the adaptive ecology at the molecular level. Furthermore, the information about bark beetle handling of nutritionally limiting and defence-rich spruce phloem diet can be utilized to formulate RNAi-mediated beetle management.

### Keywords
Bark beetle, Gut proteome, Shotgun proteomics, Ips typographus, Differential protein expression

### Affiliations
Faculty for Forestry and Wood Sciences Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, czech republic
Czech University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Amit Roy

### Lab Head
Dr Amit Roy
Faculty for Forestry and Wood Sciences Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, czech republic


