### Accession
PXD004612

### Title
Proteomic comparison study between female and male tendon

### Description
Tendons play fundamental role in the musculoskeletal system and locomotion by transferring forces generated by muscles to the skeleton. Chronic tendon injuries and diseases are among the leading causes of musculoskeletal disability. For many types of tendinopathies, women have worse clinical outcomes than men. It is possible that tendon sex-based differences in protein composition are related to an altered injury response. The aim of this study was to compare the proteome of male and female tendon using label-free protein quantification. These data could provide new insight into pathways which may beinvolved in tendinopathies, and potentially in the differential injury response of female tendon.

### Sample Protocol
Tendons samples were collection from four month old male and female C57Bl/6 mice from plantaris and Achilles tendon (n=4). Proteins of tissues were extracted with 4M guanidine-HCL and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion followed by reduction and alkylation. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Ultimate nanosystem (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to Q-exactive. Aliquots of tryptic peptides (equivalent of 1.7µg protein per sample) were loaded onto a 180 µm x 20mm C18 trap column at 5 µl/min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA. After 3 minutes, the trap column was set in-line with analytical column (C18, 75µm x 15cm x 2um) using a linear gradient of solvent B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) of 3.8% to 50% at 300 nL/min. Data dependent acquisition consisted of 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) after accumulation of ion to 1x106 target value based on AGC values from previous full scan. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiply charged ions (> 2) were fragmented by HCD with fixed injection time of 100ms and 35,000 resolution. Typical mass spectromic conditions were as follows: spray voltage 1.9kV, nosheath or auxiliary gas flow, heat temperature, 250°C normalised to HCD collision energy 30%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 counts and a 2 m/z isolation width was set.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analysed with PEAKS7 (Bioinformatic solution, Waterloo, Canada) to identify protein composition using the following search parameters: parents mass error tolerance: 10.0 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance: 0.1 Da, precursor mass search type: monoisotypic, enzyme: trypsin, max missed cleavage :1, non specidic cleavage: 1, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation, variable PTMs per peptide: 3. The result were filtered on the basis of the following parameters: de novo average local confidence score threshold: 50. Protein -10lgP >20, FDR: 1% and unique peptides > 2. Label free quantification was also performed using ProgenesisQI software (version 4, Waters, UK) where the spectra for each feature was exported to PEAKS7 against Unimouse database and filtered using the same parameters. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches were re-imported into ProgenesisQI. Statistical analysis was performed on all detected features using transformed normalised abundances for one-way ANOVA. Identification of protein with two or peptides, greater 1.5 fold abundance and FDR adjusted p-value of <0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Tendons play a critical role in the transmission of forces between muscles and bones, and chronic tendon injuries and diseases are among the leading causes of musculoskeletal disability. Little is known about sex-based differences in tendon structure and function. Our objective was to evaluate the mechanical properties, biochemical composition, transcriptome, and cellular activity of plantarflexor tendons from 4 month old male and female C57BL/6 mice using in vitro biomechanics, mass spectrometry-based proteomics, genome-wide expression profiling, and cell culture techniques. While the Achilles tendons of male mice were approximately 6% larger than female mice (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05), the cell density of female mice was around 19% greater than males (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). No significant differences in mechanical properties (p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05) of plantaris tendons were observed. Mass spectrometry proteomics analysis revealed no significant difference between sexes in the abundance of major extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as collagen types I (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.30) and III (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.68), but female mice had approximately twofold elevations (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) in less abundant ECM proteins such as fibronectin, periostin, and tenascin C. The transcriptome of male and female tendons differed by only 1%. In vitro, neither the sex of the serum that fibroblasts were cultured in, nor the sex of the ECM in which they were embedded, had profound effects on the expression of collagen and cell proliferation genes. Our results indicate that while male mice expectedly had larger tendons, male and female tendons have very similar mechanical properties and biochemical composition, with small increases in some ECM proteins and proteoglycans evident in female tendons. &#xa9; 2017 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 35:2117-2126, 2017.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Female, Male, Tendon

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA

### Submitter
Yalda  Ashraf Kharaz

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Chris Mendias
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA


