### Accession
PXD002607

### Title
Slx5/8 alleviates replication stress by promoting mitotic progression

### Description
MCM-10 vs. wild type yeast differential analysis using label-free relative quantification and directed mass spectometry using RIPPER. Loss of Mcm10 causes replication stress. We uncovered that S. cerevisiae mcm10-1 mutants rely on the SUMO-targeted E3 ubiquitin ligase complex Slx5/8 and SUMO network for survival. How Slx5/8 suppresses replication stress has remained elusive. We developed a novel intensity-based label-free quantitative mass spectrometry approach and identified SUMO conjugates that were either enriched or depleted in mcm10-1 cells. We reasoned that sumoylated proteins that were decreased in mcm10-1 cells were potential Slx5/8 targets. Such candidates included subunits of the chromosome passenger complex (CPC), Bir1 and Sli15, which we verified to be substrates of the Slx5/8 pathway. CPC is known to positively regulate  the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC), and we show here that the ablation of CPC components and other SAC proteins supports growth of mcm10-1 cells by relieving mitotic arrest. Together, our data provide mechanistic insight into how SUMO and Slx5/8 orchestrate the replication stress response to promote cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel trypsin digest  Gel regions were placed in a 1.5 ml microfuge tube and cut into approximately 2 x 2 mm cubes.  The gel pieces were washed with addition of 50/50 acetonitrile and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8 for 15 min, then aspirated and repeated once.  100% acetonitrile was added for 1 min to dehydrate the gel pieces.  The acetonitrile was aspirated and 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH7.8 was added to the gel pieces and incubated at 56oC for 1 h.  The DTT solution was aspirated and methyl methane thiosulfonate (final concentration of 8 mM) was added and samples were incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min to alkylate cysteine residues. The solution was aspirated and the gel pieces were washed twice.  After washing, 100% acetonitrile was added then aspirated after 1min.  Trypsin solution was made [5 ng/l sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8] and added to each sample to cover the gel pieces.  The samples were incubated on ice for 15 min after which any non-absorbed trypsin solution was aspirated and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8, 5 mM calcium chloride solution was added to cover the gel pieces. Samples were placed in a warm air incubator at 37°C for 16h.  The solution from each sample was transferred to a new 1.5 mL microfuge tube and 50% acetonitrile, 0.3% formic acid was added to each sample for further extraction of peptides from the gel pieces.  Same sample extracts were pooled and the process was repeated with 75% acetonitrile, 0.3% formic acid.  The pooled digests were frozen at -80oC and dried in a speed vac.  The resolubilized peptide mixtures were desalted using the Stage Tip technique with 3M Empore SDB extraction disks according to the protocol by Rappsilber et. al. (Rappsilber et al., 2003). The final peptide mixtures were dried in vacuo.   LC-MS/MS  We analyzed peptide mixtures by capillary liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) on an Eksigent 1D plus LC with a MicroAS autosampler (Dublin, CA) online with an Orbitrap Velos MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA). The amount of desalted, digested peptide mixture injected for each analysis was approximately 1.5 g. We dissolved the sample in 5 l of load solvent (98:2, water: acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), aspirated into a 10 l injection loop in microliter pick-up mode and loaded onto the column at 1.1 l/min. The column parameters were: 12 cm x 0.1 mm internal diameter Magic C18aq (Michrom, Auburn CA) C18 200Å, 5 m particles packed in-house into New Objective (Woburn, MA) PicoTip™ non-coated emitter tips with a 10 m orifice. The chromatography conditions were: flowrate 330 nl/min; solvent A was identical to the load solvent; solvent B was 98:2, acetonitrile:water, 0.1% formic acid; gradient profile: 0 – 5 min, 2 – 10% B, 5 – 120 min, 10 – 40% B, 120 – 122 min, 40 – 90% B, 122 – 128 min at 90% B.   We analyzed four sample types by 1D LC-MS for each quantification measurement consecutively on the same analytical column. The four sample types were: sample 1) WT expressing untagged SUMO; sample 2) WT expressing His8SUMO; sample 3) mcm10-1 mutants expressing untagged SUMO; sample 4) mcm10-1 mutants expressing His8SUMO.  The quantitative analysis strategy included the following sample sets: A) triplicate injections of samples 1-4 analyzed in random order in MS1 (survey scan) only; B) directed MS/MS with inclusion lists for analytes differentially quantified between samples 2 and 4 that were undetected in control samples 1 and 3.   The acquisition parameters in common between analyses A and B were: positive polarity, capillary temperature 260 °C, 2.1 kV spray voltage, profile MS1 orbitrap spectrum range 360 – 1800 m/z with 30,000 FT resolution, 1 x 10E6 automatic gain control (AGC), 500 msec maximum injection time, 1 microscan. Acquisition parameters for directed MS/MS with inclusion lists (analysis B) were: data dependent acquisition on the top 6 most abundant peaks from the inclusion list within 10 ppm mass error, centroid mode, higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy 40%, activation time 0.1 msec, 7500 FT resolution, 1 x 10E5 AGC, 500 msec maximum injection time, 1 microscan, minimum signal for MS2 trigger 5000 counts, FT first mass fixed at 111 m/z,  isolation width 2.0, unassigned charge states and 1+ rejected, chromatography mode enabled (master scan event 1, expected peak width 10 sec, correlation method enabled, maximum area ratio to previous scan 1.0), predict ion injection time enabled, dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count 1, exclusion list size 500, exclusion list duration 30 sec, exclusion mass range +/- 10 ppm, early expiration disabled).

### Data Protocol
Inclusion list generation  We used in-house software named RIPPER (Van Riper et al., 2015 RIPPER manuscript) to preprocess the MS1 data, extract peptide signals, and calculate each peptide signal’s intensity. RIPPER calculates intensity via the area under the curve integration of a single peptide signal’s extracted ion chromatogram (XIC).  RIPPER parameters for peptide signal extraction were: S/N ratio 2; minimum number XIC peaks 3; maximum analyte grouping retention time tolerance 120 sec; maximum analyte grouping m/z tolerance 0.005 Da; charge states 2 – 4; minimum m/z 100. From RIPPER output, we constructed an inclusion list for directed mass spectrometry. We first selected only those analytes not detected in any of the non-specific binding replicates (samples 1 and 3). Then, we performed a Student’s t-test for each analyte comparing samples 2 and 4. Through optimization (see supplementary data) we determined that an inclusion list containing approximately 3,000 analytes was optimal for a 2-h directed run on an Orbitrap Velos. We chose a p-value of 0.001 for the inclusion list member threshold, yielding a list containing 3,112  analytes.  Finally, we allowed a ± 2-min retention time window for each analyte on the inclusion list.  Database searching  We used Peaks Studio 7.0 build 20140912 (Bioinformatics Solutions) software package for interpretation of tandem MS and protein inference (Ma et al., 2003). Data refine parameters were: no spectral merge; corrected precursors; charge states 2 – 9; spectral filter quality > 0.35. De novo module search parameters were: precursor mass error tolerance = 20.0 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance = 0.1 Da; trypsin; fixed modification beta-methylthiolation (C) 45.9877; variable modification oxidation (M) 15.9949; max variable PTM per peptide = 3; report number of peptides = 5. PEAKS DB search parameters were: NCBI reference sequence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (taxonomy ID 4932) protein database from May 18, 2013, concatenated with the common lab contaminant proteins (http://www.thegpm.org/); precursor mass error tolerance = 50.0 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance = 0.1 Da; monoisotopic mass type; trypsin enzyme with max 3 missed cleavages, non-specific cleavage at both ends; fixed modification beta-methylthiolation; variable modification methionine oxidation; false discovery rate calculation = on. PEAKS PTM module parameters were: maximum of 3 variable modifications per peptide from the following list: pyroglutamic acid (Q) -17.0265, dioxidation (M), sumo mutant Smt3-WT tail following trypsin digestion (K) 484.2281 (EQIGG), ubiquitination (K) 383.2281 (LRRG), ubiquitin (K) 114.0429 (GG), acetylation (N-term) 42.0106. We selected .RAW files from the directed inclusion list analyses for PEAKS 7.0 analysis and combined then into a single report (MudPIT style) to apply parsimony to the peptide report.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Directed mass spectrometry, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Susan Van Riper

### Lab Head
Dr Anja-Katrin Bielinsky
Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of Minnesota


