### Accession
PXD006685

### Title
Methanobacterium thermautotrophicus temperature-stress LC-MSMS

### Description
Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus is a model thermophilic hydrogenotrophic methanogen. The life and survival of M. thermautotrophicus is highly influenced by the availability of nutrients and temperature. To learn about adaptation mechanisms evolved by the archaea to cope with drastic temperature shifts, the responses of model M. thermautotrophicus ΔH to temperature were investigated using a quantitative proteomics approach with iTRAQ-LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
M. thermautotrophicus ΔH was cultured in this medium at different temperatures (65, 70°C) using Hungate technology. For cold shock treatment, M. thermautotrophicus ΔH was exposed to 4°C for 3 h after culturing at 65°C in the log phases of growth (OD620 of 0.25). The cells at different temperatures were harvested at log phases by centrifugation at 8,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the OE were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discover 1.2 and the MGF file was searched. Proteins identification were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.3.02) against database containing 2088 sequences. For protein identification, a mass tolerance of 20 (ppm) was permitted for intact peptide masses and 0.05 Da for fragment ions, with allowance for one missed cleavages in the trypsin digests. Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ) as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides at the 95% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified. And each confident protein identification involves at least one unique peptide.  For protein quantitation, it was required that a protein contains at least two unique spectra. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used rations with p-values < 0.05, and only fold changes of > 1.2 were considered as significant. Functional annotations of the proteins were conducted using Blast2GO program against the non-redundant protein database (NR; NCBI). The kegg database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) and the COG database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/) were used to classify and group these identified proteins. The “heatmap” function is performed using the “heatmap” package in R.

### Publication Abstract
The growth of all methanogens is limited to a specific temperature range. However, Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus can be found in a variety of natural and artificial environments, the temperatures of which sometimes even exceed the temperature growth ranges of thermophiles. As a result, the extent to which methane production and survival are affected by temperature remains unclear. To investigate the mechanisms of methanogenesis that Archaea have evolved to cope with drastic temperature shifts, the responses of Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus to temperature were investigated under a high temperature growth (71&#xb0;C) and cold shock (4&#xb0;C) using Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). The results showed that methane formation is decreased and that protein folding and degradation are increased in both high- and low-temperature treatments. In addition, proteins predicted to be involved in processing environmental information processing and in cell membrane/wall/envelope biogenesis may play key roles in affecting methane formation and enhancing the response of M.&#xa0;thermautotrophicus to temperature stress. Analysis of the genomic locations of the genes corresponding to these temperature-dependent proteins predicted that 77 of the genes likely to form 32 gene clusters. Here, we assess the response of M.&#xa0;thermautotrophicus to different temperatures and provide a new level of understanding of methane formation and cellular putative adaptive responses.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Temperature-stress, Methanobacterium thermautotrophicus

### Affiliations
Nanchang University

### Submitter
xia ding

### Lab Head
Dr xia ding
Nanchang University


