### Accession
PXD027181

### Title
Acinetobacter baumannii Ci79 WT and TrxA mutant outer membrane vesicle proteins

### Description
To investigate whether OMVs can be modulated by TrxA, we isolated OMVs from wild type (WT) and TrxA-deficient (ΔtrxA) A. baumannii clinical isolate Ci79, and carried out a functional and proteomic comparison.

### Sample Protocol
The OMV-associated proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion for capillary LC/MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
WT and trxA OMV proteins were identified by mapping the mass spectrum to the translated protein sequences from the Ci79 genome. Analysis of the raw mass spectrometric data was performed using MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.3.3).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> is a Gram-negative bacterium responsible for many hospital-acquired infections including ventilator-associated pneumonia and sepsis. We have previously identified <i>A. baumannii</i> thioredoxin A protein (TrxA) as a virulence factor with a multitude of functions including reduction of protein disulfides. TrxA plays an important role in resistance to oxidative stress facilitating host immune evasion in part by alteration of type IV pili and cell surface hydrophobicity. Other virulence factors such as outer membrane vesicles (OMV) shed by bacteria have been shown to mediate bacterial intercellular communication and modulate host immune response. To investigate whether OMVs can be modulated by TrxA, we isolated OMVs from wild type (WT) and TrxA-deficient (&#x394;trxA) <i>A. baumannii</i> clinical isolate Ci79 and carried out a functional and proteomic comparison. Despite attenuation of &#x394;trxA in a mouse challenge model, pulmonary inoculation of &#x394;trxA OMVs resulted in increased lung permeability compared to WT OMVs. Furthermore, &#x394;trxA OMVs induced more J774 macrophage-like cell death than WT OMVs. This &#x394;trxA OMV-mediated cell death was abrogated when cells were incubated with protease-K-treated OMVs suggesting OMV proteins were responsible for cytotoxicity. We therefore compared WT and mutant OMV proteins using proteomic analysis. We observed that up-regulated and unique &#x394;trxA OMV proteins consisted of many membrane bound proteins involved in small molecule transport as well as proteolytic activity. Bacterial OmpA, metalloprotease, and fimbrial protein have been shown to enhance mammalian cell apoptosis through various mechanisms. Differential packaging of these proteins in &#x394;trxA OMVs may contribute to the increased cytotoxicity observed in this study.

### Keywords
Omv, Acinetobacter, Thioredoxin

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at San Antonio

### Submitter
Jieh-Juen Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Bernard Arulanandam
The University of Texas at San Antonio


