### Accession
PXD025334

### Title
PABPC1 stress granule interactome identified by BioID

### Description
Identification of Stress Granule interacting proteins by BioID (Roux et al., 2012) using PABPC1-BirA(R118G)-GFP construct

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing PABPC1-BirA(R118G)-GFP were grown to 80-90% confluency. SGs were induced with 100 μM arsenite, 200 μM 2-BP, or 9 hour starvation. After that, cells were incubated with biotin (100μM) for 4 hours, SG formation was visualized on the microscope. Lysis and affinity capture was done according to Roux et al. with minor modifications (Roux et al., 2012). Cells were washed with PBS and (subsequent steps at 4°C) lysed in the buffer (50mM Tris pH7.4, 500mM NaCl, 0.4%SDS, 5mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail (aprotinin, leupeptin, and PMSF, 10μg) with glass beads 425-600 μm (Sigma). After 1min of vortex Triton X-100 was added to 2% concentration, after second round of vortex equal amount of 50mM Tris pH7.4 was added. After third round of vortex and centrifugation 5min 13000 rpm 300μl of streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (NEB) were added to collected supernatants and incubated overnight at 4°C with agitation, 10% of the sample was collected for the Western Blot analysis. Beads were collected and (subsequent steps at room temperature) washed according to Roux et al.

### Data Protocol
Three biological repeats (two technical repeats for each) for each condition that induces Stress Granules (Arsenite, Starvation, 2-BP,)  were compared to control condition, the data was processed using Perseus software. The control intensities were subtracted to obtain the SG enriched targets.

### Publication Abstract
The formation of stress granules (SGs) is an essential aspect of the cellular response to many kinds of stress, but its adaptive role is far from clear. SG dysfunction is implicated in aging-onset neurodegenerative diseases, prompting interest in their physiological function. Here, we report that during starvation stress, SGs interact with mitochondria and regulate metabolic remodeling. We show that SG formation leads to a downregulation of fatty acid&#xa0;&#x3b2;-oxidation (FAO) through the modulation of mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion channels (VDACs), which import fatty acids (FAs) into mitochondria. The subsequent decrease in FAO during long-term starvation reduces oxidative damage and rations FAs for longer use. Failure to form SGs, whether caused by the genetic deletion of SG components or an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-associated mutation, translates into an inability to downregulate FAO. Because metabolic dysfunction is a common pathological element of neurodegenerative diseases, including ALS, our findings provide a direction for studying the clinical relevance of SGs.

### Keywords
Human, Pabpc1, Stress granule

### Affiliations
1. Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany  2. 1Base Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA 02129, USA
University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Triana Amen

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Kaganovich
1. Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany  2. 1Base Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA 02129, USA


