### Accession
PXD042996

### Title
Proteomic data on the biodegradation of tetracycline by Sphingobacterium sp. WM1

### Description
We isolated a strain that efficiently degrades tetracycline and compared its proteomic data in the presence and absence of tetracycline to analyze the molecular mechanism of tetracycline biodegradation

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells were collected in accordance with RNA sequencing for protein extraction. Protein lysate (8 M urea, 1% SDS) was added to inhibit the protease activity. Then the mixture was sonicated on ice for 2 min and incubated for 30 min. After centrifugation (12,000 g) at 4°C for 30 min, the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit（(Pierce,Thermo, USA). The proteins were subsequently subjected to reductive alkylation and digestion, resulting in the generation of peptides. These peptides were labeled using TMT (tandem mass tag) reagents (Thermofisher) and fractionated into fractions by the Vanquish Flex UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (2.1mm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters, USA). Labeled peptides were then analyzed by online nano flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry performed on an Evosep One system (Evosep, Denmark) connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo, USA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 against the protein database of strain WM1.

### Publication Abstract
As an emerging pollutant, the antibiotic tetracycline (TC) has been consistently detected in wastewater and activated sludge. Biodegradation represents a potentially crucial pathway to dissipate TC contamination. However, few efficient TC-degrading bacteria have been isolated and a comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying TC degradation is still lacking. In this study, a novel TC-degrading bacterium, designated as Sphingobacterium sp. WM1, was successfully isolated from activated sludge. Strain WM1 exhibited a remarkable performance in degrading 50&#xa0;mg/L TC within 1 day under co-metabolic conditions. Genomic analysis of the strain WM1 unveiled the presence of three functional tetX genes. Unraveling the complex molecular mechanisms, transcriptome analysis highlighted the role of upregulated transmembrane transport and accelerated electron transport in facilitating TC degradation. Proteomics confirmed the up-regulation of proteins involved in cellular biosynthesis/metabolism and ribosomal processes. Crucially, the tetX gene-encoding protein showed a significant upregulation, indicating its role in TC degradation. Heterologous expression of the tetX gene resulted in TC dissipation from an initial 51.9&#xa0;mg/L to 4.2&#xa0;mg/L within 24&#xa0;h. The degradation pathway encompassed TC hydroxylation, transforming into TP461 and subsequent metabolites, which effectively depleted TC's inhibitory activity. Notably, the tetX genes in strain WM1 showed limited potential for horizontal gene transfer. Collectively, strain WM1's potent TC degradation capacity signals a promise for enhancing TC clean-up strategies.

### Keywords
Sphingobacterium, Tetracycline

### Affiliations
Peking University
State Key Joint Laboratory of Environmental Simulation and Pollution Control,College of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Peking University, Beijing  100871, China

### Submitter
Xiuli Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xie Shuguang
State Key Joint Laboratory of Environmental Simulation and Pollution Control,College of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Peking University, Beijing  100871, China


