### Accession
PXD000761

### Title
Phosphoproteome profiling of toll-like receptor response to different ligand stimulation in macrophages identifies differences in global phosphorylation dynamics

### Description
Toll-like receptors are among the first sensors that detect and drive immune responses to pathogens. Macrophages that encounter a pathogen are usually not stimulated through one TLR but by a combination of these receptors engaged by distinct ligands produced by the microbe. As a first step to understanding the integrated signaling under such complex conditions, we have investigated the differences in the phosphoprotein signaling cascades triggered by individual TLR4, TLR2 and TLR7 ligands using a single responding cell population. We performed a global quantitative and early post-stimulation kinetic analysis of the mouse macrophage phosphoproteome using stable isotope labeling with amino acids coupled to phosphopeptide enrichment and high-resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Two biological replicates of immortalized macrophages derived from C57BL/6 mice were stimulated with 1ug/mL LPS, 1uM Pam3Cys or 1uM R848 in triple SILAC media for 0min and 3min (Lys4, Arg6), 5min and 30min (Lys8, Arg10), and 10min (Lys0, Arg0). Two pools were created each containing time points 0min, 10min, 30min and 3min, 5min, 10min respectively. The pooled cell lysate were digested with trypsin, the peptides separated with SCX and enriched for phosphopeptides by TiO2. The resulting phosphopeptides were run on an Orbitrap-Velos with a two hour gradient.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed with Maxquant with a 1% FDR. The phosphorylation site within a peptide were identified using the PTM score algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are among the first sensors that detect infection and drive immune response. Macrophages encountering a pathogen are usually stimulated not by one TLR, but by a combination of TLRs engaged by distinct microbe ligands. To understand the integrated signaling under complex conditions, we investigated the differences in the phosphoprotein signaling cascades triggered by TLR2, TLR4, and TLR7 ligands using a single responding cell population. We performed a global, quantitative, early poststimulation kinetic analysis of the mouse macrophage phosphoproteome using stable isotope labeling with amino acids coupled to phosphopeptide enrichment and high-resolution mass spectrometry. For each TLR ligand, we found marked elevation of phosphorylation of cytoskeleton components, GTPases of the Rho family, and phospholipase C signaling pathway proteins. Phosphorylation of proteins involved in phagocytosis was only seen in response to TLR2 and TLR4 but not to TLR7 activation. Changes in the phosphorylation of proteins involved in endocytosis were delayed in response to TLR2 as compared to TLR4 ligands. These findings reveal that the phosphoproteomic response to stimulation of distinct TLRs varies both in the major modification targets and the phosphorylation dynamics. These results advance the understanding of how macrophages sense and respond to a diverse set of TLR stimuli.

### Keywords
Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Tlr7, Tlr4, Macrophage, Tlr2

### Affiliations
NIH, NIAID, LSB
NIAID

### Submitter
Aleksandra Nita-Lazar

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
NIH, NIAID, LSB


