### Accession
PXD009716

### Title
glyXtoolMS Example Data Sets -  glyXtoolMS: An Open-Source Pipeline for Semiautomated Analysis of Glycopeptide Mass Spectrometry Data

### Description
The data sets of human IgG and human fibrinogen are used as test data for the publication of glyXtoolMS (https://github.com/glyXera/glyXtoolMS). GlyXtoolMS is an open-source analysis software for the (semi)automated targeted analysis of glycopeptide mass spectrometry data using OpenMS/TOPPAS as a framework and pipeline engine. The proteins were selected to show the successful analysis of both N-glycopeptide and O-glycopeptide samples. The samples were measured by nano reversed phase liquid chromatography coupled online to an electrospray ionization orbitrap mass spectrometer (nano RP-LC ESI- OT-MS/MS; LTQ Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with HCD fragmentation.

### Sample Protocol
A) Sample type and origin: commercially available standard proteins human fibrinogen and human immunoglobulin G (IgG) (both Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) B) Digestion: Tryptic digest using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (modified from Wisniewski et al (Nat Methods, 2009)) - reduction with DL-dithiothreitol (40 mM DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) - alkylation with iodoacetamide (55 mM IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) - proteolytically digested with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) - incubated overnight at 37°C - Flow-trough and wash were collected, dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in in 0.1%(v/v) trifluoroacetic acid(aq) (TFA; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). C) Glycopeptide Enrichment: Glycopeptides were enriched using to a modified version of the cotton-HILIC-SPE protocol introduced by Selman et al (Anal Chem, 2011). Cotton-HILIC microtips were prepared by filling 20 µL pipette tips to the 10 µL mark with cotton wool derived from commercially available cotton pads (100% cotton). In contrast to the original protocol, centrifugation – instead of pipetting up and down – was used during washing, loading, and elution steps. D) Nano RP-LC ESI-OT-OT-MS/MS (HCD) HILIC-enriched and non-enriched (glyco)peptides were analyzed by reversed-phase nano RP-LC ESI-OT-OT-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a quadrupole linear ion trap-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific). Fragmentation spectra were generated using a Top 5 method with stepped NCE of 35 (width: 15%, steps: 2). Target ions selected for MS² were dynamically excluded using the following settings: exclusion size list (500), exclusion duration (5 s), repeat count (1), and repeat duration (30 s).

### Data Protocol
A) Raw data conversion The measured raw data-files have been converted into mzML format using msconvert included in ProteoWizard (Version 3.0.7408). B) FASTA files FASTA files for both proteins were downloaded from uniprot C) Glycan composition database A general database of N-glycan compositions was generated by parsing structures in GlycoCT format from glycomeDB (downloaded from http://www.glycome-db.org/getDownloadPage .action?page=structure_glycoct, date: 2015-12-16). To distinguish N-glycans from O-glycans, the presence of the trimannosyl core structure for N-glycans was required. Afterwards the remaining compositions have been manually assessed for plausibility. D) Analysis with glyXtoolMS glyXtoolMS version 0.1 was used for the analysis, using the TOPPAS workflows contained within this data set. Mass accuracies were set at 0.05 Da for oxonium ion detection , 10 ppm for glycopeptide precursor matching and 30 ppm for fragment ion annotation.

### Publication Abstract
For glycoproteomic analyses several web tools and standalone software packages have been developed over the recent years. These tools support or replace the time-consuming, cumbersome, and error-prone manual spectra analysis and glycopeptide identification. However, existing software tools are usually tailored to one fragmentation technique and only present the final analysis results. This makes manual inspection and correction of intermediate results difficult or even impossible. We solved this problem by dividing the analysis tasks into modular tools with defined functions, which are executed within a software pipeline with a graphical editor. This gives users a maximum of flexibility and control over the progress of analyses. Here, we present the open-source Python software suite glyXtool<sup>MS</sup>, developed for the semiautomated analysis of N- and O-glycopeptide fragmentation data. glyXtool<sup>MS</sup> is built around the pipeline engine of OpenMS (TOPPAS) and provides a glycopeptide analysis toolbox for the analysis, interpretation, and visualization of glycopeptide spectra. The toolbox encompasses (a) filtering of fragment spectra using a scoring scheme for oxonium ions, (b) in silico digest of protein sequences to collect glycopeptide candidates, (c) precursor matching to possible glycan compositions and peptide sequences, and finally, (d) an annotation tool for glycopeptide fragment ions. The resulting analysis file can be visualized by the glyXtool <sup>MS</sup> Evaluator, enabling further manual analysis, including inspection, verification, and various other options. Using higher-energy collisional dissociation data from human immunoglobulin &#x3b3; (IgG) and human fibrinogen tryptic digests, we show that glyXtool<sup>MS</sup> enables a fast, flexible, and transparent analysis of N- and O-glycopeptide samples, providing the user a versatile tool even for explorative data analysis. glyXtool<sup>MS</sup> is freely available online on https://github.com/glyXera/glyXtoolMS licensed under the GPL-3.0 open-source license. The test data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009716.

### Keywords
Human immunoglobulin gamma, Ltq orbitrap elite, Human fibrinogen, Glycosylation, Glyxtoolms

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems Magdeburg, 39106, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems

### Submitter
Markus Pioch

### Lab Head
Dr Erdmann Rapp
Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems Magdeburg, 39106, Germany


