### Accession
PXD034770

### Title
Proteomic profiling of canine (dog) serum and urine

### Description
Companion dog care market is annually increasing. A relationship with a dog who lives with humans gives a lot of psychological stability. Therefore, companion dog's health is important to the owner. It would be of great help if a non-invasive method could monitor health through bodily fluids (urine, serum). In addition to this, it is principal to discover and verify protein biomarkers that can detect the presence or absence of disease. Despite the growing application of proteomics in biomarker research using canine serum or urine, there is no spectral assay library publicly available. Here, we set up spectral assay libraries for canine serum and urine samples using 24 midpH-fractionated samples to enable deep proteome coverage. The canine serum assay library includes 4,749 protein groups and 25,228 peptides and urine assay library contains 1,132 protein groups and 5,483 peptides.

### Sample Protocol
1-1. Serum protein sample preparation. Serum samples (40L) were loaded onto a MARS14 column (100 × 4.6 mm; Agilent Technology, Palo Alto, CA, USA) on a Shimadzu binary HPLC system (20A Prominence; Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan) in order to deplete 14 highly abundant proteins; the unbound fraction was lyophilized with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps; Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA).  1-2. Urine sample preparation. One microliter of urine was lyophilized with a cold trap.   2. Peptide sample preparation. Dried samples were resuspended in 400 μL of 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB (pH 7.55), and dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 20 mM for 10 min at 95 °C to reduce disulfide bonds. Reduced samples were then incubated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. By a 10-fold dilution of 12% phosphoric acid, acidified samples were loaded onto S-Trap mini columns (ProtiFi, Farmingdale, NY, USA; Cat. No: CO2-mini-80). We treated suspension-trapping (S-trap) proteolysis according to the manufacturer’s protocol, followed by the addition of 10 μg Lys-C/trypsin mixture and incubation for 16 h at 37 °C. The eluted peptide mixture was lyophilized using a cold trap and stored at −80 °C until use. 3. Mid pH reverse-phase fractionation.  In a serum pooling peptide mixture, 50 g of 25 independent canine digested serum peptides were mixed. In a urine pooling peptide mixture, 250 g of four independent canine digested serum peptides were mixed. Serum or urine peptide mixture separation were performed on an XBridge C-18 column (4.6 mm i.d. × 250 mm length; pore size 130 Å and particle size 5 μm; Waters Corporation, USA), using a Shimadzu Prominence HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Japan) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min for 120 min. 10 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) in HPLC water as mobile phase A and 10 mM TEAB in 90% acetonitrile (pH 8.5) and 10% HPLC water as mobile phase B were used. The sample was dissolved in 200 μL of mobile phase A, then injected into a 2100 μL sample loop. A gradient of 5-5% B for 8 min, 5-40% B for min, 5-40% B for 57 min, 40-44% B for 5 min, 44-60% B for 4 min, 60-60% B for 14 min, 60-5% B for 2 min and 5-5% B for 30 min were applied. From 8 to 94.4 min, the eluents were collected in increments of 0.45 mL in a 96-well plate on an FRC-10A of the Shimadzu Prominence (Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan). The resulting 96 fractions were mixed in a concatenate manner to form 24 fractions. Each fraction was dried and stored at -80°C until use. 4. nanoLC-MS/MS.  Peptide separation was performed using the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The dried samples were reconstituted with 25 μL of 0.1% formic acid, and 5 μL were injected into a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm × 100 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated by an Acclaim™ Pepmap 100 C18 column (500 mm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) over 200 min (250 nl/min) using a 0–48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 150 min at 50°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an EASY-Spray nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan with 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Dynamic exclusion of repeated peptides was applied for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Software Spectronaut v14 (Biosynosis, Switzerland) was used with default settings to generate spectral libraries. The UniProt SwissProt and TrEMBL combined database (Canis lupus familiaris (Taxon ID 9615), downloaded on 01/10/2022, 113,977 entries containing both reviewed (838) and unreviewed (113,139) entries without isoforms) was used to build the spectral library. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at < 1% at peptide spectrum match, peptide, and protein levels. Spectral assay libraries were generated for dog serum and urine. In total, 24 data-dependent acquisition raw mass spectrometry data from two sample types were used to generate one combined spectral assay library.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Spectrum library, Canis lupus familiaris, Lc-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


