### Accession
PXD010533

### Title
Post-thaw restoration of differentiation and function in cryopreserved human hepatocytesPost-thaw restoration of differentiation and function in cryopreserved human hepatocytes

### Description
Isolated human hepatocytes are used in all facets of liver research, from the clinical management of liver failure to in vitro studies of drug disposition. Cryopreservation provides a reliable source of hepatocytes, but the associated cellular stress causes a highly variable and heterogeneous loss of a differentiated phenotype, manifested by a decreased ability to form cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions. We reasoned that this problem could be mitigated at the post-thawing stage, which would increase the availability of well-functioning human hepatocytes. We applied quantitative global proteomics to analyze the differences between attached and non-attached fractions of cryopreserved human hepatocyte batches. Hepatocytes that were unable to attach to a collagen matrix showed many signs of cellular stress, including a glycolytic phenotype and activation of the heat shock response, with increased apoptosis activation as the ultimate consequence. Further analysis of the activated stress pathways revealed an increase in early apoptosis immediately after thawing, hinting at the possibility of stress reversal. Therefore, we transiently treated the cells with compounds aimed at decreasing cellular stress via different mechanisms. We found that brief exposure to the pan-caspase apoptosis inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK restored the ability to attach to collagen, and promoted a differentiated morphology with increased metabolic function. Further, Z-VAD-FMK treatment did not alter hepatocyte protein expression, suggesting that these ‘rescued’ cells would be suitable for applications where hepatocytes of high quality are required. Conclusion: Cryopreserved human hepatocytes are affected by considerable amounts of cellular stress, often resulting in loss of differentiation with a decreased ability to form cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions. This can be alleviated by brief apoptosis inhibition post-thawing, substantially improving key morphological and functional properties of these cells.  

### Sample Protocol
SDS based protein extraction. MED-FASP sample processing with LysC and trypsin

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant with andromeda search engine. Total protein approach global protein qunatification

### Publication Abstract
Primary human hepatocytes are used in all facets of liver research, from in vitro studies of xenobiotic disposition and toxicity to the clinical management of liver failure. Unfortunately, cellular stress during isolation and cryopreservation causes a highly unpredictable loss of the ability to attach and form cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions. Reasoning that this problem could be mitigated at the post-thawing stage, we applied label-free quantitative global proteomics to analyze differences between attached and non-attached fractions of cryopreserved human hepatocyte batches. Hepatocytes that were unable to attach to a collagen matrix showed many signs of cellular stress, including a glycolytic phenotype and activation of the heat shock response, ultimately leading to apoptosis activation. Further analysis of the activated stress pathways revealed an increase in early apoptosis immediately post-thawing, which suggested the possibility of stress reversal. Therefore, we transiently treated the cells with compounds aimed at decreasing cellular stress via different mechanisms. Brief exposure to the pan-caspase apoptosis inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK restored attachment ability and promoted a differentiated morphology, as well as formation of 3D spheroids. Further, Z-VAD-FMK treatment restored metabolic and transport functions, with maintained sensitivity to hepatotoxic insults. Altogether, this study shows that differentiation and function of suboptimal human hepatocytes can be restored after cryopreservation, thus markedly increasing the availability of these precious cells.

### Keywords
Human hepatocyte, Cryopreservation, Attachement

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R. Wisniewski
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried


