### Accession
PXD007156

### Title
Identification of Long Lived Synaptic Proteins by Comprehensive Proteomic Analysis of Synaptosome Protein Turnover

### Description
Memory formation is believed result from changes in synapse strength and structure. While memories may persist for the lifetime of an organism, the proteins and lipids that make up synapses undergo constant turnover with lifetimes from minutes to days. The molecular basis for memory maintenance may rely on a subset of long-lived proteins (LLPs). While it is known that LLPs exist, whether such proteins are present at synapses is unknown. We performed an unbiased screen using metabolic pulse-chase labeling in mice and cultured neurons combined with quantitative proteomics and identified synaptic LLPs with half-lives of several weeks or longer. Synaptic proteins generally exhibited longer lifetimes than cytosolic proteins. Protein turnover was sensitive to pharmacological manipulations of activity in neuronal cultures or in mice exposed to an enriched environment. We show that synapses contain LLPs and that global synapse protein turnover is modulated by neuronal activity and behavioral experience.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation of SILAM mouse synaptosomes and cytosol fractions for mass spectrometry analysis Synaptosomes pellets and cytosol fractions from EE- and control environment-exposed mice brains were further processed using the Filter Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) method as described earlier (Kim et al., 2014). Briefly, synaptosome pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.6 and 100 mM DTT) and heated for 10 minutes at 95°C, kept on ice followed by sonication (Bransons, USA) for 30 seconds for 3 cycles and heated for another five minutes at 95°C to ensure complete solubility. Protein lysate was centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes and the clear lysates were subjected to FASP method. SDS and DTT were removed by exchanging the buffer with 9 M urea and 20 mM trimethylamine bicarbonate (TEAB) using 30 kDa cut-off filters (EMD Millipore, USA) and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 10 minutes. This procedure was repeated two more times. Protein quantification was carried out using bicinnachoninic acid assay (BCA). Four hundred µg of protein was taken from each sample for mass spectrometry analysis. Protein was alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated in the dark for 20 minutes followed by buffer exchange with 9 M urea and 20 mM TEAB two times and with 20 mM TEAB for additional two rounds. The retenate was collected from the filters for the digestion using Lys-C. Twenty µg of Lys-C was added to each sample and incubated at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and the eluted peptides were lyophilized. The peptides were fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) on an Agilent 1100 offline HPLC system which consists of a binary pump, VWD detector and a fraction collector. The VWD detector was operated at 280 nm. The pooled peptide digests were dissolved in solvent A (10 mM TEAB) for bRPLC and fractionated by applying a linear gradient of 5% to 60% solvent B (10 mM TEAB in 90% acetonitrile (ACN)) at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min on an Xbridge bRPLC column (Xbridge, C18, 5 μm 250 x 4.6 mm. Waters, Milford, MA) over 60 min. The peptides were fractionated into 96 fractions followed by concatenation to 12 fractions.  Sample preparation of SILAC primary neuronal cells for mass spectrometry analysis Rat primary neuronal cell were cultured as described above. The protein lysate was prepared by adding lysis buffer (2% SDS in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.0) followed by heating at 95oC for 10 minutes and then subjected to sonication (Bransons, USA) for 30 seconds in each cycle. The protein lysate was cleared by centrifuging at 17,000 x g for 10 minutes. The protein amount was quantified by BCA. Sixty µg of protein was taken for mass spectrometry analysis. The protein lysate was reduced by adding 5 mM DTT and incubated at 56°C for 45 minutes. Samples were allowed to reach room temperature and alkylated by adding 20 mM IAA and incubating in the dark for 20 minutes. Samples were subjected to acetone precipitation by adding four volumes ice-cold acetone, vortexed for 30 seconds and kept in -20oC overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The acetone was removed and 80% acetone was added, vortexed for 30 seconds and centrifuged at 17,000 g for 15 minutes. Acetone was removed and the protein was air dried. Further, protein pellet was reconstituted in 6 M urea and 50 mM TEAB. Trypsin digestion was carried out by adding 1:20 of enzyme to substrate ratio and incubated at 37°C overnight. Trypsin was inactivated by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the final concentration and centrifuged at 17,000 x g at room temperature for 10 minutes. The prepared peptides were fractionated using StageTip-based SCX fractionation as described by Kulak et al (Kulak et al., 2014). Briefly, a SCX StageTip was prepared by using 20 mm syringe plunger from SCX disc (3M Empore, 2251, USA). Three layers were packed in 200 µl pipette tip. The SCX stage tip was activated with ACN and washed with 0.2% TFA. After sample loading, the peptides were fractionated by eluting with 6 different elution buffers; 50 mM ammonium formate (AF) / 20% (v/v) ACN / 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA), 75 mM AF / 20% (v/v) ACN / 0.5% (v/v) FA, 125 mM AF / 20% (v/v) ACN / 0.5% (v/v) FA, 200 mM AF / 20% (v/v) ACN / 0.5% (v/v) FA, 300 mM AF / 20% (v/v) ACN / 0.5% (v/v) FA and 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide / 80% (v/v) ACN. The eluted fractions were dried in a SpeedVac and stored in -80°C deep freezer until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 software suite was used for identification and quantitation (Cox and Mann, 2008). The tandem mass spectrometry data were searched using Andromeda search algorithms against a RefSeq protein database (version 78 for mouse, version 79 for rat) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. The search parameters used were as follows: a) Lys-C and trypsin as proteolytic enzymes for mouse and neuronal cell cultures, respectively; b) two missed cleavages; c) 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm of peptide mass error tolerances for first search and second search, respectively; d) fragment mass error tolerance of 20 ppm; e) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) as variable modifications; f) minimum of 6 amino acids per a peptides; g) . Peptides and proteins were filtered at 1% false discovery rate. Match between runs and second peptides options were enabled. Quantification of SILAC pairs was performed with standard settings using a minimum ratio count of 2.

### Publication Abstract
Memory formation is believed to result from changes in synapse strength and structure. While memories may persist for the lifetime of an organism, the proteins and lipids that make up synapses undergo constant turnover with lifetimes from minutes to days. The molecular basis for memory maintenance may rely on a subset of long-lived proteins (LLPs). While it is known that LLPs exist, whether such proteins are present at synapses is unknown. We performed an unbiased screen using metabolic pulse-chase labeling in vivo in mice and in vitro in cultured neurons combined with quantitative proteomics. We identified synaptic LLPs with half-lives of several months or longer. Proteins in synaptic fractions generally exhibited longer lifetimes than proteins in cytosolic fractions. Protein turnover was sensitive to pharmacological manipulations of activity in neuronal cultures or in mice exposed to an enriched environment. We show that synapses contain LLPs that may underlie stabile long-lasting changes in synaptic structure and function.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Long lived protein, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine USA
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
chanhyun na

### Lab Head
Dr Richard L. Huganir
The Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine USA


