### Accession
PXD015170

### Title
The GID Ubiquitin Ligase Complex is a Regulator of AMPK Activity and Organismal Lifespan

### Description
The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) regulates cellular energy homeostasis by sensing the metabolic status of the cell. AMPK is regulated by phosphorylation and dephosphorylation as a result of changing AMP/ATP levels and by removal of inhibitory ubiquitin residues by USP10. In this context, we identified the GID-complex, an evolutionarily conserved ubiquitin-ligasecomplex (E3), as a negative regulator of AMPK activity. Our data show that the GID-complex targets AMPK for ubiquitination thereby altering its activity. Cells depleted of GID-subunits mimic a state of starvation as shown by increased AMPK activity and autophagic flux as well as reduced MTOR activation. Consistently, gid-genes knockdown in C. elegans results in increased organismal lifespan. This study may contribute to understand metabolic disorders such as type 2 diabetes mellitus and morbid obesity and implements alternative therapeutic approaches to alter AMPK activity.

### Sample Protocol
Following cell lysis, samples were spun down at 10000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Protein concentration was assessed using the Biodrop μLite (Serva, 80-3006-51.01) as per manufacturers instructions (using BSA as standard) and 20 μg of protein from each sample was pipetted into a fresh Protein LoBind microcentrifuge tube (Eppendorf, 0030108116). Samples were further centrifuged at 16 000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove excess DNA and supernatant removed to a fresh tube. Each sample underwent acetone precipitation to remove salts and residual nucleic acids (briefly with the addition of 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone and left at -20°C overnight, samples spun at 16 000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and carefully remove supernatant, and allowing pellet to air-dry). The pellet was subsequently resuspended in 40 μl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Each sample was reduced and alkylated (10 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C and 55 mM IAA for 20 min at room temperature in the dark) before being digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight in an air circulated incubator. Finally, peptides were cleaned and concentrated using Pierce Peptide Desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher, 89851) as per manufacturers instructions, dried down in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid (FA). Approximately 1 μg of desalted peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, 176016000) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7μm, 75μm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IQLAAEGAAPFADBMBHQ) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μL/ min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μL/ min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 25% in 30 min, then increased to 32% in 5 more minutes and finally to 50% in a further 0.1 min. Total runtime was 60 min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The RF lens was set to 30%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 103) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the ion trap, with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed but with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors meeting the criteria were found. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 103 ions or after filling time of 300 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode, with the Rapid scan rate and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 60 s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. Additionally only 1 data dependent scan was performed per precursor (only the most intense charge state selected). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. In order to improve the mass accuracy, a lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.1 were employed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using the Andromeda search engine build into MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28). The data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database (Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01) together with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.5 Da. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a targetdecoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ampk; autophagy; gid; longevity; mtor; primary cilium; ubiquitination

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena Germany


