### Accession
PXD036040

### Title
Recognition of DNA damage lesions across the tree of life

### Description
Protecting the integrity of their genome is critical to all species. The surveillance and maintenance of the genome of every organism is orchestrated by a highly regulated combination of DNA damage response and specific DNA repair pathways. Two of these critical pathways are base excision repair (BER) and ribonucleotide excision repair (RER). Here, we investigate the phylogenetic diversity in the recognition and repair of three well-established DNA lesions, primarily repaired by BER or RER: 1) 8-oxoguanine, 2) an abasic site, and 3) incorporated ribonucleotide in DNA in E. coli, B. subtilis, H. salinarum, T. brucei, T. thermophila, S. cerevisiae, S. pombe, C. elegans, human HeLa and HEK293 cells, A. thaliana, and Z. mays. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified 337 enriched interactors across these species. Of these proteins, 140 were previously characterized to be involved in DNA repair, and 39 proteins were newly identified due to their homology to previously studied repair proteins. For 10 of the 11 species, we identify unique, uncharacterized proteins that lack homology to any protein within the included 11 species. Our study emphasizes strong crosstalk between RER and BER and highlights the evolutionary conservation of this cross recognition across all domains of life.

### Sample Protocol
LDS supernatant was loaded on a 4-10% NuPage NOVEX PAGE gel (Thermo) and run for 10 min at 180V. Samples were processed as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). In short, gel pieces were cut, destained with 50% EtOH / 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and dehydrated with acetonitrile (VWR), reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma) and alkylated using iodoacetamide (Sigma) and subsequently again dehydrated with acetonitrile (VWR) and digested with 1 μg of MS-grade trypsin (Sigma) at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were eluted from the gel pieces and loaded onto a StageTip (19) and stored at 4 °C until measurement.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (Version 1.6.5.0) was used to search and quantify the raw mass spectrometry files, for each species individually. Oxidation and Acetylation were set as variable modifications, Carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. LFQ was used to calculate and normalize intensities, without activating fast LFQ. The minimum ratio count used was 2. Match between runs was used to match within each lesion (control, abasic, 8-oxoG, RNA base), with a match time window of 0.7 min, match ion mobility window of 0.05, an alignment time window of 20 min, and alignment ion mobility of 1. Matching of unidentified features was deactivated. For protein quantification we used label minimum ratio count 2, and unique + razor peptides for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Genome maintenance is orchestrated by a highly regulated DNA damage response with specific DNA repair pathways. Here, we investigate the phylogenetic diversity in the recognition and repair of three well-established DNA lesions, primarily repaired by base excision repair (BER) and ribonucleotide excision repair (RER): (1) 8-oxoguanine, (2) abasic site, and (3) incorporated ribonucleotide in DNA in 11 species: <i>Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Halobacterium salinarum, Trypanosoma brucei, Tetrahymena thermophila, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Caenorhabditis elegans, Homo sapiens, Arabidopsis thaliana,</i> and <i>Zea mays.</i> Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified 337 binding proteins across these species. Of these proteins, 99 were previously characterized to be involved in DNA repair. Through orthology, network, and domain analysis, we linked 44 previously unconnected proteins to DNA repair. Our study presents a resource for future study of the crosstalk and evolutionary conservation of DNA damage repair across all domains of life.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


