### Accession
PXD039533

### Title
Systemic deletion of DMD exon 51 rescues clinically severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy in a pig model lacking DMD exon 52

### Description
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a fatal X-linked disease caused by mutations in the dystrophin (DMD) gene, leading to the complete absence of DMD and progressive degeneration of skeletal and heart muscles. Expression of an internally shortened dystrophin in DMD subjects (DMDΔ52) can be achieved by skipping DMD exon 51 to reframe the transcript. To predict the best possible outcome of this therapeutic strategy, we generated transgenic pigs lacking DMD exon 51 and 52, additionally representing a new model for Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). To inspect the proteome alterations caused by the different dystrophin mutations in an unbiased and comprehensive manner, we performed a label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) of myocardial and skeletal muscle samples from wild-type (WT), DMDΔ52 and DMDΔ51-52 pigs.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples of skeletal muscle (triceps brachii) and myocardium (left ventricular wall) were placed into pre-cooled tubes and cryo-pulverized in a Covaris CP02 Automated Dry Pulverizer (Covaris) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Powdered tissues were lysed in 8 M urea/0.5 M NH4HCO3 with the aid of ultrasonication (18 cycles of 10 s) using a Sonopuls HD3200 (Bandelin). Protein concentration was measured using a Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues, 20 μg of protein was digested sequentially firstly with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals Europe GmbH) for 4 h and subsequently with modified porcine trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37 °C. 1 μg of the digest was injected on an UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, peptides were transferred to a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) at 250 nL/min flow-rate with a 160-min gradient of 3-25% of solvent B followed by 10-min rise to 40% and 5-min rise to 85%. Solvents A and B consisted of 0.1% FA in water and acetonitrile, respectively. MS spectra were acquired using one full scan and 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing was carried out using MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) and its built-in search engine Andromeda. For all searches, the NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa database (downloaded in October 2022) alongside the MaxQuant contaminants fasta file was used. The MaxLFQ approach was used for protein intensity normalization. All statistical analyses and visualization were done using Perseus or the R framework with custom scripts (https://github.com/bshashikadze/BMD-proteomics). Proteins with valid values in at least 3 samples of at least one condition were considered for statistical analysis. To handle missing values the left-censored missing value imputation strategy with random numbers drawn from a normal distribution having a 1.8 standard deviation down shift and a width of 0.3 of each sample was employed. Volcano plots for dual comparisons were generated using a two-tailed Student’s t-test and permutation-based false-discovery rate cut-off of 0.05, alongside an s0-parameter of 0.1. Comparisons between multiple conditions were performed using a one-way analysis of variance. Non-parametric permutation-based false-discovery rate correction was employed to account for multiple testing issue. To determine exact pair-wise differences, Tukey’s HSD (honestly significant difference) post-hoc test was used.

### Publication Abstract
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a fatal X-linked disease caused by mutations in the <i>DMD</i> gene, leading to complete absence of dystrophin and progressive degeneration of skeletal musculature and myocardium. In DMD patients and in a corresponding pig model with a deletion of <i>DMD</i> exon 52 (<i>DMD</i>&#x394;52), expression of an internally shortened dystrophin can be achieved by skipping of <i>DMD</i> exon 51 to reframe the transcript. To predict the best possible outcome of this strategy, we generated <i>DMD</i>&#x394;51-52 pigs, additionally representing a model for Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). <i>DMD</i>&#x394;51-52 skeletal muscle and myocardium samples stained positive for dystrophin and did not show the characteristic dystrophic alterations observed in <i>DMD</i>&#x394;52 pigs. Western blot analysis confirmed the presence of dystrophin in the skeletal muscle and myocardium of <i>DMD</i>&#x394;51-52 pigs and its absence in <i>DMD</i>&#x394;52 pigs. The proteome profile of skeletal muscle, which showed a large number of abundance alterations in <i>DMD</i>&#x394;52 vs. wild-type (WT) samples, was normalized in <i>DMD</i>&#x394;51-52 samples. Cardiac function at age 3.5 mo was significantly reduced in <i>DMD</i>&#x394;52 pigs (mean left ventricular ejection fraction 58.8% vs. 70.3% in WT) but completely rescued in <i>DMD</i>&#x394;51-52 pigs (72.3%), in line with normalization of the myocardial proteome profile. Our findings indicate that ubiquitous deletion of <i>DMD</i> exon 51 in <i>DMD</i>&#x394;52 pigs largely rescues the rapidly progressing, severe muscular dystrophy and the reduced cardiac function of this model. Long-term follow-up studies of <i>DMD</i>&#x394;51-52 pigs will show if they develop symptoms of the milder BMD.

### Keywords
Becker muscular dystrophy, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Proteomics, Pig model

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis, Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Bachuki Shashikadze

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis, Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany


