### Accession
PXD008515

### Title
Systematic analysis of protein turnover in primary cells - Part II

### Description
To better understand proteostasis in health and disease, determination of protein half-lives is essential. We improved the precision and accuracy of peptide-ion intensity based quantification in order to enable accurate determination of protein turnover in non-dividing cells using dynamic-SILAC. This enabled precise and accurate protein half-life determination ranging from 10 to more than 1000 hours. We achieve good proteomic coverage ranging from four to six thousand proteins in several types of non-dividing cells, corresponding to a total of 9699 unique proteins over the entire dataset. Good agreement was observed in half-lives between B-cells, natural killer cells and monocytes, while hepatocytes and mouse embryonic neurons showed substantial differences.  Our comprehensive dataset enabled extension and statistical validation of the previous observation that subunits of protein complexes tend to have coherent turnover. Furthermore, we observed complex architecture dependent turnover within complexes of the proteasome and the nuclear pore complex. Our method is broadly applicable and might be used to investigate protein turnover in various cell types.

### Sample Protocol
Primary human Natural Kill (NK) cells isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells PBMCs derived from buffy coats by magnetic-bead based negative selection, were adapted to the light (L) SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) medium overnight at 37°C. Cells were then pulse-labeled with heavy (H) isotope-labeled amino acids and arginine for the different time periods (see paper), washed, pelleted, and snap-frozen in liquid N2. Cell pellets were lysed in buffer containing 4% SDS and digested with benzonase. Samples were dried in vacuo and resuspended in 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water. Of the sample, 50 % was injected into an Ultimate3000 nanoRLSC coupled to a Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a 5 mm x 300 um C18 column (Pepmap100, 5um, 300  Thermo Fisher Scientific) in water with 0.05 % TFA at 60C. Separation was performed on custom 50 cm 100 ?M (ID) reversed-phase columns (Reprosil) at 55C. Gradient elution was performed from 2% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 3.5 % DMSO over two hours. Samples were online injected into Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometers operating with a data-dependent top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired using 70 000 resolution and an ion target of 3x106. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) scans were performed with 25% NCE at 17 500 resolution (at m/z 200), and the ion target setting was fixed at 1x106. The instruments were operated with Tune 2.3 and Xcalibur 3.0.63

### Data Protocol
All acquired, raw data were processed using a modified version of isobarQuant available from the Github code repository https://github.com/protcode/isob/archive/1.1.0.zip: further information about which can be found is described in the paper / supplemental information). The configuration (cfg) files were set up for SILAC and processed as described hereafter. The QuantMethod.cfg file was provided with a new quantification method for SILAC (silac3).  This method contains the mass information for LIGHT (K+0, R+0), MEDIUM (K+13C6, R+13C6) and HEAVY (K+13C6+15N2, R+13C6+15N4) SILAC modifications on lysine and arginine. The quantification source was set to MS1 and the number of threads in which to run the software was set according to the number of processors on the workstation

### Publication Abstract
A better understanding of proteostasis in health and disease requires robust methods to determine protein half-lives. Here we improve the precision and accuracy of peptide ion intensity-based quantification, enabling more accurate protein turnover determination in non-dividing cells by dynamic SILAC-based proteomics. This approach allows exact determination of protein half-lives ranging from 10 to &gt;1000&#x2009;h. We identified 4000-6000 proteins in several non-dividing cell types, corresponding to 9699 unique protein identifications over the entire data set. We observed similar protein half-lives in B-cells, natural killer cells and monocytes, whereas hepatocytes and mouse embryonic neurons show substantial differences. Our data set extends and statistically validates the previous observation that subunits of protein complexes tend to have coherent turnover. Moreover, analysis of different proteasome and nuclear pore complex assemblies suggests that their turnover rate is architecture dependent. These results illustrate that our approach allows investigating protein turnover and its implications in various cell types.

### Keywords
Silac, Protein half lives, Isobarquant, Primary nk cells

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


