### Accession
PXD039168

### Title
Enzyme replacement therapy for Fabry disease: possible strate-gies to improve its efficacy

### Description
Enzyme Replacement Therapy is the only therapeutic option for Fabry patients with completely absent AGAL activity. However, it has many limitations, in terms of costs, high rh-protein re-quired, and side effects; thus, its optimization would be beneficial for patients. In this paper, we describe preliminary results paving the way for two possible approaches: i. combination of en-zyme replacement therapy with pharmacological chaperones; ii. identification of approved drugs that affect the AGAL interactors' expression. We show that galactose, a low-affinity phar-macological chaperone, can prolong rh-AGAL half-life in FD cells. We compared the wild-type AGAL and the rh-AGAL interactomes and identified a list of drugs known to affect them. This list represents a starting point to deeply screen approved drugs and identify those that can bene-fit the enzyme replacement therapy and those that can negatively interfere with it.

### Sample Protocol
Immortalized patient-derived fibroblasts (IF) incubated for 6hours with3µg/mLReplagal® (Shire Human Genetic Therapies, Inc.) or Fabrazyme® (Genzyme Corp.), and IF cells sta-bly transfected with wt-GLA (IF-GLA, [28]), were lysed in 50mM Tris HCl pH6.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 2.5mM KCl and cocktail of protease inhibitors (Roche). Protein extracts were quantified by Bradford assays (Biorad), pre-cleared by incubation with Dynabeads Protein-G (Thermo), and immunoprecipitated by using a specific rabbit poly-clonal antibody anti-hAGAL. Proteins were eluted in Glycine pH2.5and fractionated by SDS-PAGE. The whole lanes were cut in 96 bands and in situ digested with trypsin. The obtained mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, using a system LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a nano-Easy II HPLC. Peptide analysis was performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) of one MS scan (mass range from 400 to 1800 m/z) followed by MS/MS scans of the five most abundant ions in each MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were carried out by using the MASCOT software (Matrix Science Boston, USA) by setting the parameters as reported in doi:10.3389/fmolb.2022.975570. Proteins identified in all sets of samples were clusteredaccording to their biological functions as reported in the literature and UniProtschedules

### Publication Abstract
Enzyme replacement therapy is the only therapeutic option for Fabry patients with completely absent AGAL activity. However, the treatment has side effects, is costly, and requires conspicuous amounts of recombinant human protein (rh-AGAL). Thus, its optimization would benefit patients and welfare/health services (i.e., society at large). In this brief report, we describe preliminary results paving the way for two possible approaches: i. the combination of enzyme replacement therapy with pharmacological chaperones; and ii. the identification of AGAL interactors as possible therapeutic targets on which to act. We first showed that galactose, a low-affinity pharmacological chaperone, can prolong AGAL half-life in patient-derived cells treated with rh-AGAL. Then, we analyzed the interactomes of intracellular AGAL on patient-derived AGAL-defective fibroblasts treated with the two rh-AGALs approved for therapeutic purposes and compared the obtained interactomes to the one associated with endogenously produced AGAL (data available as PXD039168 on ProteomeXchange). Common interactors were aggregated and screened for sensitivity to known drugs. Such an interactor-drug list represents a starting point to deeply screen approved drugs and identify those that can affect (positively or negatively) enzyme replacement therapy.

### Keywords
Fabry disease; drug repositioning; interactome; gla; fabrazyme; replagal.

### Affiliations
University of Naples "Federico II"
University of Naples Federico II

### Submitter
Flora Cozzolino

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.ssa Maria Monti
University of Naples Federico II


