### Accession
PXD006344

### Title
Trichuris secretome - proteome data analysis 

### Description
We analysed the excretory/secretory (ES) products and the exosomes secreted by the nematode Trichuris muris. Two batches of ES and Optiprep fractions of exosomes were analysed using a 5600+ mass spectrometer

### Sample Protocol
ES products were reduced, alkylated nd trypsin digested. Exosomes were isolated by ultracentrifugation and further purified using Optiprep gradient. A 5600+ mass spectrometer was used for the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Wiff files were converted to mgf using msconvert and searched using searchGUI and PeptideShaker.

### Publication Abstract
Whipworms are parasitic nematodes that live in the gut of more than 500 million people worldwide. Owing to the difficulty in obtaining parasite material, the mouse whipworm <i>Trichuris muris</i> has been extensively used as a model to study human whipworm infections. These nematodes secrete a multitude of compounds that interact with host tissues where they orchestrate a parasitic existence. Herein we provide the first comprehensive characterization of the excretory/secretory products of <i>T. muris</i>. We identify 148 proteins secreted by <i>T. muris</i> and show for the first time that the mouse whipworm secretes exosome-like extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can interact with host cells. We use an Optiprep&#xae; gradient to purify the EVs, highlighting the suitability of this method for purifying EVs secreted by a parasitic nematode. We also characterize the proteomic and genomic content of the EVs, identifying &gt;350 proteins, 56 miRNAs (22 novel) and 475 full-length mRNA transcripts mapping to <i>T. muris</i> gene models. Many of the miRNAs putatively mapped to mouse genes are involved in regulation of inflammation, implying a role in parasite-driven immunomodulation. In addition, for the first time to our knowledge, colonic organoids have been used to demonstrate the internalization of parasite EVs by host cells. Understanding how parasites interact with their host is crucial to develop new control measures. This first characterization of the proteins and EVs secreted by <i>T. muris</i> provides important information on whipworm-host communication and forms the basis for future studies.

### Keywords
Proteome, Secretome, Trichuris muris, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Australian Institute of Tropical health and Medicine, James Cook University
James Cook University

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Loukas
Australian Institute of Tropical health and Medicine, James Cook University


