### Accession
PXD002378

### Title
Quantitative cross-linking analysis of chemoresistant HeLa cells

### Description
Chemoresistance is a common mode of therapy failure for many cancers.  Tumors develop resistance to chemotherapeutics through a variety of mechanisms, with proteins serving pivotal roles.  Changes in protein conformations and interactions affect the cellular response to environmental conditions contributing to the development of new phenotypes. The ability to understand how protein interaction networks adapt to yield new function or alter phenotype is limited by the inability to determine structural and protein interaction changes on a proteomic scale.  In this project we combine SILAC with PIR cross-linking technology to generate a quantitative protein interaction map of drug senstive and drug resistant HeLa cells.

### Sample Protocol
Intact drug sensitve and resitant HeLa cells cultured in SILAC media were harvested and subjected to in vivo cross-linking with with a protein interaction reporter (PIR) cross-linker.  Cells were lysed and protein extracted, reduced with TCEP alkylated with IAA and digested with trypsin.  Peptides were fractionated by SCX followed by avidin affinity chromatography.  Enriched cross-linked peptide samples were analyzed on a Velos-FTICR mass spectrometer (Thermo) using real-time adaptive MS3 method (ReACT, Weisbrod et al. JPR 2013).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzXML with tools in the TPP.  MS3 spectra in the mzXML files were searched against a human protein database from UniProt using Sequest.  Resulting peptide ID's from the Sequest search were mapped back to PIR mass relationships identified in the MS2 spectra to fully identify cross-linked peptides.  SILAC quantitative analysis on the MS1 spectra  was performed using MassChroQ.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoresistance is a common mode of therapy failure for many cancers. Tumours develop resistance to chemotherapeutics through a variety of mechanisms, with proteins serving pivotal roles. Changes in protein conformations and interactions affect the cellular response to environmental conditions contributing to the development of new phenotypes. The ability to understand how protein interaction networks adapt to yield new function or alter phenotype is limited by the inability to determine structural and protein interaction changes on a proteomic scale. Here, chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry were employed to quantify changes in protein structures and interactions in multidrug-resistant human carcinoma cells. Quantitative analysis of the largest crosslinking-derived, protein interaction network comprising 1,391 crosslinked peptides allows for 'edgotype' analysis in a cell model of chemoresistance. We detect consistent changes to protein interactions and structures, including those involving cytokeratins, topoisomerase-2-alpha, and post-translationally modified histones, which correlate with a chemoresistant phenotype.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking, Multidrug resistant cancer, Mass spectrometry, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Juan Chavez

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington


