### Accession
PXD048056

### Title
Monocarboxylate transporters facilitate succinate uptake into brown adipocytes

### Description
Uptake of circulating succinate by brown adipose tissue (BAT) and beige fat elevates whole-body energy expenditure, counteracts obesity, and antagonizes systemic tissue inflammation in mice. The plasma membrane transporters that facilitate succinate uptake in these adipocytes remain undefined. Here we elucidate a mechanism underlying succinate import into BAT via monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs). We show that succinate transport is strongly dependent on the proportion of it present in the monocarboxylate form. MCTs facilitate monocarboxylate succinate uptake, which is promoted by alkalinization of the cytosol driven by adrenoreceptor stimulation. In brown adipocytes, we show that MCT1 primarily facilitates succinate import. In mice, we show that both acute pharmacological inhibition of MCT1 and congenital depletion of MCT1, decrease succinate uptake into BAT and consequent catabolism. In sum, we define a mechanism of succinate uptake in BAT that underlies its protective activity in mouse models of metabolic disease.

### Sample Protocol
BAT samples were lysed in the lysis buffer (100 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 2% SDS, 1p/15 mL Roche cOmpleteTM protease inhibitors) to 1 mg/mL protein based on BCA assay results. Disulfides were reduction with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37 oC for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 25 min at room temperature in the dark. Protein precipitation was performed by the methanol-chloroform method 34, and proteins were digested resuspended in 200 mM N-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-(3-propanesulfonic acid) (EPPS) buffer pH=8, using a combination of Lys-C and trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100 overnight at 37 °C, followed by an additional 4 h digestion with trypsin 1:100. Samples were then subjected to a microBCA measurement for peptide quantification, and 25 μg peptides from each sample were labeled by TMTpro-16 reagents 35 for 1 h at room temperature following the streamlined-TMT protocol 36. The reaction was quenched using 2 μl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. A ratio-check was performed by mixing 2 μL of peptides from each channel, desalted via StageTip, and analyzed by LC-MS. Samples were combined according to the ratio check to ensure equal loading of proteins from each sample, then desalted with Waters SepPak cartridges and dried. Peptide were fractionated using high-pH HPLC. Each fraction was then desalted via StageTip, dried in a speedvac, and reconstituted in a solution containing 5% ACN and 5% FA for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). 2 μg of peptides were loaded onto an in-house 100-μm capillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm,150 Å). An Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo) and FAIMSPro (Thermo) were used for protein measurements. Peptides were separated using a 180-min gradient consisting of 2% - 23% ACN, 0.125% FA at 500 nl/min flow rate. Field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separation of precursors 37 were carried out with default settings and multiple compensation voltages (-40V/-60V/-80V). Peptide ions were collected in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 400-1600 using 2 s cycles and 120,000 resolution. Singly-charged ions were discarded, and multiply-charged ions were selected and subjected to fragmentation with standard automatic gain control (AGC) and 35% normalized collisional energy (NCE) for MS2, with a dynamic exclusion window of 120 s and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. Quantification of TMT reporter ion were performed using the multinotch SPS-MS3 method 38 with 45% NCE for MS3.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using the Comet algorithm 39 on Masspike reported previously 40.  Database searching included all mouse (Mus musculus) entries from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org, downloaded July 29th, 2020) and the reversed sequences as well as common contaminants (keratins, trypsin, etc). Peptides were searched using the following parameters: 25 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully tryptic digestion; up to three missed cleavages; variable modification: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949); static modifications: TMTpro (+304.2071) on lysine and peptide N terminus, carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0214637236) on cysteines. The target-decoy method was used for false discovery rate (FDR) control 40-42. FDR was < 1% on peptide level for each MS run and peptides that are shorter than seven amino acids were not used. Proteins were assembled to <1% protein-level FDR. TMT reporter ions were used for quantification of peptide abundance. Peptides with summed signal-to-noise (S/N) lower than 160 across 16 channels or isolation specificity lower than 70% were discarded. Normalization was performed to ensure equal protein loadings in every sample. Proteins were quantified by summing peptide TMT S/N.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermogenesis, Bat, Succinate, Mct1, Brown adipose tissue

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA 2 Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Chouchani
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA 2 Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


