### Accession
PXD004196

### Title
RBPJ/CBF1 interacts with L3MBTL3/MBT1 to promote repression of Notch signaling via histone demethylase KDM1A/LSD1

### Description
Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathway that is essential for metazoan development. At the molecular level, the key components of the Notch pathway are the NOTCH-family receptors, the ligands of the DSL (Delta, Serrate, Lag-2) family and the transcription factor CSL [CBF1/RBPJ, Su(H), Lag-1]. Upon ligand binding, the NOTCH Intra-Cellular Domain (NOTCH ICD) translocates into the nucleus and forms a complex with RBPJ to activate the transcription of target genes. In the absence of NOTCH ICD, RBPJ acts as a transcriptional repressor. Using a proteomic approach, we identified L3MBTL3 as a novel interactor of RBPJ. We discovered that L3MBTL3 competes with NOTCH ICD for binding to RBPJ. In the absence of NOTCH ICD, RBPJ recruits L3MBTL3 and its co-factor KDM1A [lysine (K)-specific demethylase 1A] to the promoters/enhancers of Notch target genes to promote H3K4me2 demethylation and transcriptional repression. In three distinct cell contexts in which Notch signaling governs cell fate, i.e., mature T-cells as well as brain and breast tumor cells, the loss of L3MBTL3 results in the de-repression of Notch target genes. Finally, the genetic analyses of the homologs of RBPJ and L3MBTL3 in Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans demonstrate that the functional link between RBPJ/Su(H)/lag-1 and L3MBTL3/dL(3)mbt/lin-61 is evolutionarily conserved, thus identifying L3MBTL3 as a universal modulator of Notch signaling in metazoans.

### Sample Protocol
U87-MG cells transfected with pcDNA3-HA-DEST encoding RBPJ, L3MBTL3 or EGFP control were collected, washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed in ice-cold Lysis buffer [50 mM Tris pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 2 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4, and Complete® protease inhibitor (1X final, Roche®, 05 056 489 001)]. HA-tagged proteins were affinity-purified with 50 μL of α-HA agarose beads (Sigma®, A2095) at 4°C for two hours with rotation. Beads were washed four times with Lysis buffer, three times with Washing buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.8, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40) and three times with 50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were eluted twice with 50 µl of 1% ammonia (NH4OH; Sigma®, 338818), dried and resuspended in 20 μL Laemmli sample buffer. Proteins were resolved via SDS-PAGE and the whole gel lanes were cut into five pieces that were individually subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion, as previously described12. Peptides were dried and analyzed via LC-MS/MS system, as follows. Peptides were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (PicoFrit column, New Objective®) using a 5-50% acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min and directly introduced into an ion-trap mass spectrometer (LTQ XL, Thermo Fisher®). Data-dependent MS/MS spectra on the five most intense ions from each full MS scan were collected (relative collision energy ∼35%).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the data against Swiss-Prot human database (January 9th 2013) appended with decoy (reverse) sequences using the X!Tandem/Trans-Proteomic Pipeline software suite13. All peptides and proteins with a PeptideProphet14 and ProteinProphet15 probability score of >0.8 (false discovery rate <2% estimated using a target-decoy strategy) were considered positive identifications. Proteins were considered potential RBPJ interactors if they were identified in both duplicate RBPJ AP-MS experiments and not in the EGFP negative AP-MS control experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Notch signaling is an evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathway that is essential for metazoan development. Upon ligand binding, the Notch intracellular domain (NOTCH ICD) translocates into the nucleus and forms a complex with the transcription factor RBPJ (also known as CBF1 or CSL) to activate expression of Notch target genes. In the absence of a Notch signal, RBPJ acts as a transcriptional repressor. Using a proteomic approach, we identified L3MBTL3 (also known as MBT1) as a novel RBPJ interactor. L3MBTL3 competes with NOTCH ICD for binding to RBPJ In the absence of NOTCH ICD, RBPJ recruits L3MBTL3 and the histone demethylase KDM1A (also known as LSD1) to the enhancers of Notch target genes, leading to H3K4me2 demethylation and to transcriptional repression. Importantly, <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> analyses of the homologs of <i>RBPJ</i> and <i>L3MBTL3</i> in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> and <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> demonstrate that the functional link between <i>RBPJ</i> and <i>L3MBTL3</i> is evolutionarily conserved, thus identifying L3MBTL3 as a universal modulator of Notch signaling in metazoans.

### Keywords
L3mbtl3, Notch, Kdm1a, Rbpj

### Affiliations
University of Michigan Department of Pathology
University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Pathology

### Submitter
Jean-Francois Rual

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Francois Rual
University of Michigan Department of Pathology


