### Accession
PXD002866

### Title
The Physcomitrella patens chloroplast proteome changes in response to short-term stress

### Description
Plants often face more than one type of stress at a time, and how plants respond to combined stress factors is therefore of great interest. Here, we used protoplasts of the moss Physcomitrella patens as a model to study the effects of short-term combined stress on the chloroplast proteome. In this system, biotic stress is mimicked by exposure to cell wall-hydrolyzing enzymes, and abiotic stress is related to plasmolysis. We used SWATH-MS to perform label-free comparative quantitative proteomic analysis of the chloroplast proteome. Overall, we quantified 480 chloroplast proteins, 220 of which showed a more than 1.4-fold change in abundance in protoplasts. We additionally quantified 1422 chloroplast proteins using emPAI. We observed degradation of a significant portion of the chloroplast proteome during the first hour of stress. Electron-transport chain (ETC) components underwent the heaviest degradation, resulting in the decline of photosynthetic activity. We also compared the proteome changes to those in the transcriptional level of nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes. Globally, the levels of the quantified proteins and their corresponding mRNAs showed limited correlation. Genes involved in the biosynthesis of chlorophyll and components of the outer chloroplast membrane showed decreases in both transcript and protein abundance. However, proteins like dehydroascorbate reductase 1 and 2-cys peroxiredoxin B responsible for ROS detoxification increased in abundance. Further, genes such as thylakoid ascorbate peroxidase were induced at the transcriptional level but down-regulated at the proteomic level. Together, our results demonstrate that the initial chloroplast reaction to stress is due changes at the proteomic level.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of chloroplast proteins Proteins were extracted using a phenol extraction procedure. Three volumes of ice-cold extraction buffer (500 m Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM EDTA, 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM КCl, 1 mM PMSF, 2% 2-mercaptoethanol, 1% Triton X-100) were added to the chloroplast pellet followed by incubation for 10 min on ice. Then, an equal volume of ice-cold Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)-saturated phenol was added, and the mixture was vortexed and incubated for 10 min with shaking. After centrifugation (10 min, 5500g, 4°C), the phenol phase was collected and re-extracted two times with extraction buffer. Proteins were precipitated from the final phenol phase with 3 volumes of ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol overnight at -20°С and centrifuged for 10 min at 5,500 g and 4°C. The pellets were rinsed with ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol three times and with ice-cold acetone containing 13 mM DTT once and then dried. Pellets were solubilized in sample buffer (8 М urea, 2 М thiourea, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Protein content was estimated using Bradford method.  In-solution trypsin digestion of chloroplast protein An equal amount of protein from each sample was taken to be analyzed. Ammonium bicarbonate was added to each sample to a final concentration of 25 mM.  To disulphide bonds, DTT was added to each sample to 5 mM, and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 56°C, then cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM ioadacetamide for 20 min in darkness. The alkylated samples were diluted 6 times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (0.01 µg per 1 µg protein) was added, and the samples were incubated for 12 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by 5% TFA. The tryptic peptides were desalted on microcolumns C-18 (Supelco, USA), vacuum-dried, and stored at -70.  LC-MS analysis Analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (ABSciex, Canada) coupled to a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system (Eksigent). The HPLC system was configured in trap-elute mode. Sample loading buffer and buffer A was 98.9% water, 1% methanol, and 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Buffer B was 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Samples were loaded on a trap column Chrom XP C18 3 mm 120 Å 350 mm*0.5 mm (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) at a flow rate of 3.5 µL/min over 10 min and eluted through the separation column 3C18-CL-120 (3 µm 120 Å) 0.075 mm*150 mm (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient was from 5 to 40% buffer B in 120 min. The column and the precolumn were regenerated between runs by washing with 95% buffer B for 7 min and equilibrated with 5% buffer B for 25 min. Between the samples, to ensure the absence of carryover, both the column and the precolumn were thoroughly washed with a blank injection trap-elute  gradient that included 5-7-minute 5-95-95-5% B waves followed by 25 min 5% B equilibration. Mass spectra were acquired in a positive ion mode. The information-dependent mass-spectrometry experiment included 1 survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were mass range for analysis, and subsequent ion selection for MS2 analysis was 300-1250 m/z; signal accumulation time was 250 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity with the threshold of 400 cps and the charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters were as follows: resolution of quadrupole was set to UNIT (0.7 Da), measurement mass range was 200-1800 m/z, optimization of ion beam focus was to obtain maximal sensitivity, signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision-activated dissociation was performed with nitrogen gas with collision energy ramping from 25 to 55 V within 50 ms signal accumulation time. Analyzed parent ions were sent to dynamic exclusion list for 15 s to obtain the next MS2 spectra of the same compound around its chromatographic peak apex (minimum peak width throughout the gradient was about 30 s).  Quantitative LC-MS analysis Quantitative LC-MS protein analysis was performed on the basis of DIA SWATH technology. Raw data were obtained by triplicate injection of each sample with LC parameters identical to those of IDA experiments. HPLC configuration was the same as described for protein identification. The SWATH acquisition parameters were as follows: one 50 msec MS1 scan for m/z 100-2000, followed by 32 SWATH windows 20 a.m.u width covering parent ion mass range from 400 to 1000 a.m.u. MS2 SWATH scans were collected in high sensitivity mode for mass range 200-1800 and 100 msec single window accumulation time. The total cycle time was ~3.3 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification For protein identification, data files were analyzed with ProteinPilot 4.5 revision 1656 (ABSciex, Canada) using search algorithm Paragon 4.5.0.0 revision 1654 (ABSciex, Canada) and a standard set of identification settings. The database was obtained by combining UniProtKB (organism Physcomitrella patens) and the protein database from cosmoss.org V1.6. In the case of 90% sequence identity, only the entries from the cosmoss.org database were taken. The following parameters were used: alkylation of cysteine - iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, TripleTOF 5600 equipment, species: none, thorough search with additional statistical FDR analysis. Peptide identifications were processed with default settings using the ProteinPilot software built-in ProGroup algorithm. The final protein identification list was obtained with the threshold reliable protein ID unused score calculated by ProteomicS Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) algorithm for 1% global FDR from fit.  SWATH-MS data analysis To process SWATH data, protein identification lists (.group files) obtained for IDA experiments were translated into an ion library with PeakView 2.0 (ABSciex, Canada) SWATH processing tools for the number of proteins according to 1% FDR from fit for the corresponding .group file and reported peptide confidence equal to 99 with the exclusion of shared and modified peptides (except for carbamylation of cysteines). The ion library was used to obtain extracted ion chromatograms for the corresponding transitions from SWATH data files with the following parameters: 1000 peptides per protein and 1000 (all observed) fragments per peptide, extraction window 15 min, mass window 50 ppm. The next step suggested by the manufacturer (ABSciex, Canada) is direct comparison of summary peptide intensities (as summary fragment intensities) per protein; however, this method almost completely lacks quality control. To enhance reliability, we filtered extracted ion chromatogram data starting from the ion level (that is for each pair of parent and fragment ions in the ion library separately) for reliably quantifiable proteins using a homemade script in R. The algorithm included scaling normalization and averaging of three technical repeats per sample [each biological sample was treated in duplicate (triplicate for protonema) and each obtained tryptic peptide sample was analyzed in triplicate, thus this step allows for injection and LC-MS signal reproducibility], exclusion of peptides with less than 3 quantified fragments, and exclusion of proteins with less than 3 quantified peptides, followed by separation of quantifiable transitions. The latter was based on the assumption of the proportionality of fragment ion intensity to parent ion intensity and, consequently, the proportionality of fragment intensity changes between different samples. Quantifiable fragment ions were selected on the basis of trend searches within all fragments on the basis of normalized spectral contrast angle analysis with iterative searches of fragment clusters. The minimal number of fragments that must follow the same trend between samples to be used as “reliable” was set at 3. After fragment filtering, all proteins with fewer than 3 peptides were excluded. This was followed by renormalization of different LC-MS repeats of the same sample and averaging, and then by the second normalization and averaging step between technical repeats of trypsinolysis of the same sample and a third normalization and averaging step within sample type. To obtain final results, biological samples were cross scale-normalized on the basis of the assumption that most of the cell proteins in any pair of samples were independent (that is, the scaling should set the minimum average difference between proteins for a pair of samples). To calculate protein fold-change results, logarithm with the base B (was chosen to obtain the best scaling) was taken for all fragment intensities. The logarithm results for each fragment were averaged within a sample (LC-MS repeats*trypsinolysis repeats*technical repeats) to obtain peptide logarithm results. Each protein result was calculated as a median of the top 3 most intense (based on total intensity of all fragmentation spectra for each peptide) of its tryptic peptides. Fold change for a protein was calculated as the difference in median values between samples raised to power B.  For proteins that could not be quantified by SWATH we used the quantitative assessment method emPAI (Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index). Scaffold v 4.2.1 (Proteome Software, USA) was used to calculate the emPAI algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Plant protoplasts are widely used for genetic manipulation and functional studies in transient expression systems. However, little is known about the molecular pathways involved in a cell response to the combined stress factors resulted from protoplast generation. Plants often face more than one type of stress at a time, and how plants respond to combined stress factors is therefore of great interest. Here, we used protoplasts of the moss <i>Physcomitrella patens</i> as a model to study the effects of short-term stress on the chloroplast proteome. Using label-free comparative quantitative proteomic analysis (SWATH-MS), we quantified 479 chloroplast proteins, 219 of which showed a more than 1.4-fold change in abundance in protoplasts. We additionally quantified 1451 chloroplast proteins using emPAI. We observed degradation of a significant portion of the chloroplast proteome following the first hour of stress imposed by the protoplast isolation process. Electron-transport chain (ETC) components underwent the heaviest degradation, resulting in the decline of photosynthetic activity. We also compared the proteome changes to those in the transcriptional level of nuclear-encoded chloroplast genes. Globally, the levels of the quantified proteins and their corresponding mRNAs showed limited correlation. Genes involved in the biosynthesis of chlorophyll and components of the outer chloroplast membrane showed decreases in both transcript and protein abundance. However, proteins like dehydroascorbate reductase 1 and 2-cys peroxiredoxin B responsible for ROS detoxification increased in abundance. Further, genes such as thylakoid ascorbate peroxidase were induced at the transcriptional level but down-regulated at the proteomic level. Together, our results demonstrate that the initial chloroplast reaction to stress is due changes at the proteomic level.

### Keywords
Moss physcomitrella patens, Chloroplast proteome, Swath-ms, Stress, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Arapidi
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences


