### Accession
PXD012880

### Title
Snap-heated freeze-free preservation and processing of the urine proteome

### Description
New method for urine proteome preservation and processing based on thermal stabilization and FASP digestion. Four urine proteomes were preserved during 48 h and 6 months using (i) the classic freeze preservation at -20 °C, (ii) snap-heated freeze-free preservation at laboratory temperature (20 °C) and (iii) snap-heated preservation at -60 °C.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh second-morning mid-stream urines were collected from four healthy male volunteers in the same age group (24 ± 1 years old). All the volunteers provided a signed consent for the usage of their urine in this study. The urine samples were collected into 100 mL urine collection tube containing 37 mg of boric acid. The urine was divided into two 50 mL tubes and were then centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min to remove cell debris. After centrifugation, the supernatants were extracted and split into aliquots of 10 mL. Urine sample concentration was processed in a 10,000 molecular weight cut-off hydrosart membrane as recommended by the manufacturer. Urinary proteome present in the membrane was preserved by a heat shock treatment using the bench instrument stabilizor™ t1. The membrane containing the urine proteome was storage in a stabilizor t1 maintainor® tissue card that then undergoes inside the stabilizor™ t1 equipment where is applied a rapid conductive heating to preserve the biological samples. The preservation is processed with default settings. Urine sample storage and preservation were processed in 3 different conditions, as it follows: (A) Urine proteome separation using ultrafiltration and heat stabilization followed by storage at laboratory room temperature (RT, 20 ºC), (B) Heat stabilization and storage at -60 ºC and (C) and for control purposes, freezing at -20 ºC with no heating stabilization.  The preserved and stored urinary proteins were analyzed at two different time points: (i) T0, 48 hours of storage and (ii) T1, 6 months of storage. After storage the urinary proteins were digested using the FASP method with minor modifications.

### Data Protocol
Relative label-free quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software V1.6.0.16. All raw files were processed in a single run with default parameters. Database searches were performed using Andromeda search engine with the UniProt-SwissProt Human Uniprot Proteome database as a reference and a contaminants database of common contaminants.32 Data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.2) with default settings. Protein group LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and the quantitative profiles were filtered for missing values with the following settings: min valid number 2 in at least one group, and values greater than 0. To overcome the obstacle of missing LFQ values, missing values were imputed using default parameter, with = 0.3 and down shift = 1.8. Log ratios were calculated as the difference in average log2 LFQ intensity values between the tested conditions (two-tailed, Student’s t-test). A protein was considered statistically significant if its fold change was ≥ 1.5 and FDR ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
We present a method to preserve and process urine proteins for proteomic analysis in a filter aided sample preparation (FASP) format. The method combines concentration of urine proteins in ultrafiltration devices, their thermal stabilization, allowing long term storage of the samples, and filter aided sample preparation. Proteomes of four different urines were preserved during 48&#x202f;h and 6 months using (i) the classic freeze preservation at&#xa0;-20&#x202f;&#xb0;C, (ii) snap-heated freeze-free preservation at laboratory temperature (20&#x202f;&#xb0;C) and (iii) snap-heated preservation at&#xa0;-60&#x202f;&#xb0;C. The three storage methods can effetely preserve the urine proteome for at least 6 months without significant alterations. Abundances of more than 500 proteins and specially 24 selected -cleared or -approved protein assayed in serum or plasma were found similar within the three preservation methods assessed. The new method here proposed dramatically simplifies the conditions for preserving the urine proteome for biobanks in terms of space and storage, including lowering the risks of sample degradation caused by misfunction of the freezer. Furthermore, the shipping of large number of samples can be made without the need of freezing. The application of the FASP format to isolate and preserve the proteins facilitates long-term storage and processing of proteome of urine samples.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Human urine, Stabilizor-based technology, Fasp, Proteome preservation

### Affiliations
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, University NOVA Lisbon, Caparica Campus, Portugal

### Submitter
Hugo M. Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Miguel Baptista Carreira dos Santos
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, University NOVA Lisbon, Caparica Campus, Portugal


