### Accession
PXD026587

### Title
Shotgun proteomic elucidation of Synergistic mechanisms of Cannabidiol and SN-38 in the MCF7 cells

### Description
We evaluted the synergyistic interactions of cannabidiol (CBD) with standard chemotherapeutic agents such as Docetaxel (DOC), doxorubicin (DOX), paclitaxel (PTX), vinorelbine (VIN), and 7-Ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN38) in MCf7 cells ultising different synergy metrics. Then we explored the synergistic mechanisms on the proteome level of the most synergistic combination (CBD and SN38 in a molar ratio of 371:1, respectively)

### Sample Protocol
proteins in cell lysates were quantified using rapid gold BCA kit according to the manufacturerer's protocol. 100 µg of protein samples were used for chemical and enzymatic sample processing according to the manufacturer protocol (EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit; ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The final volume was adjusted to 100 µL using lysis buffer in a microcentrifuge tube. 50 µL of the reduction and alkylation solutions were added, gently mixed, and incubated at 95 °C using a heat block for 10 min. The samples are allowed to cool at RT, then 50 µL of the reconstituted trypsin/lys-C protease mixture was added to each sample and incubated with shaking at 37 °C for 3 h. After incubation, 50 µL of digestion stop solution was added and mixed gently. Peptides clean up columns were implemented to remove hydrophilic and hydrophobic contaminants where clean peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in water for LC-MS analysis and carefully placed in Waters total recovery chromatography sample vials (Waters Corp, USA). Tryptic peptides were analysed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) coupled to Synapt G2-S high-definition mass spectrometer (HDMS) (Waters Corp., Manchester, UK) operating in positive electron spray ion mode (ESI +) and equipped with hybrid quadrupole time of flight (qTOF) analyser. Mass accuracy was maintained by Waters NanoLockSpray Exact Mass Ionization Source with 100 fgmL-1 Glu-fibrinopeptide B (GFP) Lockspray solution (in 50% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, lock mass m/z 785.84.26) infused at 0.5 μLmin-1 and calibrated against a sodium iodide solution. The chromatographic system was equipped with a nanoEase M/Z BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm × 100 mm, Waters Corp., USA) at 40 °C and nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20mm, Waters Corp., USA). Milli-Q water and acetonitrile (LCMS grade, Merck, Germany) containing 0.1% formic acid were used as mobile phase A and B, respectively, with 1 µL injection volume at 0.3 mLmin-1 flow rate throughout 50 min gradient. Samples were injected into the trapping column at 5 μLmin-1 at 99% mobile phase A for 3 min before being eluted on the analytical column. The peptides were separated using a chromatographic method where an initial 1% of mobile phase B and ramped to 85% B over 50 min with the following gradient: 10% B at 2 min, 40% B at 40 min and 85% B at 42 min. All samples are kept at 4 °C and were injected in triplicates. The ion source block temperature was set to 80 °C and capillary voltage was maintained to 3 kV. Ions were acquired with m/z between 50 and 2000, scanning time of 0.5 sec, sample cone voltage and source offset at 30 V, nanoflow gas at 0.3 Bar, purge gas at 20 Lh-1 and cone gas flow at 20 Lh-1. Data independent acquisition (DIA) method by MSE multiplex mode was used for samples acquisition at T-wave collision-induced dissociation cell filled with argon gas with MassLynx Mass Spectrometry Software (Waters Corporation, USA).

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI software (Waters Corporation, USA) was used to import and further process the MassLynx acquired data. Automatic selection of alignment reference among QC samples was set and peptides were identified against Uniprot human proteome database (October 2020 version) using ion accounting method with 250 kDa protein mass maximum. One fragment per peptide or one peptide per protein together with 3 fragments per protein were set as ion matching requirements using relative quantification implementing the Hi-N method (n = 3). Auto peptide and fragment tolerance and less than 4% FDR were set for search tolerance parameters. Peptides with absolute mass error > 20 ppm or single charged were further filtered out. Pairwise comparisons of the identified proteins in the treated groups were done against the control group for cytotoxic potential exploration, while the most synergistic combination samples were compared against mono treatments’ samples for the elucidation of possible synergistic mechanisms. In each experimental design proteins with analysis of variance (ANOVA)-derived p-value ≤ 0.05 and q value ≤ 0.05 with fold change among ≥ 2 were considered significant and included for further pathway analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Cannabidiol (CBD), a nonpsychoactive phytocannabinoid, has recently emerged as a potential cytotoxic agent in addition to its ameliorative activity in chemotherapy-associated side effects. In this work, the potential interactions of CBD with docetaxel (DOC), doxorubicin (DOX), paclitaxel (PTX), vinorelbine (VIN), and 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin (SN-38) were explored in MCF7 breast adenocarcinoma cells using different synergy quantification models. The apoptotic profiles of MCF7 cells after the treatments were assessed via flow cytometry. The molecular mechanisms of CBD and the most promising combinations were investigated via label-free quantification proteomics. A strong synergy was observed across all synergy models at different molar ratios of CBD in combination with SN-38 and VIN. Intriguingly, synergy was observed for CBD with all chemotherapeutic drugs at a molar ratio of 636:1 in almost all synergy models. However, discording synergy trends warranted the validation of the selected combinations against different models. Enhanced apoptosis was observed for all synergistic CBD combinations compared to monotherapies or negative controls. A shotgun proteomics study highlighted 121 dysregulated proteins in CBD-treated MCF7 cells compared to the negative controls. We reported the inhibition of topoisomerase II &#x3b2; and &#x3b1;, cullin 1, V-type proton ATPase, and CDK-6 in CBD-treated MCF7 cells for the first time as additional cytotoxic mechanisms of CBD, alongside sabotaged energy production and reduced mitochondrial translation. We observed 91 significantly dysregulated proteins in MCF7 cells treated with the synergistic combination of CBD with SN-38 (CSN-38), compared to the monotherapies. Regulation of telomerase, cell cycle, topoisomerase I, EGFR1, protein metabolism, TP53 regulation of DNA repair, death receptor signalling, and RHO GTPase signalling pathways contributed to the proteome-wide synergistic molecular mechanisms of CSN-38. In conclusion, we identified significant synergistic interactions between CBD and the five important chemotherapeutic drugs and the key molecular pathways of CBD and its synergistic combination with SN-38 in MCF7 cells. Further in vivo and clinical studies are warranted to evaluate the implementation of CBD-based synergistic adjuvant therapies for breast cancer.

### Keywords
Mcf7, Sn-38, Cbd, 7-ethyl-10-hydroxycamptothecin, Proteomics, Cannabidiol, Breast cancer, Synergy

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Cairo University
NICM Heatlth research institute, Western Sydney University, NSW, Australia.

### Submitter
Muhammad Alsherbiny

### Lab Head
Dr Chun Guang Li
NICM Heatlth research institute, Western Sydney University, NSW, Australia.


