### Accession
PXD024937

### Title
Analysis Of Molecular Networks In The Cerebellum In Chronic Schizophrenia: Modulation By Early Postnatal Life Stressors In Murine Models

### Description
Despite the growing importance of the cortico-cerebellar-thalamo-cortical circuit in schizophrenia, limited information is available regarding altered molecular networks in cerebellum. To identify altered protein networks, we conducted proteomic analysis of grey matter of postmortem cerebellar cortex in chronic schizophrenia subjects (n=12) and healthy individuals (n=14) followed by an extensive bioinformatic analysis. Two double-hit postnatal stress murine models for SZ were used to validate the most robust candidates.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared from tissue samples using NP40,  200  μg  of  total  protein  extracts  lyophilized  from  control  and  SZ lysates were resuspended in 100 μl 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.2, 100 mM NaCl. The lysate was  reduced  with  3  mM  dithiothreitol  at  55  ºC  for  30  min,  alkylated  with  20  mM iodoacetamide  at  room  temperature  for  30  min  and  quenched  with additional  3mM dithiothreitol  for  30  min  at  room  temperature.  The  extract  was digested  with  the endoproteinase LysC at 10 ng/μl at 30ºC overnight. Peptides were desalting with OASIS MCX cartridge (Waters). Eluted peptides were acidified with formic acid and dried before  re-suspending  in  MS  Buffer.  The LC/MS-MS analysis was performed in a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer( Thermofisher Scientific,  CA,  USA)  coupled  to  an  Easy  nLC  II  liquid  chromatography  system.  Peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 30 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). A gradient of 3% to 30% with a total 180-minute acquisition time. Peptides were analyzed  online on the orbitrap mass analyser using a top 20 data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed and analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8). MS/MS spectra were searched with Andromeda against UniProt fasta UP000005640 (Downloaded: 2015-06-30) with common contaminants added. The quantified protein groups were imported into Perseus software platform (version 1.6.1.3) for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the growing importance of the cerebellum as a region highly vulnerable to accumulating molecular errors in schizophrenia, limited information is available regarding altered molecular networks with potential therapeutic targets. To identify altered networks, we conducted one-shot liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in postmortem cerebellar cortex in schizophrenia and healthy individuals followed by bioinformatic analysis (PXD024937 identifier in ProteomeXchange repository). A total of 108 up-regulated proteins were enriched in stress-related proteins, half of which were also enriched in axonal cytoskeletal organization and vesicle-mediated transport. A total of 142 down-regulated proteins showed an enrichment in proteins involved in mitochondrial disease, most of which were also enriched in energy-related biological functions. Network analysis identified a mixed module of mainly axonal-related pathways for up-regulated proteins with a high number of interactions for stress-related proteins. Energy metabolism and neutrophil degranulation modules were found for down-regulated proteins. Further, two double-hit postnatal stress murine models based on maternal deprivation combined with social isolation or chronic restraint stress were used to investigate the most robust candidates of generated networks. CLASP1 from the axonal module in the model of maternal deprivation was combined with social isolation, while YWHAZ was not altered in either model. METTL7A from the degranulation pathway was reduced in both models and was identified as altered also in previous gene expression studies, while NDUFB9 from the energy network was reduced only in the model of maternal deprivation combined with social isolation. This work provides altered stress- and mitochondrial disease-related proteins involved in energy, immune and axonal networks in the cerebellum in schizophrenia as possible novel targets for therapeutic interventions and suggests that METTL7A is a possible relevant altered stress-related protein in this context.

### Keywords
Human, Cerebellum, Brain

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Ricard Rodriguez-Mias

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington


