### Accession
PXD011103

### Title
A non-canonical SWI/SNF complex underlies synthetic lethality in cancers driven by BAF complex perturbation

### Description
Mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes exist in three distinct, final-form assemblies: canonical BAF (cBAF), PBAF, and a newly characterized non-canonical complex, ncBAF. However, their complex-specific targeting on chromatin, functions and roles in disease remain largely unknown. Here, we comprehensively map complex assemblies on chromatin and find that ncBAF uniquely localizes to CTCF sites and promoters. We identified ncBAF subunits as major synthetic lethalities specific to human synovial sarcoma and malignant rhabdoid tumor, which share in common cBAF complex perturbation. Chemical and biological depletion of the BRD9 subunit of ncBAF rapidly attenuates SS and MRT cell proliferation. Notably, in cBAF-perturbed cancers, ncBAF complexes retain localization to CTCF sites and promoters, and maintain gene expression at retained mSWI/SNF sites to support cell proliferation in a manner distinct from fusion oncoprotein-mediated targeting. Taken together, these findings unmask the unique targeting and function of ncBAF complexes and present new cancer-specific therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
SWI/SNF complexes were purified as previously described (Mashtalir, N. et al., 2014), with the following modifications.  Mammalian SWI/SNF complexes were purified from HEK-293T cells stably expressing the HA-tagged constructs indicated.  Cells were collected by scraping, washed with ice cold PBS, and pelleted at 3000rpm for 5min at 4°C.  Cells were resuspended in Hypotonic Buffer (HB, 10mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 10mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF), incubated on ice for 10min, and centrifuged for 5min at 5000rpm at 4°C.  Pelleted cells were resuspended in fresh HB with protease inhibitors (~5 volumes of pellet size) and subjected to mechanical lysis using a Dounce homogenizer (40mL Kontes, Pastel A).  Suspension was overlaid on 30% HB sucrose with protease inhibitors and centrifuged at 5,000rpm for 45min at 4°C (the sucrose cushion was skipped for insect complex purifications).  Pelleted nuclei were isolated and resuspended in 5 volumes of pre-extraction buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 100mM KCl, 1mM MgCl2, 0.1% NP-40, 1mM DTT, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, 1mM PMSF), incubated for 10min at 4°C, and centrifuged at 5,000rpm for 15min at 4°C.  Supernatant was removed, and the chromatin pellet was resuspended in High Salt Extraction Buffer (HSB, 50mM Tris pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 300mM KCl, 1mM MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 1mM DTT, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail, 1mM PMSF).  Proteins were extracted for 1h at 4°C with rotation.  Chromatin was pelleted by subjecting suspensions to ultracentrifugation at 20,000rpm for 1h at 4°C.  Supernatants containing soluble nuclear extracts were filtered through 0.4 micron filters and incubated overnight at 4°C with Pierce Anti-HA Magnetic Beads (cat. 88837).  The next day, beads were washed with HSB 5 times, and purified complexes were eluted 4 times with 1mg/mL HA peptide, 1.5h per elution.  Eluates were then subjected to mass spectrometry or glycerol gradient density sedimentation.  Purified complex elutions (BRD9, BRD7, Mock) or glycerol gradient fractions (DPF2, fractions 13-14) were concentrated using StrataClean beads, loaded onto 4-12% SDS PAGE gels, migrated 2cm into the gel, and stained with colloidal blue (Invitrogen).

### Data Protocol
As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Elite ion-trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences, and the data were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate based on linear discriminant analysis (Huttlin et al., 2010).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mswi/snf, Baf, Dpf2, Brd9, Brd7, Chromatin remodeling

### Affiliations
Dana Farber Cancer Institute
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

### Submitter
Andrew D'Avino

### Lab Head
Dr Cigall Kadoch
Dana Farber Cancer Institute


