### Accession
PXD008700

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma primary tissues using high resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of preventable death globally and is broadly classified into adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma depending upon cell type. In this study, we carried out mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomic analysis of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma primary tissue by employing the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) approach. Proteomic data was analyzed using SEQUEST search algorithm which resulted in identification of 25,998 peptides corresponding to 4,342 proteins of which 610 proteins were differentially expressed (≥ 2-fold) between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma samples. These differentially expressed proteins were further classified by gene ontology for their localizations and biological processes. Pathway analysis of differentially expressed proteins revealed distinct alterations in networks and pathways in both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma samples. In this study, we identified a subset of proteins that shows converse expression between lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma samples. Such proteins may serve as signature markers to distinguish between the two subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation:  In this study, we used lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma tumor tissues samples from 4 patients of each subtype. Briefly, 10 mg of tumor tissue was homogenized in 4% SDS using cell disperser (IKA works, Wilmington, NC) followed by sonication. The cell debris from the tissue homogenates was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. The cleared supernatant was transferred into a microfuge tube and the protein concentration determined using the BCA method. 
Protein digestion and iTRAQ labelling: 100ug of protein from each sample were reduced and alkylated by using Dithiothreitol and Iodocetamide, respectively. The samples were digested overnight with trypsin (promega) (1:20) at 37°C. Peptides from each group were labelled using 8plex iTRAQ tags as per manufacturer’s protocol. Peptides derived from adenocarcinoma samples were labelled by 113, 114, 115 and 116 labels while peptides from squamous cell carcinoma samples were labelled by 117, 118, 119 and 121 labels. All labels were pooled, dried and subjected to bRPLC fractionation.
Basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC):
Briefly, 1 mL of bRPLC solvent A (10 mMTEABC pH 8.4, Sigma Aldrich) was used to resuspend peptides mixture. This mixture was fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) on an Agilent 1100 LC system with a flow rate of 1 mL/min by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (10 mMTEABC in 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.4). A total of 96 fractions were initially collected in 96- well plates with 0.1% formic acid added to each well. The fractions were then concatenated to 6 fractions and dried using speedvac.
LC-MS/MS analysis: 
The fractions were analyzed using on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy NanoLC system. Peptides are reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and they are loaded on the trap column (PepMap 100 C18, Nanoviper trap column, 75µmx20mm,3µm) using 5% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid (Solvent A). Peptide separation was done on 75µm ID x 25cm in-house packed analytical column packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a step gradient of 8% to 22% solvent B (95% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid) for 70 min and 22% to 35% for 30 min at a flow rate of 280nl/min. Total run time was 120min and peptides were ionized by NanoFlex ion source maintained at 1850V. Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer connected to Proxeon Easy nLC 1000 system was used for the LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed using data dependent top speed mode with synchronous precursor selection enabled for MS3 analysis. Total cycle time of 3 sec was used for the analysis. Survey MS scan was collected in profile mode in Orbitrap mass analyzer using 350 – 1600 m/z mass range with 120,000 resolutions, 4*105 AGC target and 50ms injection time. Top most precursor ions were isolated using quadrapole mass filter with an isolation width of 0.7 Da and fragmented using collision induced dissociation with 35 % normalized collision energy. MS2 spectra were acquired using Ion trap in rapid mode with 4,000 AGC target and 100ms injection time. For MS3 analysis, top 10 precursor ions from MS2 spectra were isolated and fragmented using high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with 55 % normalized collision energy. MS3 spectra were collected in Orbitrap mass analyzer with 50,000 resolutions, 1*105 AGC target and 150ms maximum injection time. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 40 sec exclusion time. Lock mass of 445.12002 m/z from ambient air was enabled for mass recalibration during the run. Each fraction was analyzed in triplicate.


### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81) software suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for MS/MS searches and protein quantitation. SEQUEST algorithm was used for database searches with NCBI RefSeq human protein database (Version 75). The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed; oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification while static modifications included carbamidomethyl (alkylation) at cysteine and iTRAQ modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by carrying out decoy database searches and peptides scoring better than 1% FDR score cut-off were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is the leading cause of preventable death globally and is broadly classified into adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. In this study, we carried out mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomic analysis of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma primary tissue by employing the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) approach. Proteomic data analyzed using SEQUEST algorithm resulted in identification of 25,998 peptides corresponding to 4342 proteins of which 610 proteins were differentially expressed (&#x2265; 2-fold) between adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. These differentially expressed proteins were further classified by gene ontology for their localization and biological processes. Pathway analysis of differentially expressed proteins revealed distinct alterations in networks and pathways in both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. We identified a subset of proteins that show inverse expression pattern between lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Such proteins may serve as potential markers to distinguish between the two subtypes. Mass spectrometric data generated in this study was submitted to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008700.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Itraq labelling, Lung adenocarcinoma, Lung squamous cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India


