### Accession
PXD047509

### Title
The chromatin factors SET-26 and HCF-1 oppose the histone deacetylase HDA-1 in longevity and gene regulation in C. elegans

### Description
In this study, a GFP-tagged version of the protein HCF-1 was immuno-precipitated from C. elegans lysates of the strain IU171 and co-purifying proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS. As a negative control, the same immuno-precipitation was conducted from wild-type (strain N2) worms that did not carry a HCF-1::GFP transgene.

### Sample Protocol
The respective C. elegans strains were grown to scale, harvested, washed, and lysed, as described in (Riedel et al., NCB 2013; Pubmed ID: 23604319; DOI: 10.1038/ncb2720). The protein of interest was immunoprecipitated using an anti-GFP antibody (3E6), washed, and eluted using glycin, as described in (Riedel et al., NCB 2013; Pubmed ID: 23604319; DOI: 10.1038/ncb2720). The eluate was then trypsin-digested and resulting peptides analysed by LC-MSMS, as described in (Riedel et al., NCB 2013; Pubmed ID: 23604319; DOI: 10.1038/ncb2720).

### Data Protocol
RAW data from the mass spectrometer were searched using SEQUEST and a database of the C. elegans proteome, as described in (Riedel et al., NCB 2013; Pubmed ID: 23604319; DOI: 10.1038/ncb2720).

### Publication Abstract
SET-26, HCF-1, and HDA-1 are highly conserved chromatin factors with key roles in development and aging. Here we present mechanistic insights into how these factors regulate gene expression and modulate longevity in <i>C. elegans</i>. We show that SET-26 and HCF-1 cooperate to regulate a common set of genes, and both antagonize the histone deacetylase HDA-1 to limit longevity. We propose a model in which SET-26 recruits HCF-1 to chromatin in somatic cells, where they stabilize each other at the promoters of a subset of genes, particularly mitochondrial function genes, and regulate their expression. HDA-1 opposes SET-26 and HCF-1 on the regulation of a subset of their common target genes and in longevity. Our findings suggest that SET-26, HCF-1, and HDA-1 comprise a mechanism to fine-tune gene expression and longevity and likely have important implications for the mechanistic understanding of how these factors function in diverse organisms, particularly in aging biology.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Lc-msms, Immuno precipitation

### Affiliations
Dept of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Dept of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm

### Submitter
Christian Riedel

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Riedel
Dept of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


