### Accession
PXD029793

### Title
Serum proteomic profile of asthmatic patients after 6 months of Benralizumab and Mepolizumab treatment

### Description
Severe eosinophilic asthma is characterized by chronic airway inflammation, oxidative stress and elevated proinflammatory cytokines, especially IL-5. Mepolizumab and benralizumab are both humanized IgG antibodies directed against IL-5 signaling, directly acting on eosinophils count. Together with the complexity of severe asthma classification and to the patient selection for the targeted treatment, there is also the urgency to clarify the follow-up of therapy to identify biomarkers, in addition to eosinophils, for the optimal duration of treatment, persistence of effectiveness and safety.  To this purpose, here we performed a follow-up study by differential proteomic analysis on serum samples after 1 month and 6 months of both therapies and sera from healthy patients. Statistical analysis by PCA and heatmap analyses were performed, and identified proteins were used for enrichment analysis by MetaCore software. Analysis highlights 82 differences among all considered conditions. In particular, 30 referred to benralizumab time points (T0, T1B, T6B) and 24 to mepolizumab time points (T0, T1M, T6M) analyses. t-SNE and heatmap analyses evidences as the differential serum protein profile at 6 months of both treatments is more similar to that of the healthy subjects. Among the identified proteins, APOAI, APOC-II and APOC-III are up-regulated principally after six months of benralizumab treatment, plasminogen is up-regulated after six months of both treatments and ceruloplasmin, up-regulated already after 1 month of benralizumab, become higher after 6 months of mepolizumab. By enrichment analysis, identified proteins were related to lipid metabolism and transport, blood coagulation and ECM remodelling.

### Sample Protocol
For protein identification, differentially abundant spots were manually exported from MS preparative gels, and decolorized in 5mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile solution and then completely dehydrated in acetonitrile solution. Spot were digested in trypsin solution, overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides purified by a C18ZipTip (Millipore, CA, USA), were rinsed with a 0.1% TFA and eluted directly on the MALDI target and dried. 0.5 μl of saturated α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (0.1% TFA and ACN) were added on dried spots and dried again. Digests were then analysed with an Autoflex™ Speed mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with Nd:YAG laser (355 nm; 1000 Hz) operated by FlexControl v3.3 and a 355-nm nitrogen laser. Each spectrum was obtained by delayed extraction technology in positive reflectron mode and averaged over 100 laser shots to improve the S/N ratio. External high precision calibration was executed using a peptide mixture containing bradykinin (fragment 1–7) 757.39 m/z, angiotensin II 1046.54 m/z, ACTH (fragment 18–39) 2465.19 m/z, Glu fibrinopeptide B 1571.57 m/z and renin substrate tetradecapeptide porcine 1760.02 m/z.

### Data Protocol
the spectra underwent peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) searching the human SwissProt protein database with a Mascot search engine, comparing experimentally-determined tryptic peptide masses with theoretical peptide masses calculated for proteins from these databases. Functional parameters were: trypsin as enzyme, one allowed missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation (Cys) as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, monoisotopic mass values. Ion charge state was set at +1; mass tolerance was set at 50 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Severe eosinophilic asthma., Mepolizumab; benralizumab; ceruloplasmin; plasminogen; apoa1, Apoc

### Affiliations
Functional proteomis lab, Life Sciences Dept., University of Siena
university of siena

### Submitter
Lorenza Vantaggiato

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Luca Bini
Functional proteomis lab, Life Sciences Dept., University of Siena


