### Accession
PXD046579

### Title
The ER stress sensor IRE1 interacts with STIM1 to promote store-operated calcium entry, T cell activation, and muscular differentiation

### Description
A quantitative phosphoproteomic study was performed on mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) knocked-out of IRE1 protein and re rexpressin it culturen in 25mM glucose media. The chosen experimental strategy was to perform phosphopeptide enrichment associated with multiplex protein identification and quantification by LC-MSMS on a high-resolution mass spectrometer using tandem mass tag (TMT9; Thermo Fisher Scientific) technology and High- Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
Biological replicates of IRE1-KO and IRE1-KO + IRE1-HA re-expressing MEF cells were used for this analysis. Samples were prepared in the Proteomic platform (UNIGE). Briefly, after lysis and trypsinizaiton, and labelling of all samples, these were pooled together and injected (1µg) in a LC-ESI-MS/MS (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped (Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) and separated on a home made column (75 μm x 500 mm, C18 ReproSil-Pur from Dr. Maisch GmBH, 1.9 μm, 100 Å). Separation was run for 180 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/H2O/FA 80.0%/19.9%/0.1% (solvent B). Data-Dependant Acquisition (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 4x105, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z. MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30’000 FWHM using higher-energy collisional dissociation HCD at 38% NCE.

### Data Protocol
Isolation windows was at 0.7 u with an AGC target of 5x104 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms. A dynamic exclusion of parent ions of 60 s. with 10 ppm mass tolerance was applied. Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The abundances were normalised on “Total Peptide Amount” and then scaled with the “On all Average” parameter. The protein ratios were directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances and associated p-values were calculated with ANOVA test based on the Abundances of individual proteins or peptides. Hits were considered based on significance and a 0.67-1.4 difference in ratio abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Store-operated Ca<sup>2+</sup> entry (SOCE) mediated by stromal interacting molecule (STIM)-gated ORAI channels at endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and plasma membrane (PM) contact sites maintains adequate levels of Ca<sup>2+</sup> within the ER lumen during Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling. Disruption of ER Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) to restore proteostasis. Here, we report that the UPR transducer inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) interacts with STIM1, promotes ER-PM contact sites, and enhances SOCE. IRE1 deficiency reduces T&#xa0;cell activation and human myoblast differentiation. In turn, STIM1 deficiency reduces IRE1 signaling after store depletion. Using a CaMPARI2-based Ca<sup>2+</sup> genome-wide screen, we identify CAMKG2 and slc105a as SOCE enhancers during ER stress. Our findings unveil a direct crosstalk between SOCE and UPR via IRE1, acting as key regulator of ER Ca<sup>2+</sup> and proteostasis in T&#xa0;cells and muscles. Under ER stress, this IRE1-STIM1 axis boosts SOCE to preserve immune cell functions, a pathway that could be targeted for cancer immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Er stress, Ire1, Soce, Stim1

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Cellular Physiology and Metabolism, Medical University center, Universitiy of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Amado Carreras

### Lab Head
Dr Amado Carreras Sureda
Department of Cellular Physiology and Metabolism, Medical University center, Universitiy of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


