### Accession
PXD013025

### Title
Comparative Transcriptome Combined with Proteome Analyses Revealed Key Factors Involved in Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) Response to Waterlogging Stress

### Description
Alfalfa (Medicago sativa) is the most widely grown and most important forage crop in the world. However, alfalfa is susceptible to waterlogging stress, which is the major constraint for its cultivation area and crop production. So far, the molecular mechanism of alfalfa response to the waterlogging is largely unknown. Here, comparative transcriptome combined with proteomic analyses of two cultivars (M12, tolerant; M25, sensitive) of alfalfa showing contrasting tolerance to waterlogging were performed to understand the mechanism of alfalfa in response to waterlogging stress. Totally, 748 (581 up- and 167 down-regulated) genes were differentially expressed in leaves of waterlogging-stressed alfalfa compared with the control (M12_W vs M12_CK), whereas 1193 (740 up- and 453 down-regulated) differentially abundant transcripts (DATs) were detected in the leaves of waterlogging-stressed plants in comparison with the control plants (M25_W vs M25_CK). Furthermore, a total of 187 (122 up- and 65 down-regulated) and 190 (105 up- and 85 down-regulated) differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified via iTRAQ method in M12_W vs M12_CK and M25_W vs M25_CK comparison, respectively. Compared dataset analysis of proteomics and transcriptomics revealed that 27 and 8 genes displayed jointly up-regulated or down-regulated expression profiles at both mRNA and protein levels in M12_W vs M12_CK comparison, whereas 30 and 27 genes were found to be co-up-regulated or co-down-regulated in M25_W vs M25_CK comparison, respectively. The strongly enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways for co-up-regulated genes at mRNA and protein levels in M12_W vs M12_CK comparison were ‘Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism’, ‘Arginine and proline metabolism’ and ‘Starch and sucrose metabolism’, whereas co-up-regulated protein-related pathways including ‘Arginine and proline metabolism’ and ‘Valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation’ were largely enriched in M25_W vs M25_CK comparison. Importantly, the identified genes related to beta-amylase, Ethylene response Factor (ERF), Calcineurin B-like (CBL) interacting protein kinases (CIPKs), Glutathione peroxidase (GPX) and Glutathione-S-transferase (GST) may play key roles in conferring alfalfa tolerance to waterlgging stress. The present study may contribute to our understanding the molecular mechanism underlying the responses of alfalfa to waterlogging stress, and also provide important clues for further study and in-depth characterization of waterlogging-resistance breeding candidate genes in alfalfa.

### Sample Protocol
4.4 Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The sample was ground using a mortar and a pestle in liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5 cm3 centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  4.5 iTRAQ Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  4.6 HPLC Fractionation and LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Medicago truncatula transcriptome and genome database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Alfalfa (<i>Medicago sativa</i>) is the most widely grown and most important forage crop in the world. However, alfalfa is susceptible to waterlogging stress, which is the major constraint for its cultivation area and crop production. So far, the molecular mechanism of alfalfa response to the waterlogging is largely unknown. Here, comparative transcriptome combined with proteomic analyses of two cultivars (M12, tolerant; M25, sensitive) of alfalfa showing contrasting tolerance to waterlogging were performed to understand the mechanism of alfalfa in response to waterlogging stress. Totally, 748 (581 up- and 167 down-regulated) genes were differentially expressed in leaves of waterlogging-stressed alfalfa compared with the control (M12_W vs. M12_CK), whereas 1193 (740 up- and 453 down-regulated) differentially abundant transcripts (DATs) were detected in the leaves of waterlogging-stressed plants in comparison with the control plants (M25_W vs. M25_CK). Furthermore, a total of 187 (122 up- and 65 down-regulated) and 190 (105 up- and 85 down-regulated) differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified via isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) method in M12_W vs. M12_CK and M25_W vs. M25_CK comparison, respectively. Compared dataset analysis of proteomics and transcriptomics revealed that 27 and eight genes displayed jointly up-regulated or down-regulated expression profiles at both mRNA and protein levels in M12_W vs. M12_CK comparison, whereas 30 and 27 genes were found to be co-up-regulated or co-down-regulated in M25_W vs. M25_CK comparison, respectively. The strongly enriched Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways for co-up-regulated genes at mRNA and protein levels in M12_W vs. M12_CK comparison were 'Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism', 'Arginine and proline metabolism' and 'Starch and sucrose metabolism', whereas co-up-regulated protein-related pathways including 'Arginine and proline metabolism' and 'Valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation' were largely enriched in M25_W vs. M25_CK comparison. Importantly, the identified genes related to beta-amylase, Ethylene response Factor (ERF), Calcineurin B-like (CBL) interacting protein kinases (CIPKs), Glutathione peroxidase (GPX), and Glutathione-S-transferase (GST) may play key roles in conferring alfalfa tolerance to waterlogging stress. The present study may contribute to our understanding the molecular mechanism underlying the responses of alfalfa to waterlogging stress, and also provide important clues for further study and in-depth characterization of waterlogging-resistance breeding candidate genes in alfalfa.

### Keywords
Waterlogging, Molecular mechanism, Transcriptome, Proteome, Alfalfa

### Affiliations
Hunan Agricultural University
Department of Pratacultural Sciences, College of Agriculture, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan 410128, China

### Submitter
Longxing Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Longxing Hu
Department of Pratacultural Sciences, College of Agriculture, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan 410128, China


