### Accession
PXD041181

### Title
STIM1 Translocation to The Nucleus Protects Cells from DNA Damage

### Description
DNA damage represents a challenge for cells as this damage must be eliminated to preserve cell viability and the transmission of genetic information. To reduce or eliminate unscheduled chemical modifications in genomic DNA, an extensive signaling network, known as the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway, ensures this repair. In this work, and by means of a proteomic analysis aimed at the study of the STIM1 protein interactome, we have found that STIM1 is closely related to the protection from endogenous DNA damage, replicative stress, as well as in the response to interstrand crosslinks (ICLs). Here we show that STIM1 has a nuclear localization signal (NLS) that mediates its translocation to the nucleus, and that this translocation and the association of STIM1 to chromatin is enhanced in response to mitomycin C (MMC), an ICL-inducing agent. Consequently, STIM1-deficient cell lines show a higher level of basal DNA damage, replicative stress, and a higher sensitivity to MMC. We show that STIM1 normalizes FANCD2 protein levels in the nucleus, explaining the increased sensitivity to MMC in STIM1-KO cells. Our results show for the first time a nuclear function for the endoplasmic reticulum protein STIM1 and increase the number of genes involved in DNA repair.

### Sample Protocol
STIM1-GFP was pulled-down from HEK293 cells stably expressing STIM1-GFP (mouse STIM1, RefSeq accession NP_033313.2), as described elsewhere (1). Cells were lysed using the following buffer: 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (w/v) Nonidet P40 (NP-40), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 0.27 M sucrose, 0.1% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM benzamidine, and 0.1 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride (PMSF) (whole cell lysate buffer). Samples were lysed with 0.5 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer/10 cm-dish, sonicated with 4× 10-second pulses with a setting of 40% amplitude using a Branson Digital Sonifier, and then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min (4°C). Protein concentration was determined using the Coomassie Protein Assay Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific). Equilibrated GFP-Trap agarose beads (8 µl) were added to 1 mg of the clarified cell lysate. Lysates were incubated with the beads for 1 h at 4°C with gentle shaking. The agarose beads were washed three times with 1 ml lysis buffer containing 0.15 M NaCl and twice with buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.1 mM EGTA and 0.1% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol). Agarose beads were resuspended in 2 M Urea + 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and stored at -20oC. On-bead digestion was performed from the supernatants. Four biological replicates were digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and trypsin (Promega) on beads as previously described (2) and desalted using StageTip (3).  MS analysis Peptides resulting from all digestions were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer for the in-gel digestion, or to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos for the on-beads digestion (Thermo Scientific). For both instrument a nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation) was used for ionization in positive mode. Chromatography was carried out using a 50 cm (on-beads digestion) fused silica emitter (CoAnn Technologies) packed in house with reverse phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). For the full scan a resolution of 60,000 at 250 Th was used. The top ten most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with a target of 100,000 at a resolution of 15,000 at 250 Th. MS data were acquired using the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software (4) version 1.6.3.3 and searched with Andromeda search engine (5) querying SwissProt (6) Homo sapiens (42438 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas Methionine oxidation, Phosphorylation on Serine-Threonine-Tyrosine, and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. All MaxQuant outputs were analyzed with Perseus software version 1.6.2.3 (7). Protein abundance was measured using label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant (8) and reported in the ProteinGroups.txt file. Reverse and contaminant hits were removed, and only protein groups identified with at least one unique peptide were allowed in all lists of identified proteins. Only proteins robustly quantified in all three replicates in at least one group, were allowed in the list of quantified proteins. Missing values were imputed separately for each column, and significantly enriched proteins were selected using a permutation-based unpaired t-test with FDR set at 1%, comparing all samples to GFP.    REFERENCES  1. Pozo-Guisado,E., Campbell,D.G., Deak,M., Alvarez-Barrientos,A., Morrice,N.A., Alvarez,I.S., Alessi,D.R. and Martin-Romero,F.J. (2010) Phosphorylation of STIM1 at ERK1/2 target sites modulates store-operated calcium entry. J Cell Sci, 123, 3084–93.  2. Hubner,N.C., Bird,A.W., Cox,J., Splettstoesser,B., Bandilla,P., Poser,I., Hyman,A. and Mann,M. (2010) Quantitative proteomics combined with BAC TransgeneOmics reveals in vivo protein interactions. J Cell Biol, 189, 739–754.  3. Rappsilber,J., Mann,M. and Ishihama,Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc, 2, 1896–1906.  4. Cox,J. and Mann,M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol, 26, 1367–1372.  5. Cox,J., Neuhauser,N., Michalski,A., Scheltema,R.A., Olsen,J.V. and Mann,M. (2011) Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J. Proteome Res., 10, 1794–1805.  6. UniProt Consortium (2019) UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. Nucleic Acids Res, 47, D506–D515. 35. Tyanova,S., Temu,T., Sinitcyn,P., Carlson,A., Hein,M.Y., Geiger,T., Mann,M. and Cox,J. (2016) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods, 13, 731–740.  7. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 2016 Sep;13(9):731-40. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3901. Epub 2016 Jun 27. PMID: 27348712.  8. Cox,J., Hein,M.Y., Luber,C.A., Paron,I., Nagaraj,N. and Mann,M. (2014) Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics, 13, 2513–2526.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna repair; double strand breaks; fanconi anemia; nucleus; stim1

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


