### Accession
PXD019691

### Title
Whole-Genome Wide Quantitative Proteomics Studies Revealed Tissue-Specific Expression and Phosphorylation of Regulatory Proteins in Arabidopsis

### Description
Organogenesis in plants occurs during all stages of the life cycle. Although previous studies have identified many genes important for either vegetative or reproductive development at RNA level, global scale information of translational and post-translational regulatory levels is still limited. Here, six Arabidopsis stages/organs were analyzed using quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics, identifying 2,187 non-redundant proteins and 1,194 phosphoproteins. Compared to that in cauline leaves, expression of 1,445, 1,644, and 1,377 proteins showed greater than 1.5-fold alteration in stage 1-9 flowers, stage 10-12 flowers, and open flowers, respectively. In addition, 294 phosphoproteins with 472 phosphorylation sites were newly discovered, including 275 showing differential expression patterns, providing possible candidates for functional studies or molecular markers. In addition, more phosphorylated proteins were identified in reproductive stages (1,149) than in the vegetative process (995). 701 of the proteins differentially phosphorylated between flowers and leaves were predicted to localize to the nucleus, including 22 transcription factors. Moreover, phosphorylation of CDPK6 and MAPK6 and their interacting proteins, were enriched in reproductive tissues. Overall, our study yielded extensive data on protein expression and phosphorylation at six stages and provides an important resource for understanding regulatory mechanisms during plant development.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials and experiment design Arabidopsis thaliana plants of the Columbia ecotype (Col-0) were used in this study. Seeds were surface-sterilized with 75% EtOH for 3minutes, rinsed 3 times with sterile water, plated on half-strengthen Murashige and Skoog (1/2 MS) medium plates (Wako) with 1.5% agar and 1% sucrose (pH 5.8), and then stratified at 4 °C in the dark for 2 days. Plants were germinated and grown under long day conditions (16 hrs light/8 hrs dark; light intensity: 120 µmol m−2 s-1; humidity: 60%-70%) at 22 °C until the roots (R) and above-ground parts (AGP) of 16-day seedling were harvested. 16-day-old Col-0 plants were transferred to the soil and grow for another 4 weeks at the same light and temperature conditions, then the cauline leaves (CL), stage 1 to 9 flowers (F1-9), stage 10 to 12 flowers (F10-12), and open flower (OF) are collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, respectively, and stored at -80℃ until further analyses. For each tissue/organ in this study, the sample for either proteomics or phosphor-proteomics was collected from more than 100 plants.   Protein extraction and peptide preparation Two grams of tissues from each stage/organ were ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen, and suspended with buffer containing 6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea and 100 mM NH4HCO3 (final concentration), respectively. Suspensions were sonicated for 60 min (2 sec sonication with 5 sec intervals) on ice and the extracted proteins were collected by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 20 min at 4 ℃. Then, proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 37 ℃ and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature (25℃) in the dark. The excess iodoacetamide was quenched by the addition of 10 mM DTT. After another centrifugation at 30,000 × g for 20 min at 4 ℃, the protein concentration was determined using Quick Start Bradford Protein assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA).   An aliquot of total protein (200 μg) was taken from each sample and digested with endoproteinase Lys-C at the ratio of 1:100 (Lys-C: protein) for 4 h at room temperature, followed by digestion with Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at the ratio of 20:1 (protein: trypsin)at 37℃ for 12 h.  iTRAQ labeling and Desalting After trypsin digestion, the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, and 100 μg peptides for each tissue were processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ (Apllied Biosystems). The six samples were labeled with the six iTRAQ-tags: 115-iTRAQ tag for F1-9, 116 for F10-12, 117 for OF, 118 for R, 119 for AGP, and 121 for CL.  Then, the iTRAQ-labeled peptides were mixed together, and 100 μg peptide mixtures were acidified with FA and loaded onto a pre-equilibrated home-made Poros R3 micro-column. After washing the R3 resin twice with 5% FA, the peptides were eluted by 20 μl of 30% ACN, followed by 20 μl of 60% ACN.  LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis based on LTQ-Orbitrap Elite  The Liquid chromatography (LC)—electrospray ionization (ESI) tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis was performed using LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermofisher Scientific), coupled with Easy nLC system based on a protocol described in a previous study (ref). Each peptide fractions were resuspended in solvent A (0.1% FA in H2O) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10min.   The peptide separation was accomplished by three-step elution: 35-90% solvent B (0.1% FA in 95% ACN)  in 5 min, 90% solvent B for 13 min.   The MS/MS mode was set as follows: activation type, HCD; collision energy, 35 eV; resolution, 60,000 FWHM; scan range, 300-1800m/z;  The peptide ions were detected in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer and up to 15 of the most intense peptide ions (>5000 counts) were selected and fragmented by MS/MS. Information of peptides and peptide fragments m/z were collected as following: 15 fragment spectra were collected after every full scan (MS2 scan), higher collision energy dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, full scan at a resolution of 60,000, normalized collision energy of 35 eV. Three technical replicates were conducted for reliable statistical consistency.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantization Raw data files acquired from the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher, Germany), and the MGF files were queried against the Arabidopsis database (ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Sequences/blast_datasets/TAIR10_blastsets/TAIR10_pep_20110103_representative_gene_model_updated ) using an in-house Mascot search engine 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK).  Proteins were identified using a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS and ±0.6 Da for MS/MS fragmented ions, with an allowance for only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Only peptides with significance score more than 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis were counted as identified. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized  by the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science). and only ratios with  P < 0.01, according to a Student’s t-test, were employed. The summation of six labeled sample mixtures was used as background (BC), based on the weighted average of the intensity of report ions in each identified peptide. The relative expression of protein were normalized by the ratio of value in certain sample to that of the summation (F1-9/BC, F10-12/BC, OF/BC, R/BC, AGP/BC, CL/BC). Proteins that were once identified in three technical replicates were all considered.  In the vegetative process, the final ratio of protein came from the comparison AGP/BC to CL/BC. At the reproductive stage, the ratios of CL/BC were used as REF, and all the three flower organs, F1-9, F10-12, OF, were compared to REF. Among them, the ratios greater than ±1.5-fold were considered as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).   Phosphopeptide enrichment, identification and phosphorylation residue localization Besides total proteome quantification, most of the iTRAQ–labeled peptide mixtures (400ug for each) were used for phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 micro-columns (1350L250W046 Titansphere, 5 mm, 250 4.6 mm, GL sciences Inc) as described by Thingholm et al.(Thingholm et al. 2006). The mixtures were vacuum dried and resuspended with TiO2 loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid in 80% ACN, 5% TFA) and applied onto the TiO2 micro-column. After washing four times with 20 μl loading buffer and at least three times with 20 μl washing buffer (80% ACN, 1% TFA), the bound peptides were eluted twice with 20 μl elution buffer 1 (2 M NH3•H2O), and with 2 μl elution buffer 2 (1 M NH3•H2O in 30% ACN). The eluates from TiO2 enrichment were desalted as described in the total proteome. LC-MS/MS analysis and database search of phosphoproteins were the same as for the total proteome, except four significant points: 1. phospho_STY (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) were added in the specified parameters in the protein database searches. 2. Identified peptides were further validated with Target Decoy PSM validator and phosphorylation sites were evaluated with phosphoRS3.0. 3. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0% was used for the identification of phosphorylation residues (phosphosites). 4. As to the phosphorylation levels of phosphoproteins, we figured up the ratios of each phosphosites manually instead of using the calculated results from the Proteome Discover.  Bioinformatic analysis R language (x64 3.3.1) was used to cluster the DEPs and to draw heatmaps. Proteins were examined using online DAVID analysis (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) for gene ontology (GO) annotation and enrichment analyses. The metabolic pathway classification of identified proteins was facilitated through Mapman software. The subcellular localization of proteins and phosphoproteins was predicted with WoLF PSORT (http://above-ground.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html). The relationship of detected kinases and potential substrates was generated through PhosAtDB (http://phosphat.uni-hohenheim.de/).

### Publication Abstract
Organogenesis in plants occurs across all stages of the life cycle. Although previous studies have identified many genes as important for either vegetative or reproductive development at the RNA level, global information on translational and post-translational levels remains limited. In this study, six <i>Arabidopsis</i> stages/organs were analyzed using quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics, identifying 2187 non-redundant proteins and evidence for 1194 phosphoproteins. Compared to the expression observed in cauline leaves, the expression of 1445, 1644, and 1377 proteins showed greater than 1.5-fold alterations in stage 1-9 flowers, stage 10-12 flowers, and open flowers, respectively. Among these, 294 phosphoproteins with 472 phosphorylation sites were newly uncovered, including 275 phosphoproteins showing differential expression patterns, providing molecular markers and possible candidates for functional studies. Proteins encoded by genes preferentially expressed in anther (15), meiocyte (4), or pollen (15) were enriched in reproductive organs, and mutants of two anther-preferentially expressed proteins, <i>acos5</i> and <i>mee48</i>, showed obviously reduced male fertility with abnormally organized pollen exine. In addition, more phosphorylated proteins were identified in reproductive stages (1149) than in the vegetative organs (995). The floral organ-preferential phosphorylation of GRP17, CDC2/CDKA.1, and ATSK11 was confirmed with western blot analysis. Moreover, phosphorylation levels of CDPK6 and MAPK6 and their interacting proteins were elevated in reproductive tissues. Overall, our study yielded extensive data on protein expression and phosphorylation at six stages/organs and provides an important resource for future studies investigating the regulatory mechanisms governing plant development.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Quantitative proteomics, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
Fudan University
School of Life Sciences in Fudan University

### Submitter
Mengyu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Fang Chang
Fudan University


