### Accession
PXD001948

### Title
Analysis of pre-and postsynaptic brain receptors, transporters and channels by mass spectrometry

### Description
Although receptors, transporters and channels (RTCs) are key elements in the synaptic membrane, work on analysis and quantification of RTCs by mass spectrometry is limited.  Additionally, there is not a single mass spectrometrical study that assigns the localisation of RTCs to the pre- or post-synaptic membrane.  Determination of localisation and levels of RTCs in pre- or post-synaptic membranes are essential as RTCs may show different functions in different locations.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosomes from rat cortical tissue were isolated,  pre- and post-synaptic membranes were enriched, enzymatically digested, modified by stable-isotope peptide labelling and analysed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4, ThermoFisher Scientific, IL, USA) was used to convert the .raw MS files to .mgf text peaklist files and to search the data against a rat SwissProt database containing 9,626 entries that include both the canonical and isoform sequences downloaded on October, 2014.23 MSMS spectra with a minimum of 10 peaks and a signal-to-noise ratio of 5 were extracted from the .raw files.  The database search was performed using the search engines Mascot,24 SequestHT,25 and MS Amanda.26  The MSMS ion search parameters were as follows: two missed cleavage site, mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.1 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Dynamic amino acid modification was methionine oxidation; static amino acid modifications were TMT 6-plex on peptide N-termini and lysine residues and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues.  The data was also matched against a decoy database and using Percolator27 algorithm, q-values were obtained.  Peptide identifications with q value < 0.01 were reported.  Low-scoring spectra were visually examined to further set a minimum score threshold filter per search algorithm. Protein identifications requiring a minimum of two peptides sequences were reported.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular composition of synaptic signal transduction machineries shapes synaptic neurotransmission. The repertoire of receptors, transporters and channels (RTCs) comprises major signaling events in the brain. RTCs are conventionally studied by candidate immunohistochemistry and biochemistry, which are low throughput with resolution greatly affected by available immunoreagents and membrane interference. Therefore, a comprehensive resource of synaptic brain RTCs is still lacking. In particular, studies on the detergent-soluble synaptosomal fraction, known to contain transporters and channels, are limited. We, therefore, performed sub-synaptosomal fractionation of rat cerebral cortex, followed by trypsin/chymotrypsin sequential digestion of a detergent-soluble synaptosomal fraction and a postsynaptic density preparation, stable-isotope tryptic peptide labeling and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Based on the current study, a total of 4784 synaptic proteins were submitted to the ProteomExchange database (PXD001948), including 274 receptors, 394 transporters/channels and 1377 transmembrane proteins. Function-based classification assigned 1781 proteins as probable drug targets with 834 directly linked to brain disorders. The analytical approach identified 499 RTCs that are not listed in the largest, curated database for synaptosomal proteins (SynProt). This is a threefold RTC increase over all other data collected to date. Taken together, we present a protein discovery resource that can serve as a benchmark for future molecular interrogation of synaptic connectivity.

### Keywords
Postsynaptic, Receptors, Transporters and channels, Membrane, Presynaptic

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna Dept. of Pediatrics Vienna, Austria
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
Medical University of Vienna Dept. of Pediatrics Vienna, Austria


