### Accession
PXD040929

### Title
Iron and thiosulfate respiration in a natronophile Dethiobacter alkaliphilus

### Description
Haloalkaliphilic microorganisms are double extremophiles functioning optimally at high salinity and pH. Their typical habitats are soda lakes, representing geologically ancient ecosystems which are still widespread on Earth and supposedly harbor relict microbial communities. We compared metabolic features and their genomic determinants in two strains of a single natronophilic species Dethiobacter alkaliphilus, the only cultured representative of “Dethiobacteria” class within Bacillota phylum. The strains of D. alkaliphilus were previously isolated from geographically remote Mongolian and Kenyan soda lakes. The type strain AHT1T was described as a facultatively chemolithoautotrophic sulfidogen reducing or disproportionating sulfur or thiosulfate, while strain Z-1002 was isolated as a chemolithoautotrophic iron reducer. Here, we uncovered iron reducing ability of strain AHT1T, as well as the capability of strain Z-1002 for thiosulfate reduction and anaerobic Fe(II) oxidation. Key catabolic processes sustaining the growth of both strains appeared to fit the geochemical settings of two contrasting natural alkaline environments, sulfur-enriched soda lakes and iron-enriched serpentinites. This assumption was supported by meta-analysis of publicly available Dethiobacterial metagenomes, as well as by the enrichment of a novel phylotype from a deep subsurface non-serpentinizing slightly alkaline water after its amendment with an Fe(III) mineral. Genome analysis of D. alkaliphilus strains revealed that the most probable determinants of iron and sulfur redox transformations in the organism are multiheme c-type cytochromes. Their phylogeny reconstruction showed that sulfur and thiosulfate respiration is most probably provided by evolutionary early forms of unconventional octaheme tetrathionate and sulfite reductases sharing a root with structurally similar group of OmhA/OcwA Fe(III)-reductases. Large sets of other multihemes are likely to provide Fe(III) reduction in both strains. Also, several different, yet phylogenetically related, determinants of anaerobic Fe(II) oxidation were identified in Z-1002 genome, and the oxidation process was further experimentally proven. Considering these results and phylogenetic relatedness of D. alkaliphilus’s sulfur reductases with Fe(III) reducing cytochromes, but not with archetypal bacterial sulfur/thiosulfate reductases, we suggest that sustaining high variation of multiheme cytochromes is an effective adaptive strategy to occupy geochemically contrasting alkaline anaerobic environments. We further propose that sulfur-enriched soda lakes are secondary habitats for D. alkaliphilus comparing to Fe-rich serpentinites, and discuss the evolutionary traits which might occur in prokaryotes on a crucial junction of the biosphere’s history, when intensification of the sulfur cycle outweighed the global significance of the iron cycle.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis biomass of D. alkaliphilus strain AHT1T grown with H2 and thiosulfate or SF as the electron acceptors was harvested from 100 mL cultures by centrifugation at 16000 g for 15 min. Both cultures were grown in triplicates. Prior to harvesting, the SF-grown biomass was divided into liquid and mineral phases using low speed centrifugation (5 min, 1000g). The mineral phase was ultrasonicated inside the centrifuge bags in an ultrasonic bath (Sapphire, Russia) at 99% power, 5 min, to separate attached cells from the minerals. The ultrasonicated  mineral phase was than combined with the liquid phase, mixed thoroughly, the bulk the minerals was held in the bags with a hand magnet and the remaining suspension was transferred to another centrifuge bags to harvest the biomass at 13000g for 20 min. Cell lysis, reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins were performed as follows. Sodium deoxycholate (SDC) lysis, reduction and alkylation buffer (pH 8.5) containing 100 mM TRIS, 1% (w/v) SDC, 10 mM TRIS(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide was added to a biomass sample. The sample was sonicated and boiled for 10 min, protein concentration in the sample was routinely determined by Bradford assay and equal volume of trypsin solution (pH 8.5) in 100 mM TRIS was added in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio. After overnight digestion at 37oC, peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for styrenedivinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS)-binding, and 20 µg was loaded on two 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Equal volume of ethyl acetate was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged at 300 g. After washing the StageTips with a 100 µl of 1% TFA/ethyl acetate mixture and 100 µl of 0.2% TFA, peptides were eluted by 60 µl acetonitrile/ammonia (80/5 %, v/v) mixture. The collected material was vacuum-dried and stored at -80oC. Before analysis, peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA buffer and sonicated for 2 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on the Q Exactive HF benchtop Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to the Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System via a nanoelectrospray source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dissolved peptides were analyzed using the HPLC system configured in a trap-elute mode. Approximately 1 µg of tryptic peptide digests were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 µm x 2 cm) trap column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 µm x 50 cm) column (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.2% FA) and eluted at a flow rate of 350 nL min-1 with a multistep linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% FA, 80% acetonitrile): 4 - 6% B for 5 min; 6 – 28% B for 91 min; 28 – 45% B for 20 min; 45 – 99% B for 4 min; 99% B for 7 min; 99 – 4% B for 1 min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 96% buffer B for 9 min. Column was kept at 40°C. Peptides were analyzed on a mass spectrometer with one full scan (375–1,400 m/z, R = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions and max ion fill time 30 ms, followed by up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans with higher-energy collisional dissociation (target 1e5 ions, max ion fill time 50 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy 28%, underfill ratio 2%), detected in the Orbitrap (R = 15,000 at fixed first mass 100 m/z). Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >6; peptide match – preferred; exclude isotopes – on; dynamic exclusion – 30 s was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification was made by MaxQuant software version  2.0.3.1 using D. alkaliphilus strain AHT1 amino acid FASTA dataset and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine, with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 20 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Downstream bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus.2.0.3.1. For Student’s t-test, missing values were imputed with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8 over the total matrix. Two sample tests were performed in Perseus with s0 set to 0. Quantification was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1. To quantify proteins in each sample, the iBAQ algorithm, implemented into MaxQuant software, was used (Schwanhausser et al., 2011). Normalization of each protein’s iBAQ value to the sum of all iBAQ values generated a relative iBAQ (riBAQ) values corresponding to the mole percentage of each protein in the sample, taking the whole set of proteins in it as 100%.

### Publication Abstract
Haloalkaliphilic microorganisms are double extremophiles functioning optimally at high salinity and pH. Their typical habitats are soda lakes, geologically ancient yet widespread ecosystems supposed to harbor relict microbial communities. We compared metabolic features and their determinants in two strains of the natronophilic species <i>Dethiobacter alkaliphilus</i>, the only cultured representative of the class "<i>Dethiobacteria</i>" (<i>Bacillota</i>). The strains of <i>D. alkaliphilus</i> were previously isolated from geographically remote Mongolian and Kenyan soda lakes. The type strain AHT1<sup>T</sup> was described as a facultative chemolithoautotrophic sulfidogen reducing or disproportionating sulfur or thiosulfate, while strain Z-1002 was isolated as a chemolithoautotrophic iron reducer. Here, we uncovered the iron reducing ability of strain AHT1<sup>T</sup> and the ability of strain Z-1002 for thiosulfate reduction and anaerobic Fe(II) oxidation. Key catabolic processes sustaining the growth of both <i>D. alkaliphilus</i> strains appeared to fit the geochemical settings of two contrasting natural alkaline environments, sulfur-enriched soda lakes and iron-enriched serpentinites. This hypothesis was supported by a meta-analysis of <i>Dethiobacterial</i> genomes and by the enrichment of a novel phylotype from a subsurface alkaline aquifer under Fe(III)-reducing conditions. Genome analysis revealed multiheme <i>c</i>-type cytochromes to be the most probable determinants of iron and sulfur redox transformations in <i>D. alkaliphilus</i>. Phylogeny reconstruction showed that all the respiratory processes in this organism are likely provided by evolutionarily related early forms of unconventional octaheme tetrathionate and sulfite reductases and their structural analogs, OmhA/OcwA Fe(III)-reductases. Several phylogenetically related determinants of anaerobic Fe(II) oxidation were identified in the Z-1002 genome, and the oxidation process was experimentally demonstrated. Proteomic profiling revealed two distinct sets of multiheme cytochromes upregulated in iron(III)- or thiosulfate-respiring cells and the cytochromes peculiar for Fe(II) oxidizing cells. We suggest that maintaining high variation in multiheme cytochromes is an effective adaptive strategy to occupy geochemically contrasting alkaline environments. We propose that sulfur-enriched soda lakes could be secondary habitats for <i>D. alkaliphilus</i> compared to Fe-rich serpentinites, and that the ongoing evolution of <i>Dethiobacterales</i> could retrace the evolutionary path that may have occurred in prokaryotes at a turning point in the biosphere's history, when the intensification of the sulfur cycle outweighed the global significance of the iron cycle.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Dethiobacter alkaliphilus, Proteome

### Affiliations
Extremophiles metabolism laboratory, Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, FRC Biotechnology, RAS, Russia
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Gavrilov
Extremophiles metabolism laboratory, Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, FRC Biotechnology, RAS, Russia


