### Accession
PXD010355

### Title
An atypical aspartic protease modulates lateral root development in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
We determined the specificity profile of recombinant ASPR1 (Atypical Aspartic Protease in Roots 1) using proteome-derived libraries. Although rASPR1 preferred hydrophobic amino acids in the S1 subsite, which is in line with what was previously described for other APs, rASPR1 also displayed a clear preference for accommodating asparagine and lysine in S1, a characteristic only reported so far for fungal APs. Both primary and secondary specificity preferences of rASPR1 thus revealed unique specificity requirements similar to fungal APs that are unprecedented for plant APs.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome-derived peptide libraries were generated by digesting THP1 cells lysates with either trypsin or GluC. rASPR1 was incubated with each peptide library at a ratio of 1:20 (w/w), for 5 h at 25 °C, in 50 mM sodium acetate buffer pH 4 supplemented with 100 mM NaCl. After incubation, samples were analyzed on a Triple TOFTM 5600 System (ABSciex®) in information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode. Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC column Halo Fused-Core C18 (300 μm ID × 15 cm length, 2.7 μm particles, 90 Å pore size, Eksigent®) at 5μL/min with a 110 min linear gradient from 2% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSprayTM Source, ABSciex®) with a 50 μm internal diameter (ID) stainless steel emitter (NewObjective).For IDA experiments was performed (as described in Anjo et al (2015)), the mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250 ms, followed by up to 30 MS/MS scans (100-1500 m/z for 100 ms each). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 70 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation, and 1 MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 sec (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.6, ABSciex®). Rolling collision energy was used with a collision energy spread of 5.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the peptide sequences was performed using MS Converter (ProteoWizard) converting the LC-MS/MS raw data files (.wiff) , into .mzxml files applying MS1 level filter (Darren Kessner D, et al. (2008) Bioinformatics). Peptide sequences were then identiﬁed with X!Tandem (Craig R & Beavis RC (2004) Bioinformatics), in conjunction with IProphet [Shteynberg D, et al. (2011) Mol. Cell Proteomics) at a conﬁdence level > 99%. Analysis parameters were established such as mass tolerances at 0.05 Da for parent ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions, as well as for identification of the following static modifications: carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.02 Da), dimethylation of lysines (+ 28.03 Da) and thioacylation of peptide amino termini (+ 88.00 Da). Semi-style cleavage searches were applied with no constraints for the orientation of the specific terminus. The Web-based PICS service (Schilling et al 2011a) was used to derive nonprime sequences and to reconstruct the cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
Few atypical aspartic proteases (APs) present in plants have been functionally studied to date despite having been implicated in developmental processes and stress responses. Here we characterize a novel atypical AP that we name Atypical Aspartic Protease in Roots 1 (ASPR1), denoting its expression in Arabidopsis roots. Recombinant ASPR1 produced by transient expression in Nicotiana benthamiana was active and displayed atypical properties, combining optimum acidic pH, partial sensitivity to pepstatin, pronounced sensitivity to redox agents, and unique specificity preferences resembling those of fungal APs. ASPR1 overexpression suppressed primary root growth and lateral root development, implying a previously unknown biological role for an AP. Quantitative comparison of wild-type and aspr1 root proteomes revealed deregulation of proteins associated with both reactive oxygen species and auxin homeostasis in the mutant. Together, our findings on ASPR1 reinforce the diverse pattern of enzymatic properties and biological roles of atypical APs and raise exciting questions on how these distinctive features impact functional specialization among these proteases.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana; aspr1; atypical aspartic protease; auxin; lateral root; magnicon expression system; root development; ros

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Isaura Simões
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal


