### Accession
PXD022896

### Title
Mucin-type O-glycosylation Landscapes of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Proteins

### Description
The densely glycosylated spike (S) proteins that are highly exposed on the surface of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) facilitate viral attachment, entry, and membrane fusion. We have previously reported all the 22 N-glycosites and site-specific N-glycans in the S protein protomer. Herein, we report the comprehensive site-specific O-glycosylation landscapes of SARS-CoV-2 S proteins, which were characterized using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Following digestion using trypsin and trypsin/Glu-C, and de-N-glycosylation using PNGase F, we determined the mucin-type (GalNAc-type) O-glycosylation pattern of S proteins, including O-glycosites and the 6 most common O-glycans occupying them, via Byonic identification and manual validation. Finally, 43 O-glycosites were identified by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD), and 11 O-glycosites were verified by electron transfer/higher energy collision-induced dissociation (EThcD) in the insect cell-expressed S protein. Most glycosites were modified by non-sialylated O-glycans such as HexNAc(1) and HexNAc(1)Hex(1). In contrast, 30 O-glycosites were identified by HCD, and 14 O-glycosites were verified by EThcD in the human cell-expressed S protein S1 subunit. Most glycosites were modified by sialylated O-glycans such as HexNAc(1)Hex(1)NeuAc(1) and HexNAc(1)Hex(1)NeuAc(2). Our results are the first to reveal that the SARS-CoV-2 S protein is a mucin-type glycoprotein; clustered O-glycans often occur in the N- and the C-termini of the S protein, and the O-glycosite and O-glycan compositions vary with the host cell type. These site-specific O-glycosylation landscapes of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein are expected to provide novel insights into the viral binding mechanism and present a strategy for the development of vaccines and targeted drugs.

### Sample Protocol
2.2. Protein digestion Recombinant S proteins were proteolyzed using an in-solution protease digestion protocol. In brief, 50 μg of protein were dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (pH=8.5) and denatured for 10 min at 95 °C. After reduction by DTT (20 mM) for 45 min at 56 °C and alkylation with IAA (50 mM) for 1 h at 25 °C in the dark, 2 μg of protease (trypsin or trypsin/Glu-C) was added to the tube and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C. After desalting using a pipette tip packed with a C18 membrane, the peptide concentration was determined using a peptide assay kit, based on the absorbance measured at 480 nm. The peptide mixtures were freeze-dried for further analysis.  2.3. Enrichment of intact glycopeptides and N-glycan removal Intact N- and O-glycopeptides were enriched with ZIC-HILIC materials. Specifically, 20 μg of peptides was suspended in 100 μL of 80% ACN/0.2% TFA solution, and 2 mg of processed ZIC-HILIC materials was added to the peptide solution and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Finally, the mixture was transferred to a 200 μL pipette tip packed with a C8 membrane, and washed twice with 80% ACN/0.2% TFA. After enrichment, intact glycopeptides were eluted thrice with 70 μL of 0.1% TFA, and dried using a SpeedVac concentrator. The enriched intact glycopeptides were digested using 1 U PNGase F dissolved in 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 2 h at 37 °C. The reaction was terminated by adding 0.1% FA. The de-N-glycopeptides and O-glycopeptides were dried using a SpeedVac concentrator for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
All the samples were analyzed using higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) in mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer). In brief, intact O-glycopeptides and de-N-glycopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and separated on a column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 75 μm inner diameter, 20 cm length; Dr Maisch) over a 78 min gradient (buffer A, 0.1% FA in water; buffer B, 0.1% FA in 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 was analyzed with a scan range (m/z) of 350–1,550 at an Orbitrap resolution of 120,000. The RF lens, AGC target, maximum injection time, and exclusion duration were 30%, 1.0e6, 50 ms, and 15 s, respectively. MS2 was analyzed with an isolation window (m/z) of 2 at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000. The AGC target, maximum injection time, and HCD type were 5.0e4, 80 ms, and 35%, respectively. For further verification, the same samples were analyzed using electron transfer/higher energy collision-induced dissociation (EThcD) in mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer). The MS1 was analyzed with a mass range of 400-1,600 at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. The RF Lens was set as 30 % and the maximum injection time (MIT) was 100 ms. The MS2 was analyzed in quadrupole mode and the isolation window was 2 m/z. The EThcD collision energy type was 35%. The MIT was set at 250 ms and cycle time was set at 3 s. 2.5. Data analysis Raw data files were searched against the SARS-CoV-2 S protein sequence using Byonic™ software (version 3.6.0, Protein Metrics, Inc.)16, with the mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions set at ±10 and ±20 ppm, respectively. HCD or EThcD was chosen as the fragmentation type. Two missed cleavage sites were subjected to trypsin or trypsin/Glu-C digestion. The fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C), and the variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), and de-amidation (N). In addition, the 6 most common mucin-type O-glycans (HexNAc(1) with mass of 203.079 Da; HexNAc(2) with mass of 406.159 Da; HexNAc(1)Hex(1) with mass of 365.132 Da; HexNAc(2)Hex(1) with mass of 568.212 Da; HexNAc(1)Hex(1)NeuAc(1) with mass of 656.228 Da; and HexNAc(1)Hex(1)NeuAc(2) with mass of 947.323 Da) were specified as O-glycan modifications for intact O-glycopeptides. We then checked the protein database options, including the decoy database. All other parameters were set to the default values, and protein groups were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate, based on the number of hits obtained for the searches against the databases. Stricter quality control methods for intact O-glycopeptide identification were implemented; they required a score of not less than 300, and at least 6 amino acids to be identified. Furthermore, all the glycopeptide-spectrum matches (GPSMs) were examined manually and filtered using the following standard criteria: a. GPSMs were accepted if there were at least two glycan oxonium ions and at least 6 b/y ions in the peptide backbone. b. The unambiguously identified O-glycosites were not to be hindered by the surrounding potential O-glycosites (Ser or Thr). In addition, the high-confidence O-glycosites had to be identified repeatedly at least twice. O-glycosite conservation analysis was performed using R software packages. Model building based on the Cryo-EM structure (PDB: 6VSB) of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein was performed using PyMOL.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Spike protein, O-glycosylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
Sichuan University


