### Accession
PXD035900

### Title
Global Protein Abundance and Phosphorylation Analyses of Influenza A Virus (IAV)-Infected Human Cells

### Description
Influenza A Virus (IAV) is a recurring respiratory virus with antiviral therapies of limited use. Understanding host proteins essential for IAV infection can identify targets for alternative host-directed therapies (HDTs). Using affinity purification-mass spectrometry and global phosphoproteomic and protein abundance analyses with three IAV strains (pH1N1, H3N2, H5N1) in three human cell types (A549, NHBE, THP-1), we mapped 332 IAV-human protein-protein interactions and identified 13 IAV-modulated kinases. Whole exome sequencing of patients who experienced severe influenza revealed several genes, including the structural scaffold protein AHNAK, with predicted loss-of-function variants that were also identified in our proteomic analyses. Of our identified host factors, 54 significantly altered IAV infection upon siRNA knockdown, and two factors, COPB1 and AHNAK, were also essential for productive infection by SARS-CoV-2. Finally, 16 compounds targeting our identified host factors suppressed IAV replication, with three targeting ATP6V1A, CDK2 and FLT3 showing pan-antiviral activity across influenza and coronavirus families. This study provides a comprehensive network model of IAV infection in human cells, identifying functional host targets for pan-viral HDT. This project includes the global proteomic data (abundance and phosphorylation), the AP-MS data has been submitted separately as its own dataset and has its own dataset identifier.

### Sample Protocol
A/California/04/2009 H1N1, A/Wyoming/03/2003 H3N2 and A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1 HALo IAV viruses were propagated in embryonated chicken eggs (Charles River Laboratories) following methods previously described (Eisfeld et al., 2014). Virus stocks were titrated in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells (ATCC, CCL-34) by plaque assay. All infections with live IAV were performed in accordance with institutional Biosafety Level 2+ biosafety procedures at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai and the J. David Gladstone Institutes. NHBE and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-differentiated THP-1 cells were either mock infected or infected in biological duplicate with A/California/04/2009 H1N1 IAV, A/Wyoming/03/2003 H3N2 IAV or A/Vietnam/1203/2004 H5N1 HALo IAV at MOI 2 in 0.5% BSA in 1X PBS with magnesium and calcium. Cells were incubated in virus inoculum at 37°C for 1 hour. After absorption, virus inoculum was aspirated and replaced with cell growth media supplemented with TPCK-trypsin. Cells were incubated at 37ºC before cell harvesting at four time points (3, 6, 12, and 18 hrs post-infection). IAV-infected cells were harvested and lysed with time point-matched mocks for each IAV strain and cell type. Each sample was washed with 1X PBS and lysed in 2mL urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl) supplemented with Complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor. Cells were incubated on ice for 30 minutes and then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC. Samples were thawed on ice, probe sonicated, and clarified, and protein concentration determined by Bradford assay. Clarified lysates were reduced and alkylated, quenched, diluted to a final concentration of 2M urea and digested with trypsin at a 1:100 (enzyme:protein w:w) ratio overnight at 37°C. Following digestion, peptides were acidified and desalted, and 10 μg of each sample was lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation and reserved for global protein abundance MS data acquisition. The remaining sample (> 1mg) was used for phosphopeptide enrichment by iron nitriloacetic acid (NTA) agarose resin. Ni-NTA Superflow beads were stripped of nickel, conditioned and loaded with iron. Iron NTA beads were equilibrated with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. For each sample, 1mg of dried peptides were resuspended in 75% acetonitrile, 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid and incubated with the equilibrated iron-NTA beads for 2 minutes, washed four times with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA, and washed three times with 0.5% formic acid. Beads were then incubated twice with 500mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7 for 15 seconds, and twice with 0.5% formic acid for 15 seconds. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 75μL 50% acetonitrile, 0.25% formic acid, and lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were collected on 3 instruments (Orbitrap Fusion, Orbitrap Elite, and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Virus and time-matched mocks were collected concurrently on the same instruments as follows: 1) Orbitrap Fusion collected THP-1 abundance data for pH1N1, H3N2 and H5N1, NHBE abundance data for pH1N1, H3N2 and H5N1, as well as NHBE phosphorylation data for pH1N1 and H3N2; 2) Orbitrap Elite collected NHBE phosphorylation data for H5N1; and 3) Orbitrap Fusion Lumos collected THP-1 phosphorylation data for pH1N1, H3N2 and H5N1.   For samples acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion and Orbitrap Elite, dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and injected in technical duplicate (NHBE) or singlet (THP-1) on an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to the mass spectrometer. For samples acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, dried peptides were dissolved in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and injected in technical singlet onto an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to the mass spectrometer. For all three instruments, peptides were separated on a 75μm x 25cm fused silica IntegraFrit capillary packed with 1.9μm Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ reversed-phase resin over a 180min (Fusion, Lumos) or 240min (Elite) gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute (see MS parameters table for details). For all instruments, buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, and buffer B was 0.1% FA in acetonitrile. Orbitrap Fusion acquisition was as follows: spectra were continuously acquired in a data-dependent manner. Using a top speed method with N=3 seconds, each cycle had one full scan in the Orbitrap (400-1600 m/z at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 2×10^5 and maximum injection time of 100 milliseconds) and MS/MS scans acquired in the dual linear ion trap (HCD collision energy of 30%, AGC target of 1x10^4, maximum injection time of 35 milliseconds, and isolation window of 1.6 m/z) with singly and unassigned charge states rejected, and with dynamic exclusion enabled after n=1 time, with an exclusion duration of 40 seconds (tolerance of ±10 ppm). Orbitrap Elite acquisition was as follows: spectra were continuously acquired in a data-dependent manner; each cycle consisted of one full scan in the Orbitrap (200-2000 m/z, at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1×10^6 and maximum injection time of 100 milliseconds), followed by 20 MS/MS scans acquired in the linear ion trap (AGC target of 3x10^4, maximum injection time of 50ms, fragmented by normalized collision energy at 35%), with singly and unassigned charge states rejected, and with dynamic exclusion enabled with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 20 seconds (tolerance of ±10 ppm). Orbitrap Fusion Lumos acquisition was as follows: spectra were continuously acquired in a data-dependent manner. Using a top speed method with N=3 seconds, a cycle consisted of one full scan in the Orbitrap (at 120,000 resolution in profile mode with an AGC target of 2×10^5 and maximum injection time of 100 milliseconds), and MS/MS scans collected in the dual linear ion trap (rapid scan type with an intensity threshold of 5000, HCD collision energy of 30%, AGC target of 1x10^4, maximum injection time of 35 milliseconds, and isolation width of 1.6 m/z). Singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, an exclusion duration of 30 seconds, and an exclusion mass width of ±10 ppm. Detailed MS acquisition parameters are reported in the MS parameters table for all instruments.  Raw MS files were grouped by cell line, sample type and instrument, and searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) against the human proteome (SwissProt human canonical sequences, downloaded 09 October 2018) concatenated with IAV protein sequences. Trypsin (KR|P) was selected with two missed cleavages. Variable modifications: N-terminal protein acetylation, and N-terminal protein methionine oxidation, with phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine for phospho-enrichment samples only. Static modification: carbamidomethyl cysteine. LFQ and match between runs were enabled. Peptide ion intensities were summarized to protein intensities using R Bioconductor package MSstats (version 3.19.4). Phosphopeptide data: peptide ion intensities were summarized to a single intensity per unique observed single-peptide by relabeling the protein of each feature as the protein name phosphorylated sites usin Bioconductor package artMS (version 1.3.9). Infected and mock samples were compared and scored using the MSstats and one time point per virus was selected for both cell types based on viral protein abundance (H1N1 and H3N2: 18 hrs; H5N1: 12 hours). Significantly regulated proteins and phosphorylation sites were set as: (1) adjusted p-value < 0.05; and (2) absolute(log2FC) > 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Protein abundance, Thp-1, Infection, H5n1, Phosphorylation, Nhbe, Influenza a virus, H1n1, H3n2

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
Dept. Cellular Molecular Pharmacology, University of California - San Francisco (UCSF), USA

### Submitter
Robyn Kaake

### Lab Head
Dr Robyn Kaake
Dept. Cellular Molecular Pharmacology, University of California - San Francisco (UCSF), USA


