### Accession
PXD004277

### Title
Gel-free/label-free proteomic analysis of wheat root in stress tolerant varieties under iron nanoparticles exposure

### Description
Iron nanoparticles (Fe NPs) have stimulatory effects on the germination ratio and plant growth of wheat. To elucidate the effects of Fe NPs on shoot of drought tolerant Pakistan-13 and salt tolerant NARC-11, a gel-free/label-free proteomic technique was used.

### Sample Protocol
A portion (300 mg) of each collected sample was ground in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. The powder was transferred to a solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The resulting suspension was vortexed, sonicated for 10 min, and then incubated for 60 min at -20°C. The suspension was centrifuged at 9,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded, and the obtained pellet was washed twice with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The final pellet was drieSeeds of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) varieties Pakistan-13 and NARC-11 were sown and plants were grown in a growth chamber. For proteomic analysis, shoot was harvested at 2 day of treatment without or with 5 ppm Fe NPs exposure. Twenty seeds were used for each treatment in each replication and 3 independent experiments were performed as biological replicates for all experiments

### Data Protocol
A portion (500 mg) of each sample was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle, and transferred to an acetone solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol. The resulting mixture was vortexed, sonicated for 10 min, and then incubated for 60 min at -20°C. The suspension was centrifuged at 9,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded, and obtained pellet was washed twice with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The final pellet was dried using a Speed-Vac concentrator (Savant Instruments, Hickville, NY, USA) and resuspended in lysis buffer, consisting of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM tributylphosphine, by vortexing for 1 h at 25°C. The resulting suspension was centrifuged twice at 20,000 x g for 20 min at 25°C and the supernatant was collected as total protein. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin as the standard. Proteins (150 µg) were purified with methanol and chloroform to remove any detergent from the sample solutions. The upper aqueous phase was discarded keeping the white disk unbroken and 450 µL of methanol was added slowly to lower phase. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min, supernatants were discarded, and pellets were dried. The dried pellets were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, proteins in the samples were reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase (Wako, Osaka, Japan) at 1:100 enzyme/protein concentrations at 37°C for 16 h. The resulting tryptic peptides were acidified by mixing with formic acid (pH<3) and the resulting solution was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The obtained supernatant was collected and analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS). Peptides were loaded onto an Ultimate 3,000 Nano LC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex). Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and UniProt Knowledgebase SwissProt (http://www.uniprot.org). DTA files were generated from acquired raw data files and then converted to Mascot generic files using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Using SIEVE, the relative abundances of peptides and proteins were compared between the control and treated groups

### Publication Abstract
Iron nanoparticles (Fe NPs) have stimulatory effects on the germination ratio and plant growth of wheat. To elucidate the effects of Fe NPs on shoot of drought tolerant Pakistan-13 and salt tolerant NARC-11, a gel-free/label-free proteomic technique was used. The weights/lengths of seedling, shoot, and root of wheat varieties were increased on 5ppm Fe NPs exposure. The number of proteins related to photosynthesis and protein metabolism was decreased and increased in drought tolerant variety and salt tolerant variety, respectively, treated with Fe NPs compared to untreated plants. Differentially changed proteins in drought tolerant variety and salt tolerant variety were mainly related to photosynthesis. Out of photosynthesis related proteins, light reaction was enhanced in salt tolerant variety compared to drought tolerant variety on Fe NPs exposure. The abundance of ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase small chain in drought tolerant variety was higher than that in salt tolerant variety; however, in salt tolerant variety, it was increased 3 fold by Fe NPs exposure compared to untreated plant. These results suggest that Fe NPs improve the growth of wheat seedling, which might be associated with the increase of protein abundance in photosynthesis in salt tolerant variety.

### Keywords
Abiotic stress tolerance, Proteomics, Iron nanoparticles, Wheat, Shoot

### Affiliations
University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science, Tsukuba, Japan


