### Accession
PXD026395

### Title
A comprehensive mass spectral library for human thyroid tissues

### Description
Thyroid nodules occur in about 60% of the population. Current diagnostic strategies, however, often fail at distinguishing malignant nodules before surgery, thus leading to unnecessary, invasive treatments. As proteins are involved in all physio/pathological processes, a proteome investigation of biopsied nodules may help correctly classify and identify malignant nodules and discover therapeutic targets. Quantitative mass spectrometry data-independent acquisition (DIA) enables highly reproducible and rapid throughput investigation of proteomes. An exhaustive spectral library of thyroid nodules is essential for DIA yet still unavailable. This study presents a comprehensive thyroid spectral library covering five types of thyroid tissue: multinodular goiter, follicular adenoma, follicular and papillary thyroid carcinoma, and normal thyroid tissue. Our library includes 925,330 transition groups, 157,548 peptide precursors, 121,960 peptides, 9941 protein groups, and 9826 proteins from proteotypic peptides. This library resource was evaluated using three papillary thyroid carcinoma samples and their corresponding adjacent normal thyroid tissue, leading to effective quantification of up to 7863 proteins from biopsy-level thyroid tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Five types of thyroid tissues were collected, namely normal tissue, two types of benign nodules (multinodular goiter (MNG) and follicular adenoma (FA), and two types of thyroid carcinomas (follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) and papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). Normal thyroid and thyroid nodule tissues were processed by PCT; extracted and desalted peptides were then combined into three different pooled samples: (1) pooled sample containing all five types, (2) PTC pooled samples, and (3) FA and FTC pooled sample. The pooled peptides were fractionated in two ways, i.e. strong cation exchange (SCX) or high-pH reversed-phase chromatography, to achieve higher peptide coverage.

### Data Protocol
Peptide fractions were injected into HPLC-MS/MS with 60 min-gradient through DDA mode using Thermo Orbitrap Q ExactiveTM HF. 46 DDA files were acquired in total.Four datasets were then acquired with the following four acquisition strategies: single-shot DIA (dataset 1), PulseDIA (dataset 2), pre-fraction DIA (dataset 3), and a combination of pre-fraction and PulseDIA (dataset 4).

### Publication Abstract
Thyroid nodules occur in about 60% of the population. A major challenge in thyroid nodule diagnosis is to distinguish between follicular adenoma (FA) and carcinoma (FTC). Here, we present a comprehensive thyroid spectral library covering five types of thyroid tissues. This library includes 121&#xa0;960 peptides and 9941 protein groups. This spectral library can be used to quantify up to 7863 proteins from thyroid tissues, and can also be used to develop parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assays for targeted protein quantification. Next, to stratify follicular thyroid tumours, we compared the proteomes of 24 FA and 22 FTC samples, and identified 204 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Our data suggest altered ferroptosis pathways in malignant follicular carcinoma. In all, 31 selected proteins effectively distinguished follicular tumours. Of those DEPs, nine proteins were further verified by PRM in an independent cohort of 18 FA and 19 FTC. Together, we present a comprehensive spectral library for DIA and targeted proteomics analysis of thyroid tissue specimens, and identified nine proteins that could potentially distinguish FA and FTC.

### Keywords
Spectral library, Dia, Human thyroid

### Affiliations
Westlake University
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou 310024, China

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Tiannan Guo
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou 310024, China


