### Accession
PXD033022

### Title
Mapping glucose uptake, transport and metabolism in the bovine lens

### Description
To spatially correlate the pattern of glucose uptake to glucose transporter distributions in cultured lenses and map glucose metabolism in different lens regions.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine lenses (either fresh, untreated or cultured with SIL glucose as above, n=6) were micro-dissected with tweezers. The capsule containing the lens epithelium was peeled away from the underlying lens fibre cells. An 8mm surgical punch was used to collect samples from central, peripheral and equatorial regions of the epithelium, and samples pooled for protein preparation. Samples from peripheral fibres were also collected by using tweezers to peel off cellular material from the periphery of the decapsulated lenses. The denser underlying inner cortical tissue was removed to expose the hard, central nucleus, and tweezers were used to collect fibre cells from this central lens region.Tissues from each micro-dissected lens region were homogenised in an ice-cold lysis buffer (5 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA) that contained a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), using a hand-held homogeniser (Ultra-Turrax®, IKA-Werke, Staufen, Germany). Following centrifugation at 15 000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, the pellet was separated from the supernatant. Both the pellet and supernatant were loaded and separated on an 10% SDS PAGE gel (Mini-PROTEAN® Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, California, USA), following standard protocols.A prominent band at the Mw 53kDa, corresponding to the molecular weight of GLUTs, was cut from samples of each collected region using a 6x2 mm punch. The gel bands were placed in different 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and diced into cubes. The gel bands were prepared for LC/MS analysis following standard protocols. Briefly, the bands were washed and de-stained with 50% acetonitrile in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50mM). Following de-staining, the bands were dehydrated with acetonitrile, reduced using dithiothreitol and concomitantly alkylated with iodoacetamide. Subsequently, the bands were dehydrated again and were finally subjected to enzymatic digestion using 12.5 ng/µl porcine trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, Wisconsin) in a temperature-controlled microwave at 45°C for 1 hour. The digest was acidified to halt digestion, and peptides were injected onto a 0.3 x 10 mm trap column packed with Reprosil C18 media (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and desalted for 5 min at 10 µl/min before being separated on a 0.075 x 200 mm picofrit column (New Objective, Inc., Littleton, Massachusetts, USA) packed in-house with 3 m Reprosil C18 media. A 30-50% solvent B gradient was applied at 300 nl/min using a NanoLC 400 UPLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Redwood City, California), where solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The picofrit spray was directed into a TripleTOF 6600 Quadrupole-Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer (AB Sciex LLC, Framingham, Massachusetts) scanning from 300-2000 m/z for 200 ms, followed by 40 ms MS/MS scans on the 35 most abundant multiply-charged peptides (m/z 80-1600). The mass spectrometer and HPLC system were controlled by the Analyst TF 1.7 software package (AB Sciex LLC, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were searched against a database comprising Uniprot bovine entries appended with a set of common contaminant sequences using ProteinPilot version 5.0 (AB Sciex LLC, Framingham, Massachusetts, USA). Search parameters were as follows: Sample Type = Identification; Search Effort = Thorough; Cys Alkylation = Iodoacetamide; Digestion = Trypsin.  The peptide summary exported from ProteinPilot was further processed in Excel (v2102, Microsoft Corp., Albuquerque, New Mexico) using a custom macro to remove proteins with Unused Scores below 1.3, to eliminate inferior or redundant peptide spectral matches, and to sum the intensities for all unique peptides from each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bovine lens, Cortex, Glucose transportor

### Affiliations
The University of Auckland
Department of Physiology in the School of Medical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand

### Submitter
George Kwok

### Lab Head
Dr Gus Grey
Department of Physiology in the School of Medical Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand


