### Accession
PXD003480

### Title
Dionaea secretome stimulation -  Venus flytrap carnivorous lifestyle builds on herbivore defense strategies

### Description
Proteome analysis of secretion fluid of Dionaea under different stimulation condtions

### Sample Protocol
A total of 50µg protein was predigested for three hours with endoproteinase Lys-C (0.5 µg/µl; Wako Chemicals, Neuss) at room temperature. After 4-fold dilution with 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), samples were digested with 4 µL Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin (0.5 µg µL-1; Promega) overnight at 37 °C. After overnight digestion, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added (until pH ≤ 3) to stop digestion. Digested peptides were desalted over C18 tips.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and ion intensity quantitation was carried out by MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5. Spectra were matched against the Dionaea contigs using Andromeda. Thereby, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Mass tolerance for the database search was set to 20 ppm on full scans and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Multiplicity was set to 1. For label-free quantitation, retention time matching between runs was chosen within a time window of two minutes. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR were set to 0.01, while site FDR was set to 0.05. Hits to contaminants (e.g. keratins) and reverse hits identified by MaxQuant were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Although the concept of botanical carnivory has been known since Darwin's time, the molecular mechanisms that allow animal feeding remain unknown, primarily due to a complete lack of genomic information. Here, we show that the transcriptomic landscape of the Dionaea trap is dramatically shifted toward signal transduction and nutrient transport upon insect feeding, with touch hormone signaling and protein secretion prevailing. At the same time, a massive induction of general defense responses is accompanied by the repression of cell death-related genes/processes. We hypothesize that the carnivory syndrome of Dionaea evolved by exaptation of ancient defense pathways, replacing cell death with nutrient acquisition.

### Keywords
Secretion fluid, Venus fly trap, Dionaea

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Systems Biology University of Hohenheim 70593 Stuttgart Germany
Universität Hohenheim

### Submitter
Waltraud Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Waltraud Schulze
Department of Plant Systems Biology University of Hohenheim 70593 Stuttgart Germany


