### Accession
PXD015280

### Title
Differential analysis of mitochondria-associated reticulum membranes (MAMs) between standard diet-fed and high fat high sucrose diet fed mice

### Description
Type 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM) has been linked to Ca2+ signaling alterations, notably a decreased mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake. Uncovering of Ca2+ microdomains between cardiac mitochondria and reticulum launched a new investigation avenue for cardiometabolic diseases. We here aimed to study if the impairment of mitochondrial Ca2+ handling could be due to a dysregulation of the reticulum-mitochondria interactions or of the mitochondrial Ca2+ uniporter in the diabetic mice heart. Phenotypic alterations of the type 2 diabetic mouse heart, was done using an in vivo obesogenic high fat high sucrose diet fed mouse model (HFHSD: 20% proteins, 36% lipids). The composition of the cardiac MAM fractions between standard diet-fed (SD) mice and HFHSD (HF) mice at 16 weeks was analysed by MS-based quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractionation of mouse heart was performed as previously described and validated (Paillard M et al., 2013, Circulation). Four biological replicates per condition were prepared. Proteins were stacked in a single band in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as previously described (Salvetti A et al., 2016, J Proteome Res). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using Mascot (version 2.6.0) using the Uniprot database (Mus musculus taxonomy) and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide score ≥ 25, peptide length ≥ 6, peptide-spectrum-match identification false discovery rate < 1% as calculated on scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform a compilation, grouping and MS1 quantification of the protein groups using specific peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Type 2 diabetic cardiomyopathy features Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling abnormalities, notably an altered mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> handling. We here aimed to study if it might be due to a dysregulation of either the whole Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis, the reticulum-mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> coupling, and/or the mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> entry through the uniporter. Following a 16-week high-fat high-sucrose diet (HFHSD), mice developed cardiac insulin resistance, fibrosis, hypertrophy, lipid accumulation, and diastolic dysfunction when compared to standard diet. Ultrastructural and proteomic analyses of cardiac reticulum-mitochondria interface revealed tighter interactions not compatible with Ca<sup>2+</sup> transport in HFHSD cardiomyocytes. Intramyocardial adenoviral injections of Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensors were performed to measure Ca<sup>2+</sup> fluxes in freshly isolated adult cardiomyocytes and to analyze the direct effects of in vivo type 2 diabetes on cardiomyocyte function. HFHSD resulted in a decreased IP3R-VDAC interaction and a reduced IP3-stimulated Ca<sup>2+</sup> transfer to mitochondria, with no changes in reticular Ca<sup>2+</sup> level, cytosolic Ca<sup>2+</sup> transients, and mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> uniporter function. Disruption of organelle Ca<sup>2+</sup> exchange was associated with decreased mitochondrial bioenergetics and reduced cell contraction, which was rescued by an adenovirus-mediated expression of a reticulum-mitochondria linker. An 8-week diet reversal was able to restore cardiac insulin signaling, Ca<sup>2+</sup> transfer, and cardiac function in HFHSD mice. Therefore, our study demonstrates that the reticulum-mitochondria Ca<sup>2+</sup> miscoupling may play an early and reversible role in the development of diabetic cardiomyopathy by disrupting primarily the mitochondrial bioenergetics. A diet reversal, by counteracting the MAM-induced mitochondrial Ca<sup>2+</sup> dysfunction, might contribute to restore normal cardiac function and prevent the exacerbation of diabetic cardiomyopathy.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Mouse, Diet, Mitochondria-associated reticulum membranes (mams)

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


