### Accession
PXD024852

### Title
Melanoma-derived small extracellular vesicles induce lymphangiogenesis and metastasis through a NGFR-dependent mechanism

### Description
Secreted extracellular vesicles are known to influence the tumor microenvironment and promote metastasis. In this work, we have analyzed the involvement of extracellular vesicles in the establishment of lymph node pre-metastatic niches by melanoma cells. We found that small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) derived from highly metastatic melanoma cell lines spread broadly through the lymphatic system and were taken up by lymphatic endothelial cells, reinforcing lymph node metastasis. Melanoma-derived sEVs induce lymphangiogenesis, a hallmark of pre-metastatic niche formation, in vitro and in lymphoreporter mice in vivo. We found that neural growth factor receptor (NGFR) is secreted in melanoma-derived small extracellular vesicles and shuttled to lymphatic endothelial cells, inducing lymphangiogenesis and tumor cell adhesion through the activation of ERK and NF-B pathways and ICAM1 expression. Importantly, ablation or inhibition of NGFR in sEVs reversed the lymphangiogenic phenotype, decreased melanoma lymph node metastasis and extended the survival. Importantly, analysis of NGFR expression in lymph node metastases and matched primary tumors shows that levels of MITF+NGFR+ lymph node metastatic cells are correlated with disease outcome. Our data support the idea that NGFR secreted in sEVs favors lymph node pre-metastatic niche formation and lymph node metastasis in melanoma

### Sample Protocol
Enriched EVP samples (typically 5ug - adjusted based on BCA measurements) were dried by vacuum centrifugation and re-dissolved in 30-50uL 8M Urea/50mM ammonium bicarbonate/10mm DTT. Following lysis and reduction, proteins were alkylated using 20 or 30mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Proteins were digested with Endopeptidase Lys C (Wako) in < 4M urea followed by trypsination (Promega) in < 2M Urea. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore C18-based solid phase extraction prior to analysis by high resolution/high mass accuracy reversed phase (C18) nano-LC-MS/MS. Typically, 30% of samples were injected. Peptides were separated on a C18 column (12 cm / 75 μm, 3 μm beads, Nikkyo Technologies) at 200 or 300 nl/min with a gradient increasing from 1% Buffer B/95% buffer A to 40% buffer B/60% Buffer A in typically 90 or 120 min (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile). Mass spectrometers (Q-Exactive, Q-Exactive Plus, Q-Exactive-HF or Fusion Lumos, Thermo Scientific) were operated in data dependent (DDA) positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
High resolution/high mass accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo-Scientific, 2012)/Mascot 2.5 (Perkins et al., 1999). Human data was queried against the UniProt’s Complete HUMAN proteome (February, 2020: 74,788 sequences). Mouse data was queried against UniProt’s Complete MOUSE proteome (March, 2020; 55,412 sequences) using the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin/P, maximum allowed missed cleavage sites: 2, monoisotopic precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, monoisotopic fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, dynamic modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), static modification: Carbamidomethyl (C). Percolator was used to calculate peptide False Discovery Rates (FDR), which was calculated per file. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to each separate LC-MS/MS file. For EVP enriched samples that had been in contact with Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, exemplified by samples that originated from cell culture) an FBS specific database was concatenated to the human and mouse databases when querying the data. For plasma and tissue samples, solely the sequences of porcine trypsin and Endopeptidase LysC were concatenated to the human and mouse databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ngfr, Pre-metastatic niche, Lymph node, Melanoma, Cell adhesion, : small extracellular vesicles, Lymphangiogenesis

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
Microenvironment and Metastasis Laboratory, Molecular Oncology Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Hector Peinado
Microenvironment and Metastasis Laboratory, Molecular Oncology Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.


