### Accession
PXD010322

### Title
Analysis of Panax ginseng secreted proteins under salt stress

### Description
Salt stress is one of the major abiotic stresses affecting the yield of ginseng (Panax ginseng C. A. Meyer). The objective of this study was to identify proteins of ginseng, which is responsive in salt stress. In this direction, ginseng plants of different growth stages (3, 4 and 5 years), were grown in the hydroponic conditions and exposed to 5 ds/m salt concentration. The secreted proteins, collected from the water, at 0, 24, 72 and 120 hours after exposure were used for the proteome analysis using shotgun approaches. Through the shotgun proteomics, a total of 155 and 88 secreted proteins were identified by searching in two RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) database, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Three, four and five years old ginseng plants were grown in the greenhouse as following conditions: average temperature 22.5 ± 2.5℃ and humidity 50 ± 10%. Only shoot part of the ginseng plants was cut and exposed to culture fluid of 5 ds/m salt concentration (21 mM KNO3, 6.1 mM KH2PO4 and 6.2 mM MgSO4·7H2O) and samples were harvested at 0, 24, 72 and 120 hours after exposure. Secreted proteins of ginseng in culture fluid were identified using shotgun proteomics approach. SDS-PAGE was performed using secreted proteins of 3, 4 and 5 years old salt treated ginseng and protein lane of 5 years old after 120 hours of salt treatment was fractioned in to five pieces. LC-MS/MS experiment was performed using an integrated system consisting of High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) interfaced to Linear Trap Quadropole-Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source, and fitted with a fused silica emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Peptidases were reconstituted in Solvent A [water/ACN (98:2, v/v) and 0.1% formic acid], and then injected into the Liquid Chromatography-nano ElectroSpray Ionization-Mass Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry (LC-nESI-MS/MS system). Samples were first trapped on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 trap column (5 μm, 0.3 mm x 5mm, Agilent Technologies, part number 5065-9913), washed for 10 min with 98% solvent A, 2% solvent B [Water/ACN (2:98, v/v) and 0.1% formic acid] at a flow rate of 5 μl/min, and then separated on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 capillary column (3.5 μm, 150 x 0.075 mm, Agilent Technologies, part number 5065-9911) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LC gradient was run from 2% to 35% solvent B over 60 min, and from 35% to 90% over 10 min, followed by 90% solvent B for 5 min, and finally 5% solvent B for 15 min. Resulting peptides were electrosprayed through a coated silica tip (FS360-20-10-N20-C12, PicoTip emitter, New Objective) at an ion spray voltage of 2,000 eV.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver.1.5.3.30). MS/MS spectra were searched against the RNA-seq database using 14 tissues and 4 different year-old roots of ginseng (SRP 066368, 215,879 sequences) and in-house developed RNA-sea (PAC-BIO) database (SRA: SUB2796783; containing 135,317 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salt stress, Shotgun proteomics, Panax ginseng

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institutie, Pusan National University, Miryang, 627-706, South Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institutie, Pusan National University, Miryang, 627-706, South Korea


