### Accession
PXD041212

### Title
Glycated bovine serum albumin for use in animal models – in vitro methodology and characterization of a glycated substrate for feeding trials

### Description
Advanced Glycation End-Products (AGEs) are a heterogeneous group of compounds resulting from the non-enzymatic condensation between reducing sugars and amino groups, primarily lysine and arginine moieties (Perrone et al., 2020). The in vivo glycation of proteins is part of normal metabolism, but pathological implications, as well as molecular aging (e.g. protein conformation changes, inflammaging), have been associated with its occurrence (Briceno Noriega et al., 2022). In addition to the important deleterious effects of the endogenous formation of AGEs, the amount acquired from the diet is the subject of concern. In industrial or household cooking processes, the development of appealing aromas, flavors, and colors goes hand-in-hand with the formation of dietary AGEs (dAGEs) (Lund & Ray, 2017). It is well documented that thermally processed foods are a key dietary source of these neo-formed compounds, and high exposure to dAGEs has been associated with the pathogenesis of chronic non-communicable diseases (e.g. diabetes, obesity, and heart failure) (Clarke et al., 2016). Endogenous and dAGEs are thought to exert their pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidative effects at least in part through binding with the Receptor for Advanced Glycation End-products (RAGE) (Nogueira Silva Lima et al., 2021).  Our goal here was to compare the efficiency of different reducing agents and carbonyl compounds for dCML fortification of bovine serum albumin (BSA) using a novel combination of quantitative and qualitative methods. Isotope-dilution, high-performance liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometric detection (HPLC-MS/MS), western-blot, fluorescence, and proteomics analyses using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization with time-of-flight MS (MALDI-TOF) and LC with high-resolution MS (LC-HRMS) were all employed to provide an extensive characterization of the possible modifications of BSA promoted by different carbonyl compounds. We further studied the efficiency of the incorporation of protein-bound dCML into mouse feed pellets, their stability over different storage periods, as well as clearance of dCML in mouse feces.

### Sample Protocol
We compared three different approaches representative of common practice in the literature for the preparation of CML-fortified BSA. Briefly, the first approach compared the efficiency of widely used reducing agents NaBH4, NaBH(OAc)3, and NaNH3CN in combination with glyoxylic acid (GA; reactions GA-A to GA-F). In these assays, BSA and GA were allowed to react for 2h at 37°C to form imine precursors before the addition of the reducing agents.  A second approach employed ribose (R) and glyoxal (GO) at 40% w/v (reactions GO-R-A to GO-R-E), while a third employed glyoxal only (reactions GO-A to GO-E). All these reactions were prepared in a phosphate buffer (0.2 M, pH 8.0) and incubated at 37°C for 4 days under sterile conditions. Each sample was then dialyzed for 24 hr using a Spectra/Por 4 MWCO 14-14 kDa membrane (Spectrum Chemicals) at 4°C with two water bath changes (1:23 v:v), before western-blot, LC-MS/MS, and proteomics characterization.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were processed with with PEAKS X+ (Bioinformatics software, Waterloo, Canada) against a home-made database containing BSA sequences (Swissprot accession number, P02769). Precursor’s mass tolerance was fixed to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.05 Da. Three missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (C) (+ 57.02 Da) was set as fixed modification. Deamidation (NQ) (+ 0.98 Da), Oxidation or Hydroxylation (MRYPNKD) (+ 15.99 Da), Carboxymethyl (KR) (+ 58.005 Da), Glyoxal derived hydroimidazolones (R) (+ 39.994 Da), Ne-acetyl-lysine (K) (+ 42.010 Da), Ne-formyl-lysine (K) (+ 27.994 Da) and Carboxymethyl arginine (R) (+ 58.005 Da) were selected as variable modifications. Six variable PTMs were allowed per peptides. PEAKS PTM and SPYDER was run with similar parameters to search for 313 PTMs and peptide mutations and homology research. FDR value was set to 1%, minimal ion intensity for modification was set to 2%. Raw files from eFASP were analysed using Mass Spec Studio v 2.1.2.3107 (Sarpe et al., 2016 ). GOLA (Ne-(2-{[(5S)-5-ammonio-6-oxido-6-oxohexyl]amino}-2-oxoethyl)lysinate)  lysine – lysine crosslink (+ 39.994 Da), GODIC (Ne-(2-{[(4S)-4-ammonio-5-oxido-5-oxopentyl]amino}-3,5-dihydro-4H-imidazol-4-ylidene)lysinate) lysine – arginie crosslink (+ 21.984 Da) and GOLD (6-{1-[(5S)-5-ammonio-6-oxido-6-oxohexyl]imidazolium-3-yl}norleucinate) lysine – lysine crosslink (+ 34.992 Da). Carbamidomethyl cysteine and methionine oxidation was set as dynamic modification. Trypsin was selected as an enzyme with 3 missed cleavages. Error of MS and MSMS precursor was set to 10 ppm. The minimum charge of peptides was set to 3 and the maximum was set to 8. Peptide cross-links with a score higher than 18 were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
This study investigated different methods to produce N<sup>&#x3b5;</sup>-carboxymethyl-lysine (CML)-enriched bovine serum albumin (BSA) as alternatives to the classical approach using glyoxylic acid (GA) and sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH<sub>3</sub>CN) which results in toxic hydrogen cyanide (HCN). The reaction of GA (6&#xa0;mmol/L) and NaBH<sub>3</sub>CN (21&#xa0;mmol/L) to produce CML remained the most effective with CML yields of 24-35%, followed by 13-24% using 300&#xa0;mmol/L glyoxal (GO). GA promoted specific modification of lysine to CML, and fewer structural modifications of the BSA molecule compared with GO, as evidenced by fluorescence and proteomic analyses. GO promoted greater arginine modification compared with GA (76 vs 23%). Despite structural changes to BSA with GO, murine fecal clearance of CML was similar to literature values. Hence, BSA glycation with 300&#xa0;mmol/L glyoxal is a suitable alternative to GA and NaBH<sub>3</sub>CN for generating CML-enriched protein free of HCN, but a CML-only fortification model remains to be described.

### Keywords
Bsa, Carboxymethyllysine, Proteomics, Glyoxal, Mass spectrometry, Glycation

### Affiliations
MSAP USR 3290
MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS Bâtiment C4 Avenue Paul Langevin Cité Scientifique 59655 Villeneuve D'ascq 03 20 33 71 12 https://msap-lab.fr/

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr fabrice bray
MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS Bâtiment C4 Avenue Paul Langevin Cité Scientifique 59655 Villeneuve D'ascq 03 20 33 71 12 https://msap-lab.fr/


