### Accession
PXD048604

### Title
Metabolic engineering of Streptomyces peucetius for biosynthesis of N,N-dimethylated anthracyclines

### Description
Daunorubicin and doxorubicin, two anthracycline polyketides produced by Streptomyces peucetius, are potent anticancer agents that are widely used in chemotherapy, despite severe side effects. Recent advances have highlighted the potential of producing improved derivatives with reduced side effects by incorporating L-rhodosamine, the N,N-dimethyl analogue of the native amino sugar moiety.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared essentially as described \[Gubbens et al. 2012; Zhang et al. 2020]. Briefly, bacterial culture was pelleted and lysed in 100 µL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 50 mM EDTA) and disrupted by sonication (for Marco’s sample, sonication was skipped). Total protein was precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method \[Wessel and Flugge, 1984], and the proteins dissolved in 0.1% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters) at 95°C. The protein concentration was measured at this step using BCA method. Protein samples were then reduced by adding 5 mM DTT and incubate at 60°C for 30 min, followed by thiol group protection with 21.6 mM iodoacetamide incubation at room temperature in dark for 30 min. Then 0.1 μg trypsin (recombinant, proteomics grade, Roche) per 10 μg protein was added, and samples were digested at 37°C overnight. After digestion, trifluoroacetic acid was added to 0.5% and samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 min followed by centrifugation to degrade and remove RapiGest SF. Peptide solution containing 6 μg peptide was then cleaned and desalted using STAGE-Tips \[Rappsilber et al. 2007]. Briefly, 6 μg of peptide was loaded on a conditioned StageTip with 2 pieces of 1 mm diameter C18 disk (Empore, product number 2215), washed twice with 0.5% formic acid solution, and eluted with elution solution (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). Acetonitrile was then evaporated in a SpeedVac. Final peptide concentration was adjusted to 40 ng&middot;μL<sup>-1</sup> using sample solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for analysis.  Gubbens, J., Janus, M., Florea, B.I., Overkleeft, H.S., and van Wezel, G.P. (2012) Identification of glucose kinase-dependent and -independent pathways for carbon control of primary metabolism, development and antibiotic production in *Streptomyces coelicolor* by quantitative proteomics. *Mol. Microbiol.* **86**: 1490-1507. - [10.1111/mmi.12072](https://doi.org/10.1111/mmi.12072)  Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Ishihama, Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. *Nat. Protoc.* **2**: 1896-1906. 10.1038/nprot.2007.261 - [10.1038/nprot.2007.261](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2007.261)  Wessel, D., and Flugge, U.I. (1984) A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute-solution in the presence of detergents and lipids. *Anal. Biochem.* **138**: 141-143. 10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6 - [10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6)  Zhang, Z., Du, C., de Barsy, F., Liem, M., Liakopoulos, A., van Wezel, G.P., Choi, Y.H., Claessen, D., and Rozen, D.E. (2020) Antibiotic production in *Streptomyces* is organized by a division of labor through terminal genomic differentiation. *Science Advances* **6**: eaay5781. - [10.1126/sciadv.aay5781](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay5781)  The desalted peptides solution was separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system set in a trap-elute configuration with a nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm &times; 20 mm (Waters) trap column for peptide loading/retention and nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm &times; 250 mm (Waters) analytical column for peptide separation. Mobile phase A composed of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ULC-MS grade H<sub>2</sub>O (Biosolve), while mobile phase B composed of 0.1% FA, 10% H<sub>2</sub>O in ULC-MS grade acetonitrile (ACN, Biosolve). The flow gradients used for analysis was a shallow 113 min gradient of mobile phase A and B controlled by a flow sensor at 0.3 µL&middot;min<sup>-1</sup>. The gradient was programmed with linear increment from 1% to 5% B from 0 to 2 min, 5% to 13% B from 2 to 63 min, 13% to 22% B from 63 to 85 min, 22% to 40% B from 85 to 104 min, 90% at 105 min and kept at 90% to 113 min.  The eluent was introduced by electro-spray ionisation (ESI) via the nanoESI source (Thermo) to QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific). The QExactive HF was operated in positive mode with data dependent acquisition. The MS survey scan was set with mass range 350-1400 m&middot;z<sup>-1</sup> at 120,000 resolution. For individual peaks, the data dependent intensity threshold of 2.0 &times; 10<sup>4</sup> was applied for triggering an MS/MS event, isotope exclusion on and dynamic exclusion was 20 s. Unassigned, +1 and charges >+8 were excluded with peptide match mode preferred. For MS/MS events, the loop count was set to 10, isolation window at 1.6 m&middot;z<sup>-1</sup>, resolution at 15,000, fixed first mass of 120 m&middot;z<sup>-1</sup>, and normalised collision energy (NCE) at 28 eV.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processed using MaxQuant version 2.2.0.0 in Linux environment. Parameters are stored in mqpar_blis.xml

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptomyces peucetius, Qexactive, Maxquant, Lfq

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Chao DU

### Lab Head
Dr Gilles G.P. van Wezel
Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE Leiden, The Netherlands


