### Accession
PXD039669

### Title
TREx-BCBL1-RTA GPRC5A-FLAG Immunoprecipitation LC-MS

### Description
The epitranscriptomic modification m6A is a ubiquitous feature of the mammalian transcriptome. It modulates mRNA fate and dynamics to exert regulatory control over numerous cellular processes and disease pathways, including viral infection. Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) reactivation from the latent phase leads to redistribution of m6A topology upon both viral and cellular mRNAs within infected cells. Here we investigate the role of m6A in cellular transcripts upregulated during KSHV lytic replication.  Results show that m6A is crucial for the stability of the GPRC5A mRNA, whose expression is induced by the KSHV latent-lytic switch master regulator, the replication and transcription activator (RTA) protein. Moreover, we demonstrate that GPRC5A is essential for efficient KSHV lytic replication by directly regulating NFκB signalling. Overall, this work highlights the central importance of m6A in modulating cellular gene expression to influence viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
Parental TREX-BCBL-1 cells and GPRC5A-FLAG-expressing TREX-BCBL-1 cells were lysed in immunoprecipitation buffer [150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton-X 100, 0.5 mM DTT, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4 and 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitors]. Lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 mins and the supernatant collected. A 5% input was taken at this stage and mixed with 15μl 2x Laemmli sample buffer for downstream applications. 15μl Protein A or G Dynabeads (ThermoFisher) were pre-prepared by washing 3 times in immunoprecipitation buffer then resuspended in 200μl immunoprecipitation buffer and coated with 2μl FLAG M2 (Merck Millipore) or IgG (Merck Millipore, 12–370) control antibody. Beads were rotated for 1 hour at 4°C, washed 3 times with immunoprecipitation buffer and incubated with lysates overnight at 4°C. The following day, beads were washed 3 times in immunoprecipitation buffer and analysed at the University of Bristol Proteomics facility for tandem mass tagging (TMT) coupled with liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) as previously described

### Data Protocol
Data was outputted as a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet containing the results of a Sequest search against the Uniprot Human Database. Data from two independent replicates were grouped before filtering of best interactors. Contaminating proteins from a common contaminants database were removed and data filtered to satisfy an FDR of less than 5%. Protein abundance ratios were calculated between GPRC5A-FLAG cells and TREX cells for both latently and lytically-infected cells. Proteins were filtered by a minimum abundance of 100 in GPRC5A-FLAG cells and a minimum net abundance of 50 after subtraction of background abundances in TREX cells. An abundance ratio of 2 was set for GPRC5A-FLAG cells relative to TREX cells in latency. However, a 1.4-fold enrichment was used for GPRC5A-FLAG cells relative to TREX cells in lytic replication as fewer proteins were detected due to the action of virus-mediated host-cell shutoff. Proteins with enriched GPRC5A interaction in the lytic phase were identified using a minimum 1.5-fold interaction in lytic cells compared to those undergoing latent replication after subtraction of TREX cell background.

### Publication Abstract
The epitranscriptomic modification <i>N</i><sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) is a ubiquitous feature of the mammalian transcriptome. It modulates mRNA fate and dynamics to exert regulatory control over numerous cellular processes and disease pathways, including viral infection. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) reactivation from the latent phase leads to the redistribution of m<sup>6</sup>A topology upon both viral and cellular mRNAs within infected cells. Here we investigate the role of m<sup>6</sup>A in cellular transcripts upregulated during KSHV lytic replication. Our results show that m<sup>6</sup>A is crucial for the stability of the <i>GPRC5A</i> mRNA, whose expression is induced by the KSHV latent-lytic switch master regulator, the replication and transcription activator (RTA) protein. Moreover, we demonstrate that GPRC5A is essential for efficient KSHV lytic replication by directly regulating NF&#x3ba;B signalling. Overall, this work highlights the central importance of m<sup>6</sup>A in modulating cellular gene expression to influence viral infection.

### Keywords
Human kshv gprc5a

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences and Astbury Centre of Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Timothy Mottram

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian Whitehouse
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences and Astbury Centre of Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom


