### Accession
PXD040904

### Title
Proteomic data of wheat in response to Pi deficiency

### Description
To decipher the underlying molecular mechanisms for high PUE, the shoots of the two wheat genotypes, H4399 and TM98, under +Pi or −Pi treatments were separately collected for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, digestion, peptide desalination, and label-free nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Identifying and quantifying proteins were conducted using the Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Genetic variation in phosphorus utilization efficiency (PUE) widely exists among wheat genotypes. However, the underlying mechanisms are still unclear. Two contrasting wheat genotypes, Heng4399 (H4399) and Tanmai98 (TM98), were screened out from 17 bread wheat genotypes based on shoot soluble phosphate (Pi) concentrations. The TM98 had a significantly higher PUE than the H4399, especially under Pi deficiency. The induction of genes in the PHR1-centered Pi signaling pathway was significantly higher in TM98 than in H4399. Collectively, through a label-free quantitative proteomic analysis, 2110 high-confidence proteins were identified in shoots of the two wheat genotypes. Among them, 244 and 133 proteins were differentially accumulated under Pi deficiency in H4399 and TM98, respectively. The abundance of proteins related to nitrogen and phosphorus metabolic processes, small molecule metabolic process, and carboxylic acid metabolic process weas significantly affected by Pi deficiency in the shoots of the two genotypes. The abundance of proteins in energy metabolism, especially photosynthesis, was decreased by Pi deficiency in the shoots of H4399. Inversely, the PUE-efficient genotype TM98 could maintain protein abundance in energy metabolism. Moreover, the proteins involved in pyruvate metabolism, glutathione metabolism, and sulfolipid biosynthesis were significantly accumulated in TM98, which probably contributed to its high PUE. SIGNIFICANCE: Improving the PUE of wheat is urgent and crucial for sustainable agriculture. Genetic variation among wheat genotypes provides materials for exploring the underlying mechanisms for high PUE. This study selected two wheat genotypes with contrasting PUE to reveal the differences in the physiological and proteomic responses to phosphate deficiency. The PUE-efficiency genotype TM98 greatly induced the expression of genes in the PHR1-centered Pi signaling pathway. Subsequently, the TM98 could maintain the abundance of proteins related to energy metabolism and enhance the abundance of proteins involved in pyruvate metabolism, glutathione metabolism, and sulfolipid biosynthesis to increase PUE under Pi deficiency. The differentially expressed genes or proteins between the genotypes with contrasting PUE would provide potential and basis for breeding wheat varieties with improved phosphorus use efficiency.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Wheat

### Affiliations
Institute of Soil Science
institute of soil science

### Submitter
Lu Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Lan
Institute of Soil Science


