### Accession
PXD039400

### Title
In vitro production of cat-restricted Toxoplasma  pre-sexual stages by epigenetic reprogramming

### Description
Sexual reproduction of Toxoplasma gondii, which is restricted to the small intestine of felids, is sparsely documented in studies involving domestic cats, which also raises ethical concerns. Chromatin modifiers dictate the developmental fate of the parasite during its multistage life cycle, but their targeting to stage-specific cistromes is poorly described. Here we show that AP2XII-1 and AP2XI-2, two transcription factors expressed in tachyzoites, a stage that causes acute toxoplasmosis, silence genes specific to merozoites, a developmental stage critical for sexual commitment and transmission to the next host, including humans. Their conditional and simultaneous depletion leads to a drastic change in the transcriptional program, promoting a complete transition from tachyzoites to merozoites, as revealed by mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses of the parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary fibroblasts (HFFs, ATCC® CCL-171™) were grown to confluence in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Invitrogen), 10 mM (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazine ethanesulphonic acid) (HEPES) buffer pH 7.2, 2 mM L-glutamine and 50 μg/ml of penicillin and streptomycin (Invitrogen) before infection with RH AP2XII-1 KD / AP2XI-2 KD strain in which AP2XII-1 and AP2XI-2 can be degraded by indole-3-acetic acid treatement through the auxin-inducible degron (mAID) system. After infection, cells treated with IAA for 24h, 32h and 48h or mock-treated. Three biological replicates were prepared and analyzed for each condition. Proteins were extracted using the Cell lysis buffer (Invitrogen). Seven micrograms of proteins were then stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen), stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 360-min gradient. For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated in a 200 cm µPAC column (PharmaFluidics). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software version 4.0 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Toxoplasma gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, version 58 downloaded from ToxoDB), the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, 20220527 download), and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin...). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software (version 2.2.0) was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1%, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
Sexual reproduction of Toxoplasma gondii, confined to the felid gut, remains largely uncharted owing to ethical concerns regarding the use of cats as model organisms. Chromatin modifiers dictate the developmental fate of the parasite during its multistage life cycle, but their targeting to stage-specific cistromes is poorly described<sup>1,2</sup>. Here we found that the transcription factors AP2XII-1 and AP2XI-2 operate during the tachyzoite stage, a hallmark of acute toxoplasmosis, to silence genes necessary for merozoites, a developmental stage critical for subsequent sexual commitment and transmission to the next host, including humans. Their conditional and simultaneous depletion leads to a marked change in the transcriptional program, promoting a full transition from tachyzoites to merozoites. These in vitro-cultured pre-gametes have unique protein markers and undergo typical asexual endopolygenic division cycles. In tachyzoites, AP2XII-1 and AP2XI-2 bind DNA as heterodimers at merozoite promoters and recruit MORC and HDAC3 (ref.&#x2009;<sup>1</sup>), thereby limiting chromatin accessibility and transcription. Consequently, the commitment to merogony stems from a profound epigenetic rewiring orchestrated by AP2XII-1 and AP2XI-2. Successful production of merozoites in vitro paves the way for future studies on Toxoplasma sexual development without the need for cat infections and holds promise for the development of therapies to prevent parasite transmission.

### Keywords
Apetala, Chromatin, Toxoplasma gondii, Nanolc-ms/ms, Sexual commitment, Epigenetic, Transcription factor, Gene expression, Merogony

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


