### Accession
PXD001875

### Title
The prion protein contributes to epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in the mouse NMuMG epithelial cell model

### Description
The physiological function of the prion protein (PrP) has remained elusive despite its widely recognized role in neurodegenerative diseases and sustained efforts to understand its molecular biology. On the basis of its evolutionary relationship to ZIP zinc transporters, protein-protein interactions it engages in, and the characteristics of a gastrulation arrest phenotype in a PrP-deficient model, we considered that PrP may contribute to the morphogenetic reprogramming of cells underlying epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) transitions. We have conducted three global proteomics analyses to (1) identify proteins whose levels are changed during EMT in wild-type NMuMG cells; and determine proteins whose levels are affected by (2) stable knockdown or (3) transient knockdown of the prion protein relative to levels observed in wild-type NMuMG cells. We observed a highly significant correlation between proteins, which are changed during EMT or following PrP knockdown.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and steps for the global proteome analyses were identical to those described in a recent report (Mehrabian, M., Brethour, D., MacIsaac, S., Kim, J. K., Gunawardana, C. G., Wang, H. & Schmitt-Ulms, G. (2014). CRISPR-Cas9-Based Knockout of the Prion Protein and Its Effect on the Proteome. PloS one 9, e114594). The covalent labeling of tryptic peptides in three biological replicate samples and three controls with the 6-plex amine-reactive tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling kit reagents followed manufacturer instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Briefly, TMT-labeled peptide mixtures within each of the three datasets (I to III) were combined and subjected to reversed phase separation on a 25 cm nanobore column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d.) using a 4 hr linear gradient of 2-95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, controlled by a split-free nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Easy nLC 1100, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column eluent was sent to a 10 μm emitter tip for micro-ionspray ionization, and positively charged peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer using a data-dependent acquisition method. This method conducted (i) a high resolution orbitrap survey scan, (ii) fragmented the most intense parent ions by CID for the identification of peptides in the ion trap, and (iii) detected TMT signature ions from the 10 most intense peptide fragments upon their collision with high-energy nitrogen atoms (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were analyzed by Mascot (Version 2.4; Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) and Sequest HT search engines embedded within Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific). All peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSM) were based on queries of the mouse international protein index (IPI) (release 3.87). Tolerance filters of 0.1 Da and 50 ppm were applied for searches of parent spectra and tandem MS spectra, respectively (note that scatter plots depicting precursor mass errors as a function of peptides scores indicated that observed masses of PSM, which passed stringency criteria, were largely within 10 ppm of theoretical masses). Database searches were configured to allow for up to two missed tryptic cleavages. Because 4-vinylpyridine was used as the alkylating agent, the search was configured to assume all cysteine side-chains were pyridylethyl-derivatized.  Variable modifications considered were TMT reagent modifications of primary amines, phosphorylations of serines, theonines and tyrosines, deamidations of glutamine and asparagine, and oxidations of methionines. For relative quantitations the low mass TMT signature ion distributions were interpreted by an algorithm embedded in the Proteome Discoverer software, which also generated raw data graphs depicting TMT ratios. Statistical analyses of global proteomes were conducted with PEAKS (Version 6.0; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) and ProteinCenter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software packages. A stringent false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% was set as the initial filter, which had to be passed by all PSMs. Because a reliable relative protein quantitation was instrumental for the interpretation of data, a subsequent filtering process eliminated all proteins, which were not identified and quantified on the basis of at least three PSMs for which TMT signature ion distributions were available. KEGG pathway and GO ‘biological process’ annotations were computed by a ‘Statistical analysis’ algorithm within ProteinCenter (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which computed the respective significance scores by comparing annotations of proteins of interest against a reference protein list. As the reference, served in these experiments the combined list of 6124 proteins detected in global proteome datasets I to III. Because three biological replicates of TGFB1-treated wild-type NMuMG cells were common to all three proteomics analyses conducted, their global proteomes served as a reference against which all other datasets were compared.

### Publication Abstract
Despite its multi-faceted role in neurodegenerative diseases, the physiological function of the prion protein (PrP) has remained elusive. On the basis of its evolutionary relationship to ZIP metal ion transporters, we considered that PrP may contribute to the morphogenetic reprogramming of cells underlying epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions (EMT). Consistent with this hypothesis, PrP transcription increased more than tenfold during EMT, and stable PrP-deficient cells failed to complete EMT in a mammalian cell model. A global comparative proteomics analysis identified the neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) as a candidate mediator of this impairment, which led to the observation that PrP-deficient cells fail to undergo NCAM1 polysialylation during EMT. Surprisingly, this defect was caused by a perturbed transcription of the polysialyltransferase ST8SIA2 gene. Proteomics data pointed toward &#x3b2;-catenin as a transcriptional regulator affected in PrP-deficient cells. Indeed, pharmacological blockade or siRNA-based knockdown of &#x3b2;-catenin mimicked PrP-deficiency in regards to NCAM1 polysialylation. Our data established the existence of a PrP-ST8SIA2-NCAM signaling loop, merged two mature fields of investigation and offer a simple model for explaining phenotypes linked to PrP.

### Keywords
Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, Tmt, Prion protein, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegnerative Diseases (Tanz CRND) Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Gerold Schmitt-Ulms

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegnerative Diseases (Tanz CRND) Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology University of Toronto


