### Accession
PXD006635

### Title
Plant UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) transporter (UGNT1) glycopeptide analysis

### Description
Glycosylation reactions require activated glycosyl donors in form of nucleotide sugars to drive processes such as post-translational protein modifications, glycolipid and polysaccharide biosynthesis. Most of these reactions occur in the Golgi requiring cytosolic-derived nucleotide sugars, which are actively transferred into the Golgi lumen by nucleotide sugar transporters. Here we present the identification of the plant UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) transporter (UGNT1) indispensable for the delivery of a substrate for maturation of N-glycans and glycosyl inositol phosphorylceramides (GIPCs). Profiles of N-glycopeptides revealed that UGNT1 loss-of-function mutants are devoid of complex and hybrid N-glycans. Instead, most of the glycol-N-peptide population contained high mannose structures, representing the structure prior to the addition of the first GlcNAc in the Golgi. Our findings emphasize that the reference plant Arabidopsis contains a single UDP-GlcNAc transporter responsible for the maturation of complex N-glycans in the Golgi lumen.

### Sample Protocol
Microsomal membranes were prepared from rosette material derived from three-week old seedlings according to Zeng et al., 2017. The endomembrane pellet was re-suspended in 7 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins (~500 g) were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin according to Zeng et al., 2017. Peptides were purified by Sep-Pak plus C18 cartridges (Waters) and glycopeptides enriched using a HILIC SPE (The Nest Group) according to supplier instructions, with peptides eluted in a step-wise fashion with 200 L 70% acetonitrile/ 1% TFA. The enriched glycopeptides were dried using a vacuum concentrator and desalted using ZipTipC18 Pipette Tips (Millipore) with elution to a final volume of 25 L in 0.1% formic acid. Enriched glycopeptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) by nanoflow HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column, (75 m x 500 mm, 3 m, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 5 L of the purified glycopeptide mix was loaded onto the C18 trap at an isocratic flow of 5 L min-1 with 3% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid, then switched in-line with the analytical column. Glycopeptides were eluted with 0.1% formic acid (A) and acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid (B). The gradient applied was 3% to 20% B for 95 min, 20% to 40% B in 10 min, 40% to 80% B in 5 min and maintained at 80% B for the final 5 min before equilibration for 10 min at 3% B. The MS system was operated in positive ion mode at a resolution of 120,000 in full scan mode using data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The MS2 was operated in HCD mode with a resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 50,000 and Activation Q of 0.25 for ions above 50,000 with a charge state between 3 and 8. ETD fragmentation was undertaken at a resolution of 30,000. An AGC target of 300,000 for the parent ion was triggered when one of the following ions was detected in the top 20 ions in the HCD fragment spectra: 138.0545 (HexNAc, fragment 1), 163.06 (Hex), 186.076 (HexNAc, fragment 2), 204.0967 (HexNAc) or 366.1396 (HexNAcHex).

### Data Protocol
Data were interrogated using Byonic 2.6 (Protein Metrics) through Proteome Discoverer Software 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against The Arabidopsis TAIR10 protein database (Lamesch et al., 2012) with standard contaminants (27,416 sequences). The Byonic parameters were: cleavage site(s): RK, cleavage side: C-terminal, digestion specificity: fully specific, missed cleavages: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 5 ppm, fragment type: both HCD and ETD, fragment mass tolerance for HCD and ETD: 10 ppm and 20 ppm respectively, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl/+57.021464 at C and variable glycan modifications at N. Advanced settings included, the charge states (3, 4, 5) apply to unassigned spectra and skip bad spectra; precursor isotope off by X is Too high (wide); maximum precursor mass is 10,000; precursor and charge assignments is compute from MS1; maximum # of precursors per scan is 2; smooth width (m/z) is 0.01; the peptide output options are automatic score cut; the protein output options are protein 1% FDR (or 20 reverse count). Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were exported from the Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imported into KNIME (Berthold et al., 2008). PSMs were filtered to include peptides with a glycan modification, log probability of >4 for HCD (P >0.0001) spectra and >2 for ETD spectra (P <0.01). Finally, matches for each plant line were only accepted if a glycopeptide (with any glycoform) was observed in at least two of the three replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation requires activated glycosyl donors in the form of nucleotide sugars to drive processes such as post-translational protein modifications and glycolipid and polysaccharide biosynthesis. Most of these reactions occur in the Golgi, requiring cytosolic-derived nucleotide sugars, which need to be actively transferred into the Golgi lumen by nucleotide sugar transporters. We identified a Golgi-localized nucleotide sugar transporter from Arabidopsis thaliana with affinity for UDP-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) and assigned it UDP-GlcNAc transporter 1 (UGNT1). Profiles of N-glycopeptides revealed that plants carrying the ugnt1 loss-of-function allele are virtually devoid of complex and hybrid N-glycans. Instead, the N-glycopeptide population from these alleles exhibited high-mannose structures, representing structures prior to the addition of the first GlcNAc in the Golgi. Concomitantly, sphingolipid profiling revealed that the biosynthesis of GlcNAc-containing glycosyl inositol phosphorylceramides (GIPCs) is also reliant on this transporter. By contrast, plants carrying the loss-of-function alleles affecting ROCK1, which has been reported to transport UDP-GlcNAc and UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine, exhibit no changes in N-glycan or GIPC profiles. Our findings reveal that plants contain a single UDP-GlcNAc transporter that delivers an essential substrate for the maturation of N-glycans and the GIPC class of sphingolipids.

### Keywords
Glycopeptide, Udp-n-acetylglucosamine, Nucleotide sugar transporters

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences
1. School of Biosciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia 2. Joint BioEnergy Institute and Biological Systems and Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA

### Submitter
Kris Ford

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua L. Heazlewood
1. School of Biosciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia 2. Joint BioEnergy Institute and Biological Systems and Engineering Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA


