### Accession
PXD024933

### Title
Examining pathways of iron and sulfur acquisition, trafficking, deployment, and storage in mineral-grown methanogen cells

### Description
Methanogens were recently shown to reduce pyrite (FeS2) generating aqueous iron-sulfide (FeS(aq)) clusters that are likely assimilated as a source of Fe and S. Here, we compare the phenotype of Methanococcus voltae when grown with FeS2 or ferrous iron (Fe(II)) and sulfide (HS-). Differential proteomic analyses showed similar expression of core methanogenesis enzymes, indicating that Fe and S source does not substantively alter the energy metabolism of cells. However, a homolog of the Fe(II) transporter FeoB and its transcriptional regulator DtxR were up-expressed in FeS2 grown cells, indicating that cells sense Fe(II) limitation. Two homologs of IssA, a protein putatively involved in coordinating thioferrate nanoparticles, were also up-expressed in FeS2 grown cells. We interpret these data to indicate that DtxR cannot sense Fe(II) and therefore cannot down-regulate FeoB. We suggest this is due to the transport of Fe(II) complexed with sulfide (FeS(aq)) leading to excess Fe that is sequestered by IssA as a thioferrate-like species. This model provides a framework for the design of targeted experiments aimed at further characterizing Fe acquisition and homeostasis in M. voltae and other methanogens.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analyses, 75 mL cultures of Methanococcus voltae were grown in 165 mL serum bottles that were harvested during mid-log-phase of growth. The entirety of the cultures was harvested anaerobically within an anaerobic chamber by transferring cultures into 50 mL centrifuge tubes (Globe Scientific, Mahwah, NJ) that were centrifuged at 4,696 x g for 20 minutes at 4 °C in a swing-out bucket rotor. Pellets from the same sample were combined and then re-centrifuged as above. Once pelleted, 10 mL of supernatant from each sample was subsampled and added directly into 40 mL of pre-chilled (2 hrs at -80 °C) >99.5% acetone (Fisher Scientific) to precipitate extracellular soluble proteins. The remaining supernatant from the original cell pellets was then carefully decanted and the pellets were immediately placed at -80 °C. The precipitated extracellular protein samples were subjected to a mild, brief vortex to mix the samples and were then incubated at -20 °C for 4 hrs. After incubation, the solution was centrifuged at 4,696 x g for 20 mins. at 4 °C in a swing-out bucket rotor, the acetone decanted, and the extracellular protein pellet stored at -80 °C.    Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.0, 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, and 1.8 mM KH2PO4) containing protease inhibitor (Complete Mini EDTA Free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche) was used to resuspend cell pellets for protein extraction. The cells were suspended in PBS, placed on ice, and sonicated for 15 minutes using a Biologix Ultrasonic Homogenizer 3000 using 10 pulses at 100 watts and 2 kHz each for 3 seconds after which samples were subjected to centrifugation (10,000 x g for 30 minutes, 4 °C) to pellet cell debris. The soluble fraction (supernatant) was collected and added to four times volume of pre-chilled (-20 °C) >99.5% acetone. Samples were incubated at -80 °C for 1 hour and then at -20 °C for 12 hours to precipitate protein. Samples were centrifuged to pellet protein at 10,000 g for 20 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was carefully decanted, leaving the intracellular protein pellet. Both the intracellular and extracellular soluble protein pellets were stored at -80 °C until subjected to digestion.   Protein digestion was performed at the University of Nevada, Reno Proteomics Center using the EasyPep Mini MS sample prep kit (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). During the digestion, the samples were briefly subjected to reduction and alkylation using iodoacetamide and then samples were digested using a trypsin/lysC mixture (modified from Lundby et al. (80)).  Samples were passed over a C18 reverse-phase column prior to Liquid Chromatography / Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS) to remove undigested protein. Protein digests were separated by LC with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with a self-packed ReproSil-Pur C18 column (100 µm x 35 cm). The column was packed at 9000 psi using a nano LC column packing kit (nanoLCMS, Gold River, CA). Chromatography was performed using a 92-minute method with a 2-90% gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water). Using a digital Pico View nanospray source (New Objectives, Woburn, MA), the LC was coupled to the MS, which had an ABIRD background suppressor (ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA). Data independent acquisition and MS analysis were performed using an Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). To generate a reference library, six gas phase fractions (GPF) of the biological samples were pooled. Acquisition was performed using 4 m/z precursor isolation windows in a staggered pattern (GPF1 398.4-502.5 m/z, GPF2 498.5-602.5 m/z, GPF3 598.5-702.6 m/z, GPF4 698.6-802.6 m/z, GPF5 798.6-902.7 m/z, GPF6 898.7-1002.7 m/z). Individual biological samples were run on the same gradient as the GPFs using a staggered window scheme (4 m/z Exploris 480, 24 m/z Fusion) and mass range of 385-1015 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein fragments and retention times were identified with ScaffoldDIA (2.1.0). An empirically corrected library combining GPF and the deep neural network Prosit were used to generate predicted fragments and retention times of peptides (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). Using ScaffoldDIA (2.1.0), data files were converted to mzML file format using ProteoWizard (3.0.19254) and then staggered window deconvolution and alignment based on retention times were performed. The data were then individually searched against the empirically corrected library built from UniProt and Scaffold (uniprot-M_Voltae_UP000007722_20200218.fasta.z3_nce33_v2.dlib) using a peptide mass tolerance of 10.0 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Variable carbamidomethylation modifications to cysteine were considered. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage site by the trypsin enzyme served as the cutoff for peptide matching. Only peptides with 2-3 charges and 6-30 amino acids in length were considered. Identified peptides were assigned posterior error probabilities and filtered by Percolator (3.01.nightly-13-655e4c7-dirty) to achieve a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Quantification of peptides using Encyclopedia (0.9.2) was performed by selecting the 5 highest quality fragment ions. To satisfy the principles of parsimony, proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on LC/MS analysis were assumed to be a single protein and were combined. Proteins were identified with at least 2 peptides, which achieved a protein FDR threshold of 1.0%.  Individual protein intensities returned from ScaffoldDIA (2.1.0) were log10 transformed and normalized using the Scaffold method. T-tests were performed and fold-changes were calculated for differential comparisons of proteins after sum normalization using Metabolanalyst (R version 3.6.3). [FeS]-binding proteins were predicted from the M. voltae strain A3 proteome (downloaded from UniProt on July 20, 2020) using the online server, MetalPredator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pyrite, Methanogen, Fes, Mackinawite, Iron-sulfur cluster, Fes2

### Affiliations
Montana State University
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, 59717

### Submitter
Rachel Spietz

### Lab Head
Dr Boyd, Eric S.
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana, 59717


