### Accession
PXD028529

### Title
importance of MTFP1 partners for mitochondrial function in the heart

### Description
Mitochondria are paramount to the metabolism and survival of cardiomyocytes.  Here we show that Mitochondrial Fission Process 1 (MTFP1) is essential for cardiac structure and function.  Constitutive knockout of cardiomyocyte MTFP1 in mice resulted in adult-onset dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) characterized by sterile inflammation and cardiac fibrosis that progressed to heart failure and middle-aged death.  Failing hearts from cardiomyocyte-restricted knockout mice displayed a general decline in mitochondrial gene expression and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) activity. Pre-DCM, we observed no defects in mitochondrial morphology, content, gene expression, OXPHOS assembly nor phosphorylation dependent respiration. However, knockout cardiac mitochondria displayed reduced membrane potential and increased non-phosphorylation dependent respiration, which could be rescued by pharmacological inhibition of the adenine nucleotide translocase ANT. Primary cardiomyocytes from pre-symptomatic knockout mice exhibited normal excitation-contraction coupling but increased sensitivity to programmed cell death (PCD), which was accompanied by an opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP). Intriguingly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts deleted for Mtfp1 recapitulated PCD sensitivity and mPTP opening, both of which could be rescued by pharmacological or genetic inhibition of the mPTP regulator Cyclophilin D.  Collectively, our data demonstrate that contrary to previous in vitro studies, the loss of the MTFP1 promotes mitochondrial uncoupling and increases cell death sensitivity, causally mediating pathogenic cardiac remodeling

### Sample Protocol
Potential partners of Flag-MTP18 were eluted from bait using laemmli buffer and boiled for 5 min at 95°C. Protein were stacked in a 15 % SDS-PAGE gel with a 10 min long migration at 80V. Proteins were fixed in gel and migration was visualized using the Instant Blue stain (Expedeon). Bands were excised for digestion. Gel bands were washed twice in Ammonium bicarbonate 50mM, once with AmBi 50mM / Acetenitrile 50 % and once with 100% acetonitrile. Gel band were incubated for 30 min at 56°C in 5mM DTT solution for reduciton. Gel bands were washed in AMBi 50mM and then in 100%M acetonitrile. Alkylation was perfomed at room temp in the dark by incubation of the gel bands in Iodocateamide 55mM solution. Gel bands were washed twice in AmBi 50mM and in 100% acetonitrile. 600ng of trypsin were added for a 8h digestion at 37°C. Peptides were extracted by collecting 3 washes of the gel bands using AmBi 50mM / 50 % Acetonitrile and 5 % FA. Peptides clean up and desalting was perfomed using Stage tips (2 disc Empore C18 discs stacked in a P200 tip).  LC-MS/SM analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18 30 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1 % FA) at 900 bars. Peptides were separated at 250 nl.min-1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA) from 3% to 26% in 105 min, 26% to 48% in 20 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 145 min including high ACN level step and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 400 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 26 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 105 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) [1,2] using the Andromeda search engine [3] against a reference proteome of Mus musculus (53449 entries, downloaded from Uniprot the 24th July 2018). A modified sequence of the protein MTP18 with a Flag tag in its N-ter part was also searched.  The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. The iBAQ intensity was used to estimate the protein abundance within a sample. The match between runs features was allowed for biological replicate only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Mitochondria, Mouse, Interactors

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur  25 Rue du Docteur Roux  Paris 75015
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
thibault chaze

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Chaze
Institut Pasteur  25 Rue du Docteur Roux  Paris 75015


