### Accession
PXD003464

### Title
Proteome Analysis of rapeseed Cotyledons to Light

### Description
Among multiple factors, light plays a decisive role in the switch from heterotrophic to autotrophic growth. Under dark condition, the rapeseed hypocotyl extended quickly with an apical hook, yellow and folded cotyledon, and the glyoxysome assembling. Whereas under light, the hypocotyl extended slowly, the cotyledon unfolded and turned green. In this study, we performed proteome profiling analyses to show the differential molecular responses of Brassica napus cotyledons to light and dark and reveal metabolic adaptations in postgerminative seedling establishment. In both light and dark-grown conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Protein from cotyledons was extracted using tris-phenol method. Totally, 100ug protein for each sample was pre-fractioned by 12% SDS-PAGE. The visualized gel was cut and subjected to trypsin digestion. After digestion, the peptides were collected and desalted using ZipTip C18™ (Millipore, Germany). And then, the peptides from cotyledons of rapeseed seed germinated at 1 day dark, 3 days dark and 1 day dark plus 2 days light condition were labeled with light (2CH3, L), medium (2CD2H, M), and heavy (213CD3, H) dimethyl isotopes, respectively. The dimethyl isotopes labelled peptides were mixed and desalted, and then subjected to LC-MS/MS spectrometry analyses using a quadrupole-TOF LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+, AB Sciex) equipped with a nanospray source

### Data Protocol
The MS data were searched with ProteinPilot software 4.5 against Brassica napus database downloaded from http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/brassicanapus/ with user-defined search parameters described as Zhang Hui. The false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein and peptide were specified at 1%. Isotope pattern calculator was implemented to quantify the relative intensities of isotope peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthesis competent autotrophy is established during the postgerminative stage of plant growth. Among the multiple factors, light plays a decisive role in the switch from heterotrophic to autotrophic growth. Under dark conditions, the rapeseed hypocotyl extends quickly with an apical hook, and the cotyledon is yellow and folded, and maintains high levels of the isocitrate lyase (ICL). By contrast, in the light, the hypocotyl extends slowly, the cotyledon unfolds and turns green, the ICL content changes in parallel with cotyledon greening. To reveal metabolic adaptations during the establishment of postgerminative autotrophy in rapeseed, we conducted comparative proteomic and metabolomic analyses of the cotyledons of seedlings grown under light versus dark conditions. Under both conditions, the increase in proteases, fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation and glyoxylate-cycle related proteins was accompanied by rapid degradation of the stored proteins and lipids with an accumulation of the amino acids. While light condition partially retarded these conversions. Light significantly induced the expression of chlorophyll-binding and photorespiration related proteins, resulting in an increase in reducing-sugars. However, the levels of some chlorophyllide conversion, Calvin-cycle and photorespiration related proteins also accumulated in dark grown cotyledons, implying that the transition from heterotrophy to autotrophy is programmed in the seed rather than induced by light. Various anti-stress systems, e.g., redox related proteins, salicylic acid, proline and chaperones, were employed to decrease oxidative stress, which was mainly derived from lipid oxidation or photorespiration, under both conditions. This study provides a comprehensive understanding of the differential molecular responses of rapeseed cotyledons to light and dark conditions, which will facilitate further study on the complex mechanism underlying the transition from heterotrophy to autotrophy.

### Keywords
Cotyledons, Postgerminative seedling establishment, Light, Brassica napus, Amino acids

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Sino-African Joint Research Center, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, China
Wuhan Botanic Garden

### Submitter
Dongli He

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Speciality Agriculture, Sino-African Joint Research Center, Wuhan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, China


