### Accession
PXD018325

### Title
Mammalian Fibroblast Turnover Rates, Protein Abundance, and Protein Damage Response

### Description
Within a cell, proteins are in a dynamic state of turnover and are continuously synthesized and degraded. As an energetically expensive cellular process, protein turnover can have two opposing effects on maintaining a healthy proteome during the lifespan of an organism. Rapid protein turnover can replace old and damaged proteins with newly synthesized proteins. However, the high energetic demands of this process can potentially generate damaging reactive oxygen species that comprise the long-term health of the proteome. Thus, the relationship between aging, protein turnover kinetics and energetic demands of an organism remain unclear. Here, we used a proteomic approach to measure global rates of protein turnover within cultured fibroblasts isolated from a number of species with a wide range of lifespans. We show that organismal lifespan is negatively correlated with global rates of turnover. By further comparing cells from mice and naked mole rats (a short-lived and long-lived rodent species, respectively) we show that the latter has slower rates of turnover, lower levels of ATP production and reduced cellular ROS levels. Despite its slower rate of protein turnover, naked mole rat cells are able to tolerate protein misfolding stress more effectively than mouse cells. We suggest that in lieu of rapid constitutive protein turnover, long-lived species such as the naked mole rat have may have evolved more energetically efficient mechanisms for selective clearance of damaged proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Turnover Measurements: The isolated fibroblasts were grown in EMEM media supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin and cultured. Before isotopic labeling, cultures were grown to 100% confluency. Once cells ceased cell division because of contact inhibition, they were maintained in a quiescent state for 4 days. Subsequently, the cells were acclimated to the labeling media (EMEM) supplemented with 15% dialyzed FBS (Thermo Scientific), 100U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin for 4 days. After 4 additional days in adaptation media, the cultures were introduced to MEM media for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with L-arginine:HCl (13C6, 99%) and L-lysine:2HCl (13C6, 99%;Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) at concentrations of 0.13 g/l and 0.0904 g/l respectively, 15% dialyzed FBS (Thermo Scientific), 100U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin. After 0, 2, 4, and 6 days of labeling, cells were harvested, washed with PBS, and pellets were frozen before further analysis. Cells were lysed in a 8M Urea, 150mM, and 50 mM HEPES (pH = 9.0). Cell pellets were resuspended in 50 µL of lysis buffer per 106 cells and sonicated three times using a high-energy sonicator (QSonica, Newtown, CT) for 10s with 60s resting periods on ice. The samples were centrifuged for 5min at 16000 x g and the supernatants were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes.  For Protein Abundance Measurements: Three separate cultures were grown to quiescence in EMEM media supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin. Cells were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis as described above and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described above. For AZC Incorporation: Eight total plates of both mouse and naked mole rat fibroblast cultures were grown to quiescence. Four plates of each species were treated with 2.5 mM L-proline (13C5, 99%; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and four with 2.5 mM AZC. After 3, 4, 8, and 16 days of labeling, cells were harvested, washed with PBS, and pellets were frozen prior to further analysis. Protein concentrations were measure via bicinchoninic assay (BCA) kit (Thermo Scientific). Subsequent experiments were performed using 50 µg of total protein from each culture. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) Bond-breaker (Thermo Scientific) at RT for 1 hr, and proteins were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at RT for 30 min in darkness. DTT was added to 1 mM to quench IAA and samples were diluted to a [Urea] of less than 1 M with 50 mM HEPES. To derive tryptic peptides, 1 µg of trypsin (selective cleavage on the C-terminal side of lysine and arginine residues) was added and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. To quench trypsin, formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1%. To increase proteome coverage, high-pH fractionation was conducted on extracts before LC-MS/MS using homemade C18 spin columns. Eight different elution buffers were made with 100 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) (AF) with 5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, and 50% acetonitrile (ACN) added. After conditioning the column with ACN and AF, the samples were added and centrifuged. An AF wash was performed to remove any residual salt before the eight elutions were collected in fresh tubes. All fractions were then dried down and re-suspended in 10 µL of 0.1% TFA. Peptide extracts were injected onto homemade C18 columns with 1.8 um beads (Sepax), using an Easy nLC-1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer(Thermo Fisher).For the elution gradient, 0.1% formic acid in water was used as Solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile was used as Solvent B. Optimized LC gradients were used for each fraction. For fractions 1 and 2, the gradient went from 2-20% B over 71 minutes. For fraction 3 and 4, the gradient went from 3- 30% B over 71 minutes. For fractions 5 and 6, the gradient went from 8-30% B in 71 minutes, and for fractions 7 and 8 the gradient went from 11-35% B in 71 minutes. For all methods, the gradient was ramped up to 70% B after the peptide separation and was held there for 3 minutes, and then returned to 0%B over 2 minutes and held there for 8 minutes to re-equilibrate the column. The total run time for all methods was 90 minutes. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode, with a full MS1 scan followed by 20 data-dependent MS2 scans. The full scan was done over a range of 400-1400 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injecti on time of 50 ms. The MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 5e4 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. The isolation width was 1.5 m/z, with an offset of 0.3 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
MS2 data for all samples were searched against either the M. musculus (22,305 entries, downloaded 8/7/2017) or B. taurus (22,009 entries, downloaded 9/10/2018) Uniprot database using the integrated Andromeda search engine with MaxQuant software [29]. The maximum allowable numbers of missed cleavages in all searches were two and the FDR thresholds were set to maximum of 1%.  For measuring Turnover rates:  SILAC peptide and protein quantifications were performed with MaxQuant using the parameter settings listed in Table S1. For each peptide, heavy to light (H/L) SILAC ratio was determined by MaxQuant using a model fitted to all isotopic peaks within all scans that corresponding peptide spectral matches were detected. The H/L ratio for each peptide, obtained MaxQuant outputs, was subsequently converted to fraction labeled (H/H+L) measurements. The determination of degradation rate constants (kdegradation) from the fraction labeled measurements were conducted in accordance to the kinetic model outlined in the next section. To obtain kdegradation measurements for each peptide, plots of fraction labeled as a function of time were fitted to a single exponential function (equation 8, below) using least squares fitting. To determine kdegradation at the protein level, fraction labeled measurements for all peptides and time-points mapped to specific proteins were combined in single aggregated kinetic plots and fitted to a single exponential function using the least squares method to determine kdegradation. All reported kdegradation measurements at the protein level were required to pass two quality control criteria: At least two unique peptide sequences were quantified in one or more time-points. At least one peptide was quantified in two or more time-points. The R2 for the fitted curve must be greater than 0.90. For protein abundance measurements: Peptide and protein quantifications were performed with MaxQuant. All peptides that shared 100% sequence homology between mouse and naked mole rat were then used in prior analysis. Log2 fold change and significance were significance were calculated using the Proteus software. For AZC incorporation: Eight total plates of both mouse and naked mole rat fibroblast cultures were grown to quiescence. Four plates of each species were treated with 2.5 mM L-proline (13C5, 99%; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and four with 2.5 mM AZC. After 3, 4, 8, and 16 days of labeling, cells were harvested, washed with PBS, and pellets were frozen prior to further analysis. Cells were prepared for and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described earlier. For samples treated with AZC, they were searched using novel modification was created in MaxQuant for AZC by creating a proline-specific modification that resulting in a mass change of -14.01565. To calculate the incorporation of 13C5, the increase in fraction of labeled prolines were calculated as described earlier.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Primary, Silac, Ibaq, Fibroblast, Mammalian

### Affiliations
University of Rochester Department of Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Resource Facility
University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Shared Resource Laboratory

### Submitter
Kyle Swovick

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
University of Rochester Department of Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Resource Facility


