### Accession
PXD012573

### Title
Phosphoproteomics analysis of Erk signaling in embryonic stem cell differentiation

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics was applied to unravel Erk signaling in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). A previously described engineered ESCs system for Erk induction via a drug-inducible cRAF-ErT2 fusion (Hamilton, W. B. & Brickman, J. M., Cell Rep 2014) was used in two different setups measuring the phosphoproteome in an 11-plex tandem mass tag (TMT)-based approach as described below. Fgf4 stimulation and MEK inhibition: ESCs were stimulated with Fgf4 (40 nM, recombinant, mouse, 5 minutes) following pretreatment (30 minutes) with either DMSO (1:10000) or MEK inhibition (MEKi: 1 microM PD0325901): The experimental treatment conditions and TMT11-plex labeling are specified below:  126: DMSO, unstimulated control replicate 1 127N: DMSO, unstimulated control replicate 2 127C: DMSO, unstimulated control replicate 3 128N: DMSO + Fgf4 replicate 1  128C: DMSO + Fgf4 replicate 2  129N: DMSO + Fgf4 replicate 3  129C: MEKi + Fgf4 replicate 1  130N: MEKi + Fgf4 replicate 2 130C: MEKi + Fgf4 replicate 3  131N: MEKi replicate 1  131C: MEKi replicate 2  Analog sensitive Erk2 setup: In the ESC system the ERK2-/- ESCs (Hamilton et al., PloS ONE, 2013) were engineered to stably express an inducible cRAF-ErT2 fusion protein expressed from the same transgene as a FLAG-tagged analogue sensitive Erk2Q103A. Erk1 was subsequently removed by CRISPR-Cas9 mutagenesis using sgRNAs flanking exon 2. Cells were pre-treated for 30 minutes with either the ATP-mimetic compound 1-NM-PP1 (2 microM) (Endo et al., Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006), the Mek1 inhibitor PD0325901 (1 microM), or DMSO (0.01%), followed by induction or not of the cRAF-ErT2 fusion by (Z)-4-Hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT) (250 nM) for 2 hours as indicated.  The experimental treatment conditions and TMT11-plex labeling are specified below:  126: DMSO pretreatment, non-induced control, replicate 1 127N: DMSO pretreatment, non-induced control, replicate 2 127C: DMSO pretreatment, non-induced control, replicate 3 128N: DMSO pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 1  128C: DMSO pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 2  129N: DMSO pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 3  129C: PP1 pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 1  130N: PP1 pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 2 130C: PP1 pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 3  131N: MEKi pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 1  131C: MEKi pretreatment, 4OHT-induction, replicate 2

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 6 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA for 10 min at 99°C and whole cell extracts were sonicated. Cell lysates were digested by Lys-C (Wako) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:300 (w/w) for 1 hour, followed by a dilution with 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, to 2 M guanidine-HCl and further digested overnight with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) 1:100 (w/w). Protease activity were quenched by acidification with TFA and the resulting peptide mixture was concentrated on C18 Sep-Pak (Waters). Peptides were eluted with 40% ACN, followed by 60% ACN. 300 microgram peptide from each sample was labeled with 30 ul of one of 11 different TMT-labels according to the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoScientific). After labeling, the 11 samples were combined and adjusted to 80% ACN, 6% TFA and phosphopeptides were further enriched by two sequential rounds of titansphere chromatography. The eluted phosphopeptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and fractionated with high-pH-reversed-phase fractionation and the resulting 12 fractions of TMT11-plex labeled peptide mixture was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HFx orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.17 using the Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Central to understanding cellular behaviour in multi-cellular organisms is the question of how a cell exits one transcriptional state to adopt and eventually become committed to another. Fibroblast growth factor-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (FGF -ERK) signalling drives differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells (ES cells) and pre-implantation embryos towards primitive endoderm, and inhibiting ERK supports ES cell self-renewal<sup>1</sup>. Paracrine FGF-ERK signalling induces heterogeneity, whereby cells reversibly progress from pluripotency towards primitive endoderm while retaining their capacity to re-enter self-renewal<sup>2</sup>. Here we find that ERK reversibly regulates transcription in ES cells by directly affecting enhancer activity without requiring a change in transcription factor binding. ERK triggers the reversible association and disassociation of RNA polymerase II and associated co-factors from genes and enhancers with the mediator component MED24 having an essential role in ERK-dependent transcriptional regulation. Though the binding of mediator components responds directly to signalling, the persistent binding of pluripotency factors to both induced and repressed genes marks them for activation and/or reactivation in response to fluctuations in ERK activity. Among the repressed genes are several core components of the pluripotency network that act to drive their own expression and maintain the ES cell state; if their binding is lost, the ability to reactivate transcription is compromised. Thus, as long as transcription factor occupancy is maintained, so is plasticity, enabling cells to distinguish between transient and sustained signals. If ERK signalling persists, pluripotency transcription factor levels are reduced by protein turnover and irreversible gene silencing and commitment can occur.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


