### Accession
PXD029408

### Title
mTOR inhibition via Rapamycin treatment partially reverts the deficit in energy metabolism caused by FH loss in RPE cells

### Description
To obtain insight into the molecular mechanism of FH intracellular function in hTERT-RPE1 cells, we analyzed the interactome of FH via its immunoprecipitation followed by MS-based analysis. We found that FH interacts with essential components of the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway (UPS) as well as with RB1/E2F signalling in a complement-pathway independent manner. Moreover, we found, that FH silencing affects mRNA levels of the E3 Ubiquitin-Protein Ligase Parkin and PTEN induced putative kinase (Pink1), both of them are associated with UPS. As inhibition of mTORC1 has been previoulsy shown to result in increased overall protein degradation via UPS and as FH mRNA and protein levels were shown to be affected by inhibition of UPS, our data stress a potential regulatory link between endogenous FH activity and UPS.

### Sample Protocol
MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate3000 RSLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (300μm i.d. × 5mm precolumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC grade water. After 3 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75μm i.d. × 25cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA, USA) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300nl/minute over 150 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 10 minutes. MS parameters were as follows: for full MS spectra, the scan range was 335–1,500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200. MS/MS acquisition was performed in top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle time. The maximum injection time was 50ms. The AGC target was set to 400,000, and the isolation window was 1 m/z. Positive Ions with charge states 2-7 were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 seconds and the lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0). Trypsin was selected as the digesting enzyme with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine car-bamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications.. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide toler-ance to 5ppm. For peptide and protein identification the Human subset of the SwissProt database (Release 2021_04) was used, and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum length of 6 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.05 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The statistical analysis including ratio and two sample t-test was done using the Perseus. Identification of CFH potential interactors was per-formed using a one sided permutation based t-test with 250 randomizations, an FDR < 0.05 and a S0 of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a complex degenerative disease of the retina with multiple risk-modifying factors, including aging, genetics, and lifestyle choices. The combination of these factors leads to oxidative stress, inflammation, and metabolic failure in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) with subsequent degeneration of photoreceptors in the retina. The alternative complement pathway is tightly linked to AMD. In particular, the genetic variant in the complement factor H gene (<i>CFH</i>), which leads to the Y402H polymorphism in the factor H protein (FH), confers the second highest risk for the development and progression of AMD. Although the association between the FH Y402H variant and increased complement system activation is known, recent studies have uncovered novel FH functions not tied to this activity and highlighted functional relevance for intracellular FH. In our previous studies, we show that loss of <i>CFH</i> expression in RPE cells causes profound disturbances in cellular metabolism, increases the vulnerability towards oxidative stress, and modulates the activation of pro-inflammatory signaling pathways, most importantly the NF-kB pathway. Here, we silenced <i>CFH</i> in hTERT-RPE1 cells to investigate the mechanism by which intracellular FH regulates RPE cell homeostasis. We found that silencing of <i>CFH</i> results in hyperactivation of mTOR signaling along with decreased mitochondrial respiration and that mTOR inhibition via rapamycin can partially rescue these metabolic defects. To obtain mechanistic insight into the function of intracellular FH in hTERT-RPE1 cells, we analyzed the interactome of FH via immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry-based analysis. We found that FH interacts with essential components of the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway (UPS) as well as with factors associated with RB1/E2F signalling in a complement-pathway independent manner. Moreover, we found that FH silencing affects mRNA levels of the E3 Ubiquitin-Protein Ligase Parkin and PTEN induced putative kinase (Pink1), both of which are associated with UPS. As inhibition of mTORC1 was previously shown to result in increased overall protein degradation via UPS and as FH mRNA and protein levels were shown to be affected by inhibition of UPS, our data stress a potential regulatory link between endogenous FH activity and the UPS.

### Keywords
Ap-proteomics, Complement factor h, Interactome, Amd, Mtor

### Affiliations
Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.
Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen

### Submitter
Mohamed Ali Jarboui

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Armento
Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.


