### Accession
PXD011411

### Title
Comparison of Protein Extraction using Microwave and Spark Discharges in Chlorella vulgaris

### Description
Efficacies for protein extraction from C. vulgaris was compared using classical microwave extraction and a self-developed spark discharge. Besides proteins, modifications occuring at proteins were investigated to assess, which method provided a more gentle way of extraction. To observe protein extraction, proteins were purified from the supernatent and from the pellet, both directy processed after treatmemt ('dp') or after 2 h incubation on ice(2h).

### Sample Protocol
For cell lysis, the following buffer solutions were utilised: Buffer A: 50 mmol/l TRIS, pH 8.0 (Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany), 150 mmol/l NaCl (Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany), 1 mmol/l TCEP (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), Roche® complete mini tablets, EDTA-free, Easypack, LOT-no. 23160900 (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, supplied by Sigma Aldrich, Germany), 1 mmol/l PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride; Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany). Buffer B: 50 mmol/l TRIS, pH 8.0 (Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany), 150 mmol/l NaCl (Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany), 1 mmol/l TCEP (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), 4 % CHAPS (3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate; Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany) The fresh pellets were transferred to lysing tubes, lysing matrix C (MP Biomedicals, LLC, USA), refilled with 500 µl buffer A and homogenised at 4.0 m/s, three cycles à 60 seconds and 2 minutes breaks on ice each (Fastprep 24 ™ 5G, MP Biomedicals, LLC, USA). Buffer A was used in this case to protect proteins against proteolysis during homogenisation. Storage container and homogenisation tubes were rinsed with buffer solution B, 250µl each. This step was necessary to ensure solvation of proteins that were adhered to tube walls. Subsequently, the homogenate was centrifuged at 16.000 g, 4 °C for 30 minutes (centrifuge 5430R, Eppendorf Vertrieb Deutschland GmbH, Germany). A volume equal to 50 µg protein amount was transferred to low-binding tubes and precipitated by acetone (- 20 °C), with one volume of protein solution mixed with 4-fold volume of acetone and incubated overnight at - 20 °C. After precipitation, all samples were treated as described in section 2.5.1, additionally with adding 1 µl of 100 mmol/l TCEP for 5 min and 1 µl of 505 mmol/l iodoacetamid for 30 more minutes at room temperature before trypsin digestion. For solid phase extraction, a stage tip system with C18 gel-loaded pipette tips was applied (GELoader pipette tip 96, Thermo Scientific, USA). Prior to extraction, the columns were preloaded with Luna® 3µm C 18 (2) material (Phenomex Inc., CA, USA), suspended in a 6:3 methanol-to-water-mixture (Rotisolv, Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany). After preloading, columns were washed once with 100 µl acetonitrile/ 0.1 % acetic acid solution (Fluka Analytical, Sigma Aldrich, Germany; Rotipuran Ultra 100%, Carl Roth GmbH + Co. KG, Germany) and twice with 100 µl water/ 0.1 % acetic acid solution (Merck KG, Germany; EMD Millipore Corporation, MA, USA). After each step, the washing solution was removed by centrifugation. Subsequently, samples were loaded onto the columns by centrifugation. Samples were desalted by an additional washing step, using 100 µl water/ 0.1 % acetic acid and the peptides were then eluted from the column using 50 µl of 60 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % acetic acid. The elution solution was pressed through the columns into MS vials (VWR International GmbH, Germany), utilising ca. 4  bar of nitrogen. Evaporation of solvent was conducted with a speed vacuum device (Eppendorf Concentrator plus, Eppendorf Vertrieb Deutschland GmbH, Germany). The dried samples were dissolved in 10 µl of 5 % acetonitrile in water/ 0.1 % acetic acid solution and stored at -80 °C until measurement with tandem mass spectrometry. To determine the protein origin, their distribution and probable plasma effects, samples were analysed on a nano-LC system (UltiMate 3000), coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer with a nanoFlex source (all Thermo Scientific Inc., MA; USA), using a steel emitter. To separate peptides, reversed-phased LC was conducted by operating an in-line setup with a trap column (PepMate   PepMap 100, C18, 75 µm x 20 mm) and a separation column (PepMate PepMap 100 RSLC, C18, 75 µm x 150 mm, both Thermo Scientific Inc., MA; USA). The 245 minute-gradient was utilised with solvent A (Aqua dest + 0.1 % acetic acid) and B (acetonitrile + 0.1 % acetic acid) as followed: initial trapping step 0 – 4 min, 2 % B; 190 min, linear to 35 % B; 220 210 min, linear to 50 % B;, keep for 10 min; 221 min, 231 min, linear to 80 % B,; keep for 10 min; 232 min, linear   to 2 % B, equilibration step to 245 min 2 % B. The detection of peptides was performed by the MS in DDA-Top10 mode over the complete run, combining MS survey scans with fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra of the peaks of interest. Signals were monitored in the range of 300 to 1650 m/z with a spray voltage of 2.6 kV. Resolution was set to 70000 for MS and 17500 for MS/MS scans with an AgC target of 1×106 (MS) and 2×105 (MS/MS), respectively. Fragmentation for MS/MS was achieved by applying a normalized HCD energy of 27.5 eV. Additionally, the exclusion time for MS/MS isolation masses was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
After separation and fragmentation, peptide fractions were compared to a proteome database via Proteome Discoverer ™ 1.4 (PD, Thermo Scientific), to identify original proteins in the samples. Although Chlorella vulgaris is a well-studied microalga, there is no full proteome database available, yet. The approach in this study was to apply a database from the order Chlorellales to identify the fragments according to their original protein in the samples. This database was transferred from Uniprot® database (Consortium 2016). Statistical settings, such as peptide and protein score were kept rather strict (< 1 and < 10, respectively) with at least two unique peptides found per protein, required for further processing. To exclude unsharp results, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was applied and for modification studies, only modification with a p-value of 0.05 or better were taken into account. Experiments were repeated in duplicate and each replicate was injected twice in the nano LC-MS setup. Subsequently, corresponding runs were merged to enhance coverage.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Chlorella vulgaris, Protein extraction, Microwave

### Affiliations
ZIK plasmatis at Leibniz Institute of Plasma Science and Technology, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 2, 17489 Greifswald, Germanz
ZIK plasmatis at INP Greifswald

### Submitter
Jan-Wilm Lackmann

### Lab Head
Dr Jan-Wilm Lackmann
ZIK plasmatis at Leibniz Institute of Plasma Science and Technology, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 2, 17489 Greifswald, Germanz


