### Accession
PXD021024

### Title
Comprehensive Proteome and Lysine Acetylome Analysis Reveals the Widespread Involvement of Acetylation in Cold Resistant of Peppers (Capsicum annuum L.)

### Description
Lysine acetylation in proteins is a dynamic and reversible Post-translational modification and plays an important role in diverse cellular processes, but limited knowledge is available for acetylation modifications in pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) resistance of cold stress. In this study, the proteome and acetylome of two peppers with different cold resistance under different cold stress and recovery treatment were investigated. In total, 6213 proteins groups and 4574 lysine acetylation sites of 2261 protein groups were identified. Cold stress and recovery treatment results in 3008 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and 768 differentially expressed acetylated proteins (DEAPs). Further analysis found a total 1988 proteins were both identifed in the proteome and acetylome data and elucidated the functional differences between the up-regulated and down-regulated proteins in these co-identified proteins through GO enrichment. Twenty acetylation motifs were defined on 3934 unique lysine acetylation sites and motifs *KS*, *KY*, and *KH* occupied the highest proportion of all the identified peptides. Subcellular distribution predictions showed that acetylated proteins in pepper leaves distributed predominantly in chloroplast, cytoplasm and nuclear. KEGG analysis showed 397 identified acetylated proteins were involved in 93 different metabolic pathways. Then the dynamic changes of acetylated proteins in photosynthesis and carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms pathways under cold stress were further analyzed and many key acetylated proteins regulating cold resistance of pepper were found in these two metabolic pathways. This study is the first to identify the acetylome in pepper, expands greatly the catalog of lysine acetylation substrates and sites in Solanaceae crops and provide a new insight for the post-translational modification study.

### Sample Protocol
Two pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) varieties, cold-resistant A188 and cold-sensitive A122, were provided by Hunan Vegetable Research Institute (Changsha, China). Seeds were sown in 10 cm × 10 cm plastic pots with the nutrient substrate, and grown in greenhouse (16 h of light at 30±2 ℃ and 8 h of darkness at 20±2 ℃). After growing to 4 leaves and 1 core stage, the seedlings were treated in an artificial climate chamber (Cu-41L4,Percival Scientific Inc.USA) with temperature of 4 ℃, air humidity of 70% and photoperiod of 16h/8h for 72 hours, and then treated at room temperature. In the whole treatment of cold stress and recovery, ten treatments including 0 hour, 2 hour, 4 hour, 8 hour, 12 hour, 24 hour, 48 hour, 72 hour of cold stress, recovery 1 hour after 72 hour cold stress, recovery 4 hour after 72 hour cold stress were set. Each treatment was repeated three times, with a total of 9 pepper seedlings per repetition (Figure S1). We select four treatment samples including 0 hours of cold stress (T0) , 2 hours of cold stress (T1), 12 hours of cold stress (T2) and recovery 1 hour after 72 hours of cold stress (R1) treatment for physiological measurement, proteome and acetylome sequencing.  Proteome analysis Protein Extraction Samples were first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added; then, the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 °C, 10 min, 5500g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding five volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for at least 8 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a 25 cm X 75 μm analytical column, 1.6 μm C18 beads with integrated nanospray emitter (IonOpticks, Australia). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 70 min, 24% to 32% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the pepper transcriptome database (unpublished) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 40 ppm in First search and Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as40 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ) and lysine acetylation as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Proteins identified in at least two of the three replicates were considered for expression analysis. For modification sites intensity, while t-test p value < 0.05, a fold change of >1.5 or <0.667 were regarded as significantly up- or down-regulated, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Pepper is a typical warmth-loving vegetable that lacks a cold acclimation mechanism and is sensitive to cold stress. Lysine acetylation plays an important role in diverse cellular processes, but limited knowledge is available regarding acetylation modifications in the resistance of pepper plants to cold stress. In this study, the proteome and acetylome of two pepper varieties with different levels of cold resistance were investigated by subjecting them to cold treatments of varying durations followed by recovery periods. In total, 6,213 proteins and 4,574 lysine acetylation sites were identified, and this resulted in the discovery of 3,008 differentially expressed proteins and 768 differentially expressed acetylated proteins. A total of 1,988 proteins were identified in both the proteome and acetylome, and the functional differences in these co-identified proteins were elucidated through GO enrichment. KEGG analysis showed that 397 identified acetylated proteins were involved in 93 different metabolic pathways. The dynamic changes in the acetylated proteins in photosynthesis and the "carbon fixation in the photosynthetic organisms" pathway in pepper under low-temperature stress were further analyzed. It was found that acetylation of the PsbO and PsbR proteins in photosystem II and the PsaN protein in photosystem I could regulate the response of pepper leaves to cold stress. The acetylation levels of key carbon assimilation enzymes, such as ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, sedoheptulose-1,7-bisphosphatase, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, phosphoribulokinase, and triosephosphate isomerase decreased, leading to decreases in carbon assimilation capacity and photosynthetic efficiency, reducing the cold tolerance of pepper leaves. This study is the first to identify the acetylome in pepper, and it greatly expands the catalog of lysine acetylation substrates and sites in Solanaceae crops, providing new insights for posttranslational modification studies.

### Keywords
Pepper; proteome; lysine acetylation; cold stress; recovery; photosynthesis ; carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms

### Affiliations
College of Horticulture, Hunan Agricultural University

### Submitter
zhoubin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhoubin Liu
College of Horticulture, Hunan Agricultural University


