### Accession
PXD006459

### Title
Human lamin B1: stress-induced phosphorylation

### Description
This is a small scale study of the phosphorylation state of human lamin B1 immunoprecipitated from control cells or cells treated with methyl methane sulphonate (MMS, acting as a DNA damage stressor agent)

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and treatments: Cells, HeLa and human dermal fibroblast (HDFs) cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FCS, L-glutamine, and non-essential amino acids. BRCA1-reconstituted HCC1937 cells were generated by transfecting HCC1937 cells with full-length BRCA1-pIRES2-EGFP or full-length BRCA1 with point mutation I26A-pIRES2-EGFP (provided by X. Yu, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN). Drug concentrations used were as follows; Methyl methane sulfonate (MMS) 100 µg/ml, Zeocin  50  µg/ml, SP6000125 10 µM, UO126 20 µM, H2O2 4 mM. Heat shock was performed by incubating the cells at 45°C for 10 minutes. DNA constructs used in the current study were GFP-lamin B1 and GFP-Oct1 (kind gift from S. Murphy, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology). Antibodies used in the current study were anti-lamin B1 (Santa Cruz; sc-6216), anti-lamin B1 (own production 8D1), anti-Oct1 (Santa Cruz; sc-232 and sc-232x), anti Oct1 (GenTech; GTX105202) anti-GFP (Abcam; ab5449), anti-GFP (GeneTech; GT7312) anti-JNK (Cell Signalling; 9258), anti-phospho-JNK (Cell Signalling; 4668), anti-phospho-c-Jun (Cell Signalling; 9261) and anti-actin (Abcam; AC-15). Sequential extraction of nuclear proteins was performed as described previously. Briefly, purified nuclei were re-suspended in nuclear isolation buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 2 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM DTT) and sonicated for two 5 s bursts at 10 mm amplitude. Insoluble material was re-suspended in nuclear extraction buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 M NaCl) and incubated at room temperature with agitation for 20 min. The extraction was repeated using nuclear extraction buffer with 2 % Triton X-100 and 4 M urea in sequential extractions. All fractions were then analyzed by Western blotting. Immunoprecipitation (IP): Cells were lysed using NP-40 lysis buffer in the presence of complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysates were pre-cleared twice using uncoated Protein A Dynabeads and immunoprecipitated overnight at 4°C using the appropriate antibody coupled to Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen). Antibodies used for IP in the current study were anti-lamin B1 (Santa Cruz; C20), anti-GFP (Abcam; ab5449), and anti-GFP (GeneTech, GT7312). Following washing with binding and washing buffers from IP Dynabeads Protein G kit (Invitrogen), antigens were eluted using elution buffer with NuPage LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) and analysed by Western blotting as indicated. In some cases, cells were crosslinked with disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) (Pierce) or BS3 crosslinker (Abcam) followed by RIPA buffer lysis and IP as described above and results were compared to those from IP experiments without crosslinking.  Mass spectrometry: Gel pieces were digested and desalted on a C18 packed pipette tip. Samples were injected onto an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC (Dionex) system coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). Searches were carried out by Mascot and data were searched against IPI Human protein database.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using the Central Proteomics Facility Pipeline (CPFP), which co-ordinates database searches carried out using the following search engines; Mascot, X! Tandem and OMSSA and combines search results as well as threshold them for 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) from statistics calculated using iProphet.

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear lamina can bind and sequester transcription factors (TFs), a function lost if the lamina is abnormal, with missing or mutant lamin proteins. We now show that TF sequestration is not all-or-nothing, but a dynamic physiological response to external signals. We show that the binding of the ubiquitous TF, Oct-1, to lamin B1 was reversed under conditions of cellular stress caused, inter alia, by the chemical methylating agent methylmethanesulfonate (MMS). A search for lamin B1 post-translational modifications that might mediate changes in Oct-1 binding using kinase inhibitors uncovered a role for c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Phosphoproteomic and site-directed mutagenesis analyses of lamin B1 isolated from control and MMS-treated nuclei identified T575 as a JNK site phosphorylated after stress. A new phospho-T575 specific anti-peptide antibody confirmed increased interphase cellular T575 phosphorylation after cell exposure to certain stress conditions, enabling us to conclude that lamin B1 acts as an interphase kinase target, releasing Oct-1 to execute a protective response to stress.

### Keywords
Human, Lamin, Nuclear envelope, Post translational modification

### Affiliations
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford

### Submitter
David Vaux

### Lab Head
Dr David J Vaux
Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford


