### Accession
PXD023885

### Title
Proteomic analysis of growth cones from WT and HD mice

### Description
Although Huntington’s disease (HD) is a late onset neurological condition, studies suggest a developmental contribution to its adult manifestations. Imaging studies in presymptomatic HD gene carriers revealed early alterations in white matter tract with a marked defect in the corpus callosum. This tract is mainly formed by axons projecting from layer II/III neurons. HD leads to microtubule bundling defects in the growth cone, the cellular compartment that drives axonal growth. We performed a mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of growth cones from WT (HdhQ7/Q7) and HD (HdhQ7/Q111) mice to identify proteins involved in HD-induced phenotypes on axonal growth and on the growth cone microtubule cytoskeleton.

### Sample Protocol
Growth cone and non-growth cone fractions were separated from P0 cortices. Briefly, a dozens of cortices were homogenized by 10 strokes using glass potters, loaded onto a discontinuous 0.75/1.0/2.33M sucrose gradient and spin at 242,000 g for 1h at 4°C in a SW32Ti rotor. Growth cones fractions were collected at the interface load/0.75M sucrose and non-growth cones fractions between 0.75/1.0M sucrose. The extracted proteins from five biological replicates of growth cones purified from HdhQ7/Q7 and HdhQ7/Q111 mice were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega), as previously described (Casabona MG et al. Proteomics, 2013). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 185 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch).

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Mus musculus taxonomy, February 2018 version), a homemade classical database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.), and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 25 mmu. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 7 amino acids, peptide score ≥ 25, allowing to reach a false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy). Proline was then used to perform a compilation, grouping and MS1 label-free quantification of the identified protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Although the classic symptoms of Huntington's disease (HD) manifest in adulthood, neural progenitor cell behavior is already abnormal by 13&#xa0;weeks' gestation. To determine how these developmental defects evolve, we turned to cell and mouse models. We found that layer II/III neurons that normally connect the hemispheres are limited in their growth in HD by microtubule bundling defects within the axonal growth cone, so that fewer&#xa0;axons cross the corpus callosum. Proteomic analyses of the growth cones revealed that NUMA1 (nuclear/mitotic apparatus protein 1) is downregulated in HD by miR-124. Suppressing NUMA1 in wild-type cells&#xa0;recapitulates the microtubule and axonal growth defects of HD, whereas raising NUMA1 levels with antagomiR-124 or stabilizing microtubules with epothilone B restores microtubule organization and rescues axonal growth. NUMA1 therefore regulates the microtubule network in the growth cone, and HD, which is traditionally conceived as a disease of intracellular trafficking, also disturbs the cytoskeletal network.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Growth cone, Huntington’s disease

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


