### Accession
PXD010659

### Title
Changes in the Membrane-Associated Proteins of Exosomes Released from Human Macrophages after Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection - Biotinylated

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB) is the deadliest infectious disease worldwide. One obstacle hindering the elimination of TB is our lack of understanding of host-pathogen interactions. Exosomes, naturally loaded with microbial molecules, are circulating markers of TB. Changes in the host protein composition of exosomes from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)-infected cells have not been described, can contribute to our understanding of the disease process, and serve as a direct source of biomarkers or as capture targets to enrich for exosomes containing microbial molecules. Here, the protein composition of exosomes from Mtb-infected and uninfected THP-1-derived macrophages was evaluated by tandem-mass-spectrometry and differences in protein abundances were assessed. Our results show that infection with Mtb leads to significant changes in the protein composition of exosomes. Specifically, 41 proteins were significantly more abundant in exosomes from Mtb-infected cells; 63% of these were predicted to be membrane associated. Thus, we used a novel biotinylation strategy to verify protein localization, and confirmed the localization of some of these proteins in the exosomal membrane. Our findings reveal another important scenario where Mtb could be influencing changes in host cells that unveil new features of the host-pathogen interaction and may also be exploited as a source of biomarkers for TB.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolated from the culture supernatants of uninfected control and Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv infected THP-1 macrophages.  Exposed amine-groups of surface proteins were labelled with biotin and biotinylated peptides were generated by digestion with Asp-N.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mzxml and SEQUEST was set up to search the Uni-Prot Homo sapiens Reference Proteome (ID: UP000005640, 70076 entries) assuming the enzymatic digestion with AspN (before Asp or Glu). SEQUEST was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 50 PPM. Oxidation of methionine (+15.99) and carbamidomethyl of cysteine (+57.02) were specified in SEQUEST as variable modifications for the unlabeled experiment. Biotin (+226) and LC-LC Biotin (+452) in lysine and N-termini were also included as variable modification for the labeling experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis (TB) is the deadliest infectious disease worldwide. One obstacle hindering the elimination of TB is our lack of understanding of host-pathogen interactions. Exosomes, naturally loaded with microbial molecules, are circulating markers of TB. Changes in the host protein composition of exosomes from Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)-infected cells have not been described, can contribute to our understanding of the disease process, and serve as a direct source of biomarkers or as capture targets to enrich for exosomes containing microbial molecules. Here, the protein composition of exosomes from Mtb-infected and uninfected THP-1-derived macrophages was evaluated by tandem-mass-spectrometry and differences in protein abundances were assessed. Our results show that infection with Mtb leads to significant changes in the protein composition of exosomes. Specifically, 41 proteins were significantly more abundant in exosomes from Mtb-infected cells; 63% of these were predicted to be membrane associated. Thus, we used a novel biotinylation strategy to verify protein localization, and confirmed the localization of some of these proteins in the exosomal membrane. Our findings reveal another important scenario where Mtb could be influencing changes in host cells that unveil new features of the host-pathogen interaction and may also be exploited as a source of biomarkers for TB.

### Keywords
Asp-n, Biotin

### Affiliations
Colorado State University
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology; Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO

### Submitter
Nicole Kruh-Garcia

### Lab Head
Dr Karen M Dobos
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology; Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO


