### Accession
PXD039272

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Trop2 Xenograft Prostate Tumors

### Description
Shotgun proteomic analysis of LNCaP-Trop2-OV tumor xenografts and LNCaP-RFP control tumors

### Sample Protocol
Tumor tissues were homogenized, sonicated, and centrifuged.  Supernatant was collected and protein concentration was measured by BCA assay.  50 ug of protein from each sample was used for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Proteins were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin.  Tryptic peptides were dried and then reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid.  Five micrograms of tryptic peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap column using  Dionex Ultimate Rapid Separation nano Liquid Chromatography systemTryptic peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography and analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched twice using Byonic - once against a Swiss-Prot database containing the reference human proteome (2017; 20,484 entries) and once against a Swiss-Prot the reference mouse proteome database (2017; 17,191 entries). Database search parameters included trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable methionine oxidation and asparagine deamination were also specified. Peptide IDs were filtered for <1% FDR.  Peptides identified in the human database search that were also identified in the mouse database search were also removed to perform a conservative analysis of the human identified proteins with non-homologous mouse peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance to androgen deprivation therapy, or castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), is often accompanied by metastasis and is currently the ultimate cause of prostate cancer-associated deaths in men. Recently, secondary hormonal therapies have led to an increase of neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC), a highly aggressive variant of CRPC. Here, we identify that high levels of cell surface receptor Trop2 are predictive of recurrence of localized prostate cancer. Moreover, Trop2 is significantly elevated in CRPC and NEPC, drives prostate cancer growth, and induces neuroendocrine phenotype. Overexpression of Trop2 induces tumor growth and metastasis while loss of Trop2 suppresses these abilities in vivo. Trop2-driven NEPC displays a significant up-regulation of PARP1, and PARP inhibitors significantly delay tumor growth and metastatic colonization and reverse neuroendocrine features in Trop2-driven NEPC. Our findings establish Trop2 as a driver and therapeutic target for metastatic prostate cancer with neuroendocrine phenotype and suggest that high Trop2 levels could identify cancers that are sensitive to Trop2-targeting therapies and PARP1 inhibition.

### Keywords
Xenograft, Trop2, Mice, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology Stanford University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Canary Center at Stanford for Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology Stanford University School of Medicine


