### Accession
PXD006048

### Title
T. brucei MAPKLK1 knockdown -  The MAP kinase MAPKLK1 is essential to Trypanosoma brucei proliferation and regulates proteins involved in mRNA metabolism

### Description
Pathogenic trypanosomatids have a large number of protein kinases and phosphatases in comparison to other organisms. Moreover, post-translational modifications have key role in the gene expression control in these cells, reinforcing the relevance of the phosphorylation process. Nevertheless little is known about protein phosphorylation in these protozoa. In front of this, the effects of the depletion of a MAP kinase-like kinase (MAPKLK1) were evaluated in Trypanosoma brucei. After silencing MAPKLK1 expression by RNAi, the cells were evaluated by SILAC MS-based proteomics. In total, 1,756 phosphorylation sites were identified, of which 384 were not previously described in T. brucei. The modulations observed on proteome and phosphoproteome are related to key cellular processes enriched to mRNA processing and stability control.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeled (control) and no-labeled (MAPKLK1 knockdown) T. brucei cultures were mixed in a 1:1 ratio. The samples were taken from three independent biological replicates and protein extraction was done as follow. About 3 × 10^9 mixed cells were harvested by centrifugation (5,000 ×g for 5 min), washed twice with phosphate buffered saline and lysed with 1% nocylglucoside, 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM MgCl2, complete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor, 50 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 750 U benzonase. The extract were incubated for 30 min at 24 °C with agitation in a thermomixer (Eppendorf) at 500 rpm, and then frozen at −80 °C for posterior processing. Before protein digestion, samples were thawed and incubated with 4% SDS for 20 min at 24 °C with agitation (500 rpm). Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min. Protein amount was quantified by BCA method and digested with FASP procedure. For this, 10 mg of protein plus 8 ml of UA (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) were added to an Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Unit 10 K. The filter was centrifuged for 40 min at 3,000 × g, 20 °C, washed with 10 ml of UA, and centrifuged in the same conditions. Proteins were alkylated with 55 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, protected from light. Then, the filter was washed twice with 10 ml of UA, and twice with 10 ml of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) with centrifugation between the washes (40 min at 3,000 × g). Trypsin was added in a 1:100 enzyme to protein mass ratio, and the filter was incubated for 19 h at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation (15 min at 3,000 × g) of the filter in a new flask. Two additional elutions were done with 1 ml of 50 mM ABC and 1 ml of 0.5 M NaCl. Eluted peptides were off-line fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography (HPRP). For this, the total peptide elution (4.5 ml) was mixed to 95.5 ml of ammonium formate pH 10 (0.08% v/v ammonium hydroxide, 0.016% v/v formic acid). This peptide mixture was distributed through ten pre-equilibrated Sep-Pak C18 Plus Light Cartridge (Waters)andashedith 20 mM ammonium formate. Peptide was sequentially eluted in five steps with 1 ml of 20 mM ammonium formate combined with 10, 14, 18, 26, or 40% acetonitrile (MeCN). The peptide fractions were acidified with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptide concentration was determined by the absorbance at 280 nm, using an extinction molar coefficient of 1100 and a peptide mass average of 1400 Da. Ten percent of peptides from each fraction were desalted in C18 StageTips, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Five micrograms of the peptide suspension were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The remaining peptide solution (around 0.5 mg)was processed for in batch TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment. Briefly, 0.5 mg of peptides from each fraction were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and suspended in 1 ml of 2.5% TFA, 80% MeCN, 70 mg ml^−1 phthalic acid. Four milligrams of 10 μm TiO2 beads, pre-equilibrated in 100 μl of 2.5% TFA, 80% MeCN were added to the suspended peptide solution, and incubated for 15 min with end over end rotation. The flow through was incubated with new TiO2 beads for two additional rounds. The beads were then washed twice with 500 μl of 2.5% TFA, 80% MeCN, 70 mg ml^−1 phthalic acid, twice with 500 μl of 0.1% TFA, 80% MeCN, and twice with 500 μl of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 100 μl of 0.3 M ammonium hydroxide, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, suspended in 25 μl 1% TFA, 5% MeCN, and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 3 min to eliminate remaining beads. Ten microliters were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed in a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometry (mass spectrometry facility RPT02H/Carlos Chagas Institute - Fiocruz Parana). Peptides were injected into 3 μm C18 particles packed into a 15 cm length, 75 μm ID fused silica column, and separated with a 5 to 40% linear gradient of MeCN, 0.1% formic acid in 120 min (phosphopeptide enriched samples) or 240 min (peptide samples). The runs were carried out in five technical replicates for proteomics and two technical replicates for phosphoproteomics. Full MS was done in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000, m/z window of 350 to 1,650, enabling preview scan. MS2 analysis was performed in a DDA mode, where the ten most intense ions were subjected to CID fragmentation in the ion trap analyzer. For the phosphoproteomics analysis, the multi-stage activation was employed. The lock mass option was enable for the m/z 445.120025. The spray voltage used was 2.3 kV, spray current 100 μA, capillary voltage 35 V, tube lens 100 V, and capillary heater 200 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by peptide sequence match in Andromeda algorithm embedded into MaxQuant platform version 1.5.2.8. The parameters were settled as the default, briefly, specific cleavage for trypsin except sites before Prolin, maximum of two missed cleavages, 20 ppm (first search) and 4.5 ppm (main search) for peptide tolerance in the MS and MS/MS match tolerance of 0.5 Da were enabled. The options “match between runs” and “re-quantify” were enabled and for phosphoproteomics, phospho (STY) sites was settled as a variable modification. The database used for peptide identification was Trypanosoma brucei TREU 927 release 24, with 11,567 entries, downloaded from TriTrypDB page. A false positive rate of 1% was allowed by using a decoy database containing the reverse sequence of each database entry and a minimum of one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap xl etd, Map kinase, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Fiocruz
Functional Genomics Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil

### Submitter
Michel Batista

### Lab Head
Dr Fabricio Klerynton Marchini
Functional Genomics Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz, Curitiba, Parana, Brazil


