### Accession
PXD011539

### Title
Exosomal shuttle protein in Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas during bacterial stimulation

### Description
As marine invertebrates, oysters lack adaptive immunity and employ innate immunity as the front line and lmost the solo defense mechanism to protect them against invaders. Accumulating research achievements demonstrated that exosomes could act as innate immune effectors that contribute to host defense mechanism. To better understand the immune functions of exosomes in Crassostrea gigas against bacterial stimulation, iTRAQ was applied to explore the global protein changes of exosomes in oyster after Staphylococcus aureus and Vibrio splendidus stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Adult oysters with average shell length of about 15 cm were purchased from a local farm in Qingdao, China, and maintained in aerated seawater at about 20 ℃. Approximately 100 oysters were employed for bacterial stimulation assay. After acclimated for two weeks, 30 oysters were kept in tanks containing live S. aureus at a final concentration of 1.0 × 108 colony forming units (CFUs) per 1.0 mL, defined as Gram-positive bacteria stimulation group. Another 30 oysters were kept in tanks containing live V. splendidus at a final concentration of 1.0 × 108 CFUs per 1.0 mL, defined as Gram-negative bacteria stimulation group. The last 30 oysters cultured in seawater were employed as the control group. After stimulated for 12 h, the 30 oysters at each group were divided into three replicates (ten oysters per one replicate). The hemolymphs from each replicate was collected, mixed and centrifuged at 800 g, 4 ℃ for 10 min twice to prepare the hemocytes-free serum for exosomes isolation. Exosomes from such serum was isolated using Total Exosome Isolation (from serum) Reagent (4478360, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Briefly, one quarter volume of Total Exosome Isolation (from serum) Reagent was added to hemocytes-free serum and the mixture was incubated at 4 ℃ for 30 min and then centrifuged at 10000 g for 10 min and supernatant was removed by aspiration. Pelleted exosomes was re-suspended in phosphate buffered saline (PBS, 10010-023, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as protein samples. The protein samples were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h, and the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. An isobaric tag was labeled to the samples, following the manufacturer’s instructions for the iTRAQ 8-plex reagents (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Mascot Distiller version 2.6. Then the mass spectrometry datawere transformed into MGF files with Proteome Discovery 1.2 (Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA, USA)and analyzed using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.2). Protein identifications were accepted if they could achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosomes, Crassostrea gigas

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, Ocean University of China
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mengqiang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Mengqiang Wang
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences


