### Accession
PXD044532

### Title
Proteomic identification of seasonally expressed proteins contributing to heart function and the avoidance of skeletal muscle disuse atrophy in a hibernating mammal

### Description
Hibernation in mammals such as the thirteen-lined ground squirrel (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) takes place over 4 to 6 months and is characterized by multi-day bouts of hypothermic torpor (5-7 °C core body temperature) that are regularly interrupted every 1-2 weeks by brief (12-24 hour) normothermic arousal periods called interbout arousals. The goal of our work was to identify the molecular mechanisms which underlie the hibernator’s ability to preserve heart function and avoid the deleterious effects of skeletal muscle disuse atrophy over prolonged periods of inactivity, starvation, and near-freezing body temperatures. To achieve this goal, we performed organelle enrichment of heart and skeletal muscle at five seasonal time points followed by LC-MS-based label-free quantitative proteomics. In both organs we saw a dramatic increase in levels of many proteins as ground squirrels transition from an active state in September to a pre-hibernation state in October. Interestingly, seasonal abundance patterns also identified new candidates for mitigating disuse atrophy in skeletal muscle which include higher levels of DHRS7C, SRL, and RTN2 in December-January torpid, IBA, and March active animals; and higher March active levels of TRIM72 and MPZ. Elevation of these proteins prompted us to perform an ex vivo contractile mechanics analysis of both type 1 (soleus) and type 2 (extensor digitorum longus) muscles in fall active, torpid, and spring active animals. Consistent with our hypotheses, both muscle types showed no deleterious effects despite several months of sedentary activity that would normally result in reduced muscle performance in non-hibernating mammals. An increased understanding of protein expression in natural hibernators may enable novel therapeutic strategies to treat human health concerns such as muscle disuse atrophy and heart disease.

### Sample Protocol
All minced tissues were transferred into a tube containing 4.5 mL ice-cold homogenization buffer (10 mM sodium bicarbonate, 2 mM sodium azide, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5). Tissues were homogenized using a tissue tearer homogenizer. After homogenization, the solution was aliquoted into three tubes and centrifuged (2,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C). The supernatants were collected from each tube and centrifuged again (10,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C). After this centrifugation, 1 mL of the supernatant from each tube was transferred to three new tubes and 1.8 M KCl solution (500 μL) was added to each tube for a final concentration of 0.6 M KCl. The tubes were vortexed, incubated on ice for 30 min, and then centrifuged (40,000 × g, 30 min, 4 °C). After the final centrifugation, the supernatants were removed to isolate the organelle-enriched pellets. The pellets were resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.0 (150 μL for quadricep extracts and 300 μL for heart extracts).  Total protein concentration in organelle-enriched samples was quantified using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Organelle-enriched protein samples (20 μg) were transferred to new tubes and diluted to 20 μL using 10 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.5. Twenty μL of 0.1% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters, 186001861) in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of 0.05% RapiGest SF. All samples were vortexed, sonicated for 5 min, and incubated in refrigerator at 2-8 °C for 30 min. The samples were then centrifuged (20,000 × g, 20 min) at 4 °C and the supernatants transferred to new tubes and dried by vacuum concentrator. Dried supernatants containing isolated proteins were stored at -20 °C until trypsin digestion.  Dried samples were dissolved in 20 μL of 2 M urea, 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Five μL dithiothreitol of 50 mM (10 mM final concentration) was added to all samples and incubated for 30 min at 50 °C. After reduction, 15 μL of iodoacetamide of 80 mM (30 mM final concentration) was added and the samples were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark. For trypsin digestion, 2 μL of trypsin (0.2 μg/μL), 18 μL water and 60 μL of 2× trypsin reaction buffer (100 mM Tris HCl, 40 mM CaCl2, pH 8.0) were then added to all samples at a protein to trypsin ratio of 50:1 and incubated overnight at 37 °C. After overnight incubation, the trypsin digestion was quenched by adding formic acid (1% v/v final concentration) to each sample.   Protein samples were desalted via solid-phase extraction using 100 mg C18 cartridges (ThermoFisher Scientific, 60108-302). At first, the C18 cartridge was activated with 50% acetonitrile/water + 0.1% formic acid (2 × 300 μL), and then equilibrated with 3% acetonitrile/water + 0.1% formic acid (2 × 300 μL). Next, acidified tryptic digests were loaded to the equilibrated cartridge, and then the cartridge was washed with 3% acetonitrile/water + 0.1% formic acid (2 × 300 μL). Finally, bound tryptic peptides were eluted with consecutive washes of 25% acetonitrile/water + 0.1% formic acid (300 μL), 50% acetonitrile/water + 0.1% formic acid (300 μL), and 75% acetonitrile/water + 0.1% formic acid (300 μL). Eluted samples were dried via vacuum concentrator, and then redissolved in water + 0.1% formic acid (40 μL). Desalted tryptic peptide concentrations were determined by BCA assay, and samples were diluted to 100 ng/μL final peptide concentration in water + 0.1% formic acid. For each tissue, 4 μL of every sample was withdrawn and combined to make a pooled quality control (QC) sample.  LC-MS and LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using a Waters M Class Acquity uHPLC system coupled to a Waters Xevo G2-XS quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-ToF) mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source (Waters Z spray nano lock spray). The column compartment temperature was set to 35 °C and the autosampler temperature was set to 8 °C. For LC separations, solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Sample injection order was randomized, and pooled QC samples were injected at regular intervals throughout the injection sequence. For each sample, 300 ng (3 μL) of isolated peptide was loaded onto a Waters nanoEase M/Z symmetry C18 trap column for on-line desalting prior to separation, using 1% B at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Peptide separations were then performed on a Waters nanoEase M/S HSS T3 C18 column with a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min. The solvent mixture was held at 3% B at the time of injection, followed by a 40-min gradient from 3% to 40% B, a 4-min gradient to 85% B, a 4-min hold at 85% B, and then re-equilibration at 3% B for a total run time of 60 min. MS and MS/MS (CID) analyses were performed over a mass range of 100-2000 m/z in positive ion mode. Data-dependent acquisition was used to select 5 precursor ions for MS/MS from each MS scan based on a peak intensity threshold of 5000, with an MS scan time of 0.5 s, and an MS/MS scan time of 1 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS and LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using PEAKS Studio X Pro software (Bioinfomatics Solutions Inc.) for protein identifications, using the thirteen-lined ground squirrel (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) protein database from UniProt. Database searching was performed with a 10 ppm parent mass error tolerance and 0.1 Da fragment mass error tolerance. The filter charge was set to +2 to +8, and max missed cleavage set to 3. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02) was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99) was set as a variable modification. The threshold for false discovery rate of identified peptides was set to 1% and for identified proteins -10logP was set to ≥ 20. To quantify protein peak areas and minimize missing values via ID-transfer, the PEAKS Q Module for label-free quantification was utilized, with mass error tolerance set to 20.0 ppm and retention time shift tolerance set to 2.5 min. All identified proteins and their total ion chromatogram normalized peak areas were exported from the PEAKS Q Module. Peptide vectors with similar m/z and retention times were manually inspected, and peptide vectors with ambiguous identifications were filtered before calculating the final peak area of proteins (See note in Supporting Information). Batch correction was performed using statTarget R package. Proteins were considered present if they had non-zero value for at least 50% of samples in each group, and proteins that did not meet these criteria were filtered. Imputation was performed using the k-nearest neighbor algorithm (knn; k = 10) and normalized using EigenMS. Data preprocessing was prepared using the R statistical software version 4.0.3.   Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using R package pcaMethods. Univariate analysis was used to assess peptide differences between groups, in which ten pairwise comparisons (i.e., “October vs. September”, “Torpor vs. October”, etc.) were performed. Differential proteins were assessed using parametric (t-test) and non-parametric (Wilcoxon rank-sum) statistical tests. For both statistical tests, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure was applied to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. Proteins were considered differentially expressed when they passed with a BH-corrected p-value less than 0.05 in both statistical tests.

### Publication Abstract
Hibernation in the thirteen-lined ground squirrel (<i>Ictidomys tridecemlineatus</i>) takes place over 4-6 months and is characterized by multiday bouts of hypothermic torpor (5-7 &#xb0;C core body temperature) that are regularly interrupted every 1-2 weeks by brief (12-24 h) normothermic active periods called interbout arousals. Our goal was to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms that underlie the hibernator's ability to preserve heart function and avoid the deleterious effects of skeletal muscle disuse atrophy over prolonged periods of inactivity, starvation, and near-freezing body temperatures. To achieve this goal, we performed organelle enrichment of heart and skeletal muscle at five seasonal time points followed by LC-MS-based label-free quantitative proteomics. In both organs, we saw an increase in the levels of many proteins as ground squirrels transition from an active state to a prehibernation state in the fall. Interestingly, seasonal abundance patterns identified DHRS7C, SRL, TRIM72, RTN2, and MPZ as potential protein candidates for mitigating disuse atrophy in skeletal muscle, and <i>ex vivo</i> contractile mechanics analysis revealed no deleterious effects in the ground squirrel's muscles despite prolonged sedentary activity. Overall, an increased understanding of protein abundance in hibernators may enable novel therapeutic strategies to treat muscle disuse atrophy and heart disease in humans.

### Keywords
Hibernation; proteomics; heart; skeletal muscle; disuse atrophy; organelle enrichment

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
James Checco

### Lab Head
Dr James Checco
University of Nebraska-Lincoln


