### Accession
PXD007232

### Title
FFPE oral cancer -  Combining discovery and targeted proteomics reveals a prognostic signature in oral cancer

### Description
Laser Microdissection (LMD) associated to LC-MS/MS were used to analyze the proteome of neoplastic islands and stroma tumor of Formalin-Fixed and Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) OSCC tissues to identify proteins of prognostic value. Label-free protein quantification and statistical analysis revealed neoplastic islands proteins and from stroma tumor as correlated to clinicopathological data including lymphonode status and recurrence.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion followed the protocol developed by Ville´n & Gygi (2008), with modifications. Samples were treated with 8M urea, followed by protein reduction with dithiothreitol (5 mM for 25 minutes at 56°C) and alkylation with iodoacetamide (14 mM for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark). For protein digestion, urea was diluted to a final concentration of 1.6 M and 1 mM of calcium chloride were added to samples for trypsin digestion for 16 h at 37°C (2 µg). The reaction was quenched with formic acid 0.4% and peptides were desalted by stage tips C18 (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and dried down in a vacuum concentrator, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and stored at -20°C for subsequent analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptide mixture (4.5 µl) was analyzed by an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to nanoflow liquid chromatography on EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were then separated by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using PicoFrit analytical column (20 cm x ID75, 5 µm particle size, New Objective), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 212 minutes, with a gradient of 35% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant v1.3.0.3 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human UniProt database (release January 7th, 2015, 89,649 sequences, 35,609,686 residues) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). As search parameters, a tolerance of 20 ppm were considered for precursor ions (MS search) and 0.5 Da for fragment ions (MS/MS search), with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. A maximum of 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) was set for both protein and peptide identification. Protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm implemented in MaxQuant software, with 2 minimal ration count and a 2 min window for matching between runs.

### Publication Abstract
Different regions of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) have particular histopathological and molecular characteristics limiting the standard tumor-node-metastasis prognosis classification. Therefore, defining biological signatures that allow assessing the prognostic outcomes for OSCC patients would be of great clinical significance. Using histopathology-guided discovery proteomics, we analyze neoplastic islands and stroma from the invasive tumor front (ITF) and inner tumor to identify differentially expressed proteins. Potential signature proteins are prioritized and further investigated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and targeted proteomics. IHC indicates low expression of cystatin-B in neoplastic islands from the ITF as an independent marker for local recurrence. Targeted proteomics analysis of the prioritized proteins in saliva, combined with machine-learning methods, highlights a peptide-based signature as the most powerful predictor to distinguish patients with and without lymph node metastasis. In summary, we identify a robust signature, which may enhance prognostic decisions in OSCC and better guide treatment to reduce tumor recurrence or lymph node metastasis.

### Keywords
Oscc, Ffpe, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
CNPEM
Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme Squina
Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil.


