### Accession
PXD013696

### Title
A core proliferative program induced by B-cell receptor stimulation in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells

### Description
The B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is crucial for the pathophysiology of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Although the BCR has recently emerged as a new therapeutic target the precise mechanisms by which BCR signaling controls neoplastic B-cell proliferation are still ill characterized. Here, by comparing proliferating vs. non-proliferating cells from aggressive CLL patients, we longitudinally characterized the transcriptional and proteomic response of CLL cells after BCR engagement ex vivo. Of the 5,733 genes and/or proteins which expression was modulated after BCR activation, we identified a CLL proliferative signature including 430 genes and 374 proteins. Mathematical modelling of this signature revealed a nested sub-regulatory network comprising transcription factors activated within hours after cell activation linked to proteins involved in cell proliferation days after stimulation. The mining of this core cellular program sustaining primary human cancer cells proliferation provides an evidence based-resource for innovative therapeutic perspectives.

### Sample Protocol
Before cell stimulation (T0), and at eight time points after stimulation (1h, 2h, 4h, 7h, 12h, 24h, 48h, 96h), 8.106 cells were collected, washed and resuspended in 100µl of lysis buffer (Urea 8M, Thiourea 2M, Chaps 4%, Dithiothreitol (DTT) 1%, Triton 10%, TLCK 0,05%, protease inhibitors). After centrifugation (5min, 8000g), 6 volumes of glacial acetone were added to the supernatant and samples were incubated overnight at -20°C. The proteins were pelleted and 10 µg of each sample were resuspended in loading buffer (2% SDS, 0,1M DTT, 10% glycerol, 62.5 mM Tris pH 6.8) and concentrated in one stacking-gel band using a 4% SDS-PAGE gel. The gels were fixed with 45% methanol/3% acetic acid and stained with colloidal Silver Blue. Each band was excised and cut in four pieces prior to in-gel digestion. The gel pieces were washed four times with 100 μL of 75% acetonitrile (ACN) and 25% ammonium bicarbonate buffer (NH4HCO3) at 25 mM and dehydrated with 50 μL of ACN. The cysteine residues were reduced by adding 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C and 30 min at room temperature, and alkylated by adding 55 mM IAA (Iodoacetamide) for 20 min in the dark. The bands were then washed three times by adding 50 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 50 μL of ACN. Gel pieces were dehydrated twice with 50 μL ACN prior to enzymatic digestion. Proteins were cleaved in an adequate volume to cover the gel pieces with a modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) solution at a 1:50 w/w enzyme:protein ratio. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice under agitation, first with 40 μL of 60% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for 1 h and then with 30 µL of 100% ACN for 40 min. The collected extracts were pooled, the excess of ACN was vacuum dried, and the samples were resolubilized with 25 µL of H2O/ACN/FA (98/2/0.1 v/v/v) and sonicated in ice during 10 min prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nanoLC-MS/MS were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1). Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with trypsin/P specificity. The database used for the searches contained all human entries extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt including canonical sequences and isoforms (26 September 2016; 42,145 entries). The minimum peptide length required was seven amino acids and a maximum of one trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification. The maximum false discovery rate was 1% at peptide and protein levels with the use of a decoy strategy. The “match between runs” option was used. The dataset was made of 53 measurements of 50,503 peptides (outlying sample CLL-NP3_24h was excluded) and we used the data preprocessing pipeline recommended by the MSqRob package. First, the data were log2 transformed and we applied quantile normalization. Then we removed protein groups for which any of its member proteins is present in a smaller protein group. We filtered peptides that could be assessed as contaminant and we removed proteins that were only identified by peptides carrying one or more modification sites. Finally, peptide sequences that were identified only once in a single sample were removed because with only one identification, the model was perfectly confounded. Gene symbols were retrieved for all protein groups, whenever possible, from the UniProt database (The UniProt Consortium 2017) using the proteins API.

### Publication Abstract
B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is crucial for the pathophysiology of most mature B-cell lymphomas/leukemias and has emerged as a therapeutic target whose effectiveness remains limited by the occurrence of mutations. Therefore, deciphering the cellular program activated downstream this pathway has become of paramount importance for the development of innovative therapies. Using an original ex vivo model of BCR-induced proliferation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells, we generated 108 temporal transcriptional and proteomic profiles from 1&#x2009;h up to 4 days after BCR activation. This dataset revealed a structured temporal response composed of 13,065 transcripts and 4027 proteins, comprising a leukemic proliferative signature consisting of 430 genes and 374 proteins. Mathematical modeling of this complex cellular response further highlighted a transcriptional network driven by 14 early genes linked to proteins involved in cell proliferation. This group includes expected genes (EGR1/2, NF-kB) and genes involved in NF-kB signaling modulation (TANK, ROHF) and immune evasion (KMO, IL4I1) that have not yet been associated with leukemic cells proliferation. Our study unveils the BCR-activated proliferative genetic program in primary leukemic cells. This approach combining temporal measurements with modeling allows identifying new putative targets for innovative therapy of lymphoid malignancies and also cancers dependent on ligand-receptor interactions.

### Keywords
Human, Cll, Proteomic, Transcriptomic

### Affiliations
UMR7178 IPHC-DSA-LSMBO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Leslie MULLER

### Lab Head
Dr Christine CARAPITO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France


