### Accession
PXD038075

### Title
A viral ADP-ribosyltransferase attaches RNA chains to host proteins

### Description
The mechanisms by which viruses hijack their host’s genetic machinery are of enormous current interest. One mechanism is adenosine diphosphate (ADP) ribosylation, where ADP-ribosyltransferases (ARTs) transfer an ADP-ribose fragment from the ubiquitous co-factor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) to acceptor proteins (Cohen and Chang, 2018). When bacteriophage T4 infects Escherichia coli, three different ARTs reprogram the host’s transcriptional and translational apparatus (Koch et al., 1995; Tiemann et al., 2004). Recently, NAD was identified as a 5’-modification of cellular RNA molecules in bacteria and higher organisms (Cahova et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2009; Jiao et al., 2017). Here, we report that a bacteriophage T4 ART ModB accepts not only NAD but also NAD-RNA as substrate, thereby covalently linking entire RNA chains to acceptor proteins in an “RNAylation” reaction. This enzyme specifically RNAylates its host protein targets, ribosomal proteins rS1 and rL2, at arginine residues and prefers NAD-RNA over NAD. RNAylation of specific ribosomal proteins decreases ribosome activity. We identify specific E. coli and T4 phage RNAs, which are RNAylated to rS1 in vivo.T4 phages expressing an inactive mutant of ModB show a decreased burst size and a decelerated lysis of E. coli during T4 infection. Our findings not only challenge the established views of the phage replication cycle but also reveal a distinct biological role of NAD-RNA, namely activation of the RNA for enzymatic transfer. Our work exemplifies the first direct connection between RNA modification and post-translational protein modification. As ARTs play important roles far beyond viral infections (Fehr et al., 2020), RNAylation may have far-reaching implications.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of protein digests was performed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with packed in-house C18 resin column (Magic C18 AQ 2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were eluted from a pre-column in backflush mode with a gradient from 98 % solvent A (0.15 % formic acid) and 2 % solvent B (99.85 % acetonitrile, 0.15 % formic acid) to 35 % solvent B over 40 min and 90 min, respectively. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/ min. The data dependent acquisition mode for label-free quantificagtion was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 60000 (m/z 200) with scanning range from 350 to 1650 m/z. MS/MS scans were acquired either of the 20 most intense ions (90 min gradient), or for the most intense ions detected within 2s (Cycle 1s, 40 min gradient). To increase the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was adjusted to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The ion accumulation time was set to 25 ms for MS and “auto” for MS/MS scans. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 300% for MS survey scans and 200 % for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
MS raw spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0 and 2.0.3.0) using a fasta database of the targets proteins and a set of common contaminant proteins. searched via the. The following search parameters were used: full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); three missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed modification; and oxidation (M; +16 Da), deamidation (N, Q; +1 Da) and ADP-Ribosylation (K; +541 Da) set as a variable modification. MaxQuant was excecuted in defaults setting. All MaxQuant paramters are listed in Extended Data Tables.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E.coli, Adpr, Bateriophage t4

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg Germany


