### Accession
PXD008752

### Title
Erythrocytes lacking the Langereis blood group protein ABCB6 are resistant to Plasmodium falciparum malaria parasites

### Description
Epstein Barr virus (EBV) replication contributes to multiple human diseases, including infectious mononucleosis, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, B-cell lymphomas, and oral hairy leukoplakia. We performed systematic quantitative analyses of temporal changes in host and EBV proteins during lytic replication to gain novel insights into virus-host interactions, using conditional Burkitt lymphoma models of type I and II EBV infection. We quantified profiles of >8000 cellular and 69 EBV proteins, including >500 plasma membrane proteins, providing temporal views of the lytic B-cell proteome and EBV virome. Our approach revealed EBV-induced remodelling of cell cycle, innate and adaptive immune pathways, including upregulation of the complement cascade and proteasomal degradation of the B-cell receptor complex, conserved between EBV types I and II. Cross-comparison with proteomic analyses of human cytomegalovirus infection and of a Kaposi sarcoma associated herpesvirus immunoevasin identified host factors targeted by multiple herpesviruses. Our results provide an important resource for studies of EBV replication.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane profiling for quantification of protein surface expression of the Lan-null and control erythrocytes was performed as previously described (Egan E et al Science 2015, Weekes MP et al Cell 2014).  Briefly, 1x108 of each erythrocyte sample were centrifuged and washed with PBS. Surface sialic acid residues were oxidized with sodium meta-periodate (Thermo) then biotinylated with aminooxy-biotin (Biotium). The reaction was quenched, and the biotinylated cells incubated in a 1% Triton X-100 lysis buffer. Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched with high affinity streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce) and washed extensively. Captured protein was denatured with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) and digested on-bead with trypsin (Promega) in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for 3h. Tryptic peptides were collected and labelled using TMT reagents. The reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine, and TMT-labelled samples combined in a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. Labelled peptides were enriched, desalted and separated into six fractions using tip-based strong cation exchange. Mass spectrometry data was acquired and searched as previously described using an Orbitrap Fusion coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated using a 2 hr gradient of 6 to 30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Each analysis used a MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline as previously described (Weekes MP et al Cell 2014). Data were searched using the human Uniprot database (April 2014) concatenated with common contaminants, and filtered to a final protein-level false discovery rate of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all peptide-spectral matches using in-house software. For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading across all samples (Weekes MP et al Cell 2014). Gene Ontology Cellular Compartment terms were added from www.uniprot.org and p-values (Significance A) adjusted with the Benjamini Hochberg method using Perseus version 1.4.1.3 (Cox and Mann Nature Biotechnology 2008).

### Publication Abstract
The ATP-binding cassette transporter <i>ABCB6</i> was recently discovered to encode the Langereis (Lan) blood group antigen. Lan null individuals are asymptomatic, and the function of ABCB6 in mature erythrocytes is not understood. Here, we assessed ABCB6 as a host factor for <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> malaria parasites during erythrocyte invasion. We show that Lan null erythrocytes are highly resistant to invasion by <i>P. falciparum</i>, in a strain-transcendent manner. Although both Lan null and Jr(a-) erythrocytes harbor excess porphyrin, only Lan null erythrocytes exhibit a <i>P. falciparum</i> invasion defect. Further, the zoonotic parasite <i>P. knowlesi</i> invades Lan null and control cells with similar efficiency, suggesting that ABCB6 may mediate <i>P. falciparum</i> invasion through species-specific molecular interactions. Using tandem mass tag-based proteomics, we find that the only consistent difference in membrane proteins between Lan null and control cells is absence of ABCB6. Our results demonstrate that a newly identified naturally occurring blood group variant is associated with resistance to <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i>.

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Malaria, Tandem mass tag, Lc-msmsms, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY


