### Accession
PXD023362

### Title
Identification of intracellular glycosaminoglycan-interacting proteins by affinity purification mass spectrometry

### Description
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs)  are essential functional components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Artificial GAGs like sulfated hyaluronan (sHA) exhibit pro-osteogenic properties and boost healing processes and hence are of high interest for supporting wound healing. Although sulfated GAGs (sGAGs) are internalized into cells, knowledge of intracellular effects and interaction partners is scarce. Here we used an affinity-purification mass spectrometry-based (AP-MS) approach to identify novel and particularly intracellular sGAG-interacting proteins from human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSC). Overall, 478 proteins were found interacting with at least one of four distinct sGAGs. Enrichment analysis for protein localization showed that mainly intracellular and cell-associated interacting proteins were identified. Only a limited fraction of about 10 % was annotated for extracellular regions. The interactions of the 2-macroglobulin receptor-associated protein (LRPAP1), exportin-1 (XPO1), and Serine protease HTRA1 (HTRA1) were confirmed in reverse assays.

### Sample Protocol
Same amounts of biotinylated GAGs or biotin (17.5 nmol) were incubated with NeutrAvidin coated magnetic particles (Sera-Mag™ SpeedBeadsTM, GE Healthcare, USA) in pull-down (PD) buffer (25 mM Tris/HCl, pH7.4; 75 mM NaCl; 0.5 % NP-40; 0.125 % Na-deoxycholate; 1 mM EDTA) for 1 h with constant rotation at 4 °C. Bead-bound GAGs were subsequently washed two times with PD-buffer. The hBMSC cell lysates equivalent to 500 µg protein were pre-cleared with NeutrAvidin coated magnetic particles in PD buffer for 30 min with constant rotation at 4 °C. The pre-cleared lysates were combined with the bead-bound GAGs or bead-bound biotin. Interacting proteins were captured for 90 min with constant rotation at 4 °C. The beads were washed two times with 1 ml PD buffer and one time with detergent-free lysis buffer. The captured proteins were eluted with 2x Laemmli buffer under heating (65 °C) and shaking for 5 min. Proteins from cell lysates and pull-down eluates were proteolytically cleaved using a paramagnetic bead approach based on Hughes et al. (Hughes et al., 2019). In short, sample proteins were precipitated on Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) by adding acetonitrile to a final concentration greater than 50% and washed with pure ACN and 70% ACN. Precipitated proteins were reduced with 50 mM TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), carbamidomethylated with 100 mM IAA (Merck, Germany), and proteolytically cleaved with Trypsin (Promega, USA) applied in a 1:50 Trypsin:protein-ratio for 16 h. The peptides containing supernatants were collected and dried to completeness using a vacuum concentrator. LC-MS/MS analysis of samples was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, USA), online coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by a chip-based electrospray ionization source (TriVersa NanoMate, Advion, USA). Peptides were trapped and desalinated on a C18 pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm), and subsequently separated on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm x 25 cm, C18, 2 μm). For proteome analysis, a bipartite linear 95 min gradient starting from 4 % eluent B (0.1 % FA in 80 % ACN) in eluent A (0.1 % FA in water) to 55 % eluent B via 30 % eluent B after 70 min was used. After each sample, the column was flushed to 99% eluent B and reconstituted to starting conditions. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner. For MS1 scans, the following parameters were set: m/z range 350-1600, maximum injection time = 150 ms, automated gain control (AGC) = 3x106, R = 60 000. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS2 acquisition using the following parameters: isolation window of 1.4 m/z, maximum injection time 150 ms, AGC = 2x105, normalized collision energy (NCE) = 28, R = 15 000, m/z range 200-2000. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data for proteome and phosphoproteome were examined by MaxQuant (Version 1.6.7.0) (Cox et al., 2014). The database search was performed against the Uniprot Homo sapiens RefSet (09/2019, 74349 entries) and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant (07/2019, 245 entries) (UniProt, 2019). Search parameters were set as follows: Maximum missed cleavages = 2, minimal peptide length = 6 amino acids, first search peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance = 4.5 ppm, FTMS MS/MS match tolerance = 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. A minimum of 2 unique peptides was required for protein quantification. Peptides, proteins, and sites were filtered by a target-decoy approach to a FDR ≤ 0.01 using a reversed decoy database. Match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was used for relative protein quantification based on an LFQ ratio count ≥2. Perseus (Version 1.6.10.43) was used for further statistical analysis. First, proteins identified by site, from the reverse database, or as potential contaminants were removed. LFQ- intensities were log2-transformed. The dataset was split into two parts, one with proteins not identified in any of the biotin controls and one with proteins identified in at least one control sample. PD-exclusive interacting proteins were then identified by filtering for quantification in at least 4 of 5 PD-experiments with the respective GAG within the list of proteins not identified in any control-PD. For the identification of enriched proteins, missing values were imputed with random values drawn from a normal distribution (width = 0.3, downshift = 1.8) for the control-PD only. Significantly altered proteins were then identified by one-sided, paired t-tests. To be included, proteins had to be quantified in at least 4 of 5 PD-experiments. The threshold for significant alteration was set at p ≤ 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are essential functional components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Artificial GAGs like sulfated hyaluronan (sHA) exhibit pro-osteogenic properties and boost healing processes. Hence, they are of high interest for supporting bone regeneration and wound healing. Although sulfated GAGs (sGAGs) appear intracellularly, the knowledge about intracellular effects and putative interaction partners is scarce. Here we used an affinity-purification mass spectrometry-based (AP-MS) approach to identify novel and particularly intracellular sGAG-interacting proteins in human bone marrow stromal cells (hBMSC). Overall, 477 proteins were found interacting with at least one of four distinct sGAGs. Enrichment analysis for protein localization showed that mainly intracellular and cell-associated interacting proteins were identified. The interaction of sGAG with &#x3b1;2-macroglobulin receptor-associated protein (LRPAP1), exportin-1 (XPO1), and serine protease HTRA1 (HTRA1) was confirmed in reverse assays. Consecutive pathway and cluster analysis led to the identification of biological processes, namely processes involving binding and processing of nucleic acids, LRP1-dependent endocytosis, and exosome formation. Respecting the preferentially intracellular localization of sGAG in vesicle-like structures, also the interaction data indicate sGAG-specific modulation of vesicle-based transport processes. By identifying many sGAG-specific interacting proteins, our data provide a resource for upcoming studies aimed at molecular mechanisms and understanding of sGAG cellular effects.

### Keywords
Sulfated glycosaminoglycan derivatives, Hbmsc, Biotin-gag, Lc-ms/ms, Pull-down approach, Saos2/osteoblast cell line

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ
Leipzig, Germany
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Henning Großkopf

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


