### Accession
PXD004819

### Title
Terpenes a common language between fungi and bacteria

### Description
Previously, we investigated the effect of fungal VOCs on the behavior of phylogenetically different soil bacteria (Schmidt et al 2015). In these experiments we showed that VOCs emitted by several fungi can lead to phenotypical responses in bacteria, for example, by inducing a change in motility (Schmidt et al 2015). We observed that the plant pathogenic fungus Fusarium culmorum produced a unique cluster of VOCs consisting primarily of terpenes. When exposed to the VOCs emitted by this fungus, the rhizobacterium Serratia plymuthica PRI-2C responded with an induction of motility. It is plausible that in soil, microorganisms sense changes in their environments via shifts in VOCs blend and adapt their behavior accordingly (Garbeva et al 2014). Although several studies indicated that VOCs can be used as signaling molecules in microbial inter-species interactions, the following questions remain unanswered as how are VOCs perceived as signals by the microorganisms and which regulatory pathways and genes are involved in the response? To answer these questions, the rhizosphere isolate S. plymuthica PRI-2C was grown alone or exposed to VOCs emitted by F. culmorum. The bacterial transcriptome and proteome were analyzed under each situation to identify the molecular basis of the bacterial response to fungal VOCs.

### Sample Protocol
S. plymuthica PRI-2C cells were suspended in 2 ml of sterile phosphate buffer and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 1.5 min at 4 °C. Cytosolic proteins were extracted by using a bead-beating protocol. Fractions were transferred into 2 ml Eppendorf tubes with 0.25 ml of 0.1 mm glass beads (BioSpec Products) and placed into FastPrep-24 lyser tubes (MP Biomedicals). Eight rounds of 30 s lysis at 6.5 m s−1 followed by 5 min incubation on ice were used to extract proteins in concentrations from 2 to 8 mg ml−1. Reduction of disulfide bonds with TCEP, alkylation of thiolgroups with iodoacetamide and subsequent in-solution digestion of proteins using trypsin was performed as described by Muntel et al. (2012). Desalting of peptides prior to mass spectrometry analysis using Stage tips was done according to the protocol by Rappsilber et al. (2007). The nanoACQUITYTM UPLCTM system (Waters) was used to separate and introduce peptides into the Synapt G2 (Waters) mass spectrometer. Parameters for liquid chromatography and IMSE (MSE with ion mobility separation) were described previously (Muntel et al., 2014, Zühlke et al. 2016).

### Data Protocol
LC-IMSE data were processed using PLGS v3.0.1 Processing parameters were set as follows: Chromatographic peak width and MS TOF resolution were set to automatic, lock mass charge 2 set to 785.8426 Da/e with a lock mass window of 0.25 Da, low energy threshold 200.0 counts, elevated energy threshold 20.0 counts, intensity threshold 750 counts. The data were searched against a randomized S. plymuthica PRI-2C database (version February 2016) with added laboratory contaminants and yeast ADH1 sequence (10,090 entries). For positive protein identification the following criteria had to be met: 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, 1 peptide matched per protein; 2 missed cleavages allowed, primary digest reagent: trypsin, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C (+ 57.0215), variable modifications: deamidation N, Q (+ 0.9840), oxidation M (+ 15.9949), pyrrolidonecarboxylacid N-TERM (− 27.9949). The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 5%. For the final analysis only identifications based on at least two peptides were considered. Absolute protein quantification of identified proteins was performed by using top3 peptide intensity with spiked-in yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (Waters) as a reference (Hi3 approach, Silva et al 2006) . Data were corrected for detector saturation effects by implementing a correction factor as recently described (Zühlke et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
The ability of bacteria and fungi to communicate with each other is a remarkable aspect of the microbial world. It is recognized that volatile organic compounds (VOCs) act as communication signals, however the molecular responses by bacteria to fungal VOCs remain unknown. Here we perform transcriptomics and proteomics analyses of Serratia plymuthica PRI-2C exposed to VOCs emitted by the fungal pathogen Fusarium culmorum. We find that the bacterium responds to fungal VOCs with changes in gene and protein expression related to motility, signal transduction, energy metabolism, cell envelope biogenesis, and secondary metabolite production. Metabolomic analysis of the bacterium exposed to the fungal VOCs, gene cluster comparison, and heterologous co-expression of a terpene synthase and a methyltransferase revealed the production of the unusual terpene sodorifen in response to fungal VOCs. These results strongly suggest that VOCs are not only a metabolic waste but important compounds in the long-distance communication between fungi and bacteria.

### Keywords
Transcriptomics; proteomics; metabolomics; serratia plymuthica sp.; fusarium culmorum sp., Fungal-bacterial interactions; volatile organic compounds; terpenes

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology University of Greifswald Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstr. 15 17489 Greifswald Germany

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology University of Greifswald Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahnstr. 15 17489 Greifswald Germany


