### Accession
PXD016026

### Title
Selective autophagy cargo receptor NBR1 is involved in plant response to sulfur deficit

### Description
Autophagy involvement in plant response to nitrogen, carbon and sulfur starvation was already reported, however the mechanisms responsible for its regulation and selectivity in such conditions were not yet investigated. We observed increased amounts of NBR1 transcript in plants exposed to sulfur deficit as compared to the control plants grown in nutrient sufficient conditions. This observation prompted us to investigate the role of this selective autophagy cargo receptor in plant response to sulfur deficit. Transcriptome analysis of the wild type and NBR overexpressing plants revealed differences in gene expression changes in response to sulfur deficit. Moreover, NBR1 overexpressors have significantly shorter roots than WT, when grown in nutrient deficient conditions in the presence of TOR kinase inhibitors, namely in the conditions leading to autophagy induction. Besides, NBR1 overexpression promoted stomata closure while NBR1 depletion stomata opening. Surprisingly, all lines had more closed stomata when grown in sulfur deficient than sulfur optimal conditions, what indicates that this effect is independent from NBR1. Similarly, ABA-dependent stomatal closure was independent from NBR1 and growth conditions. Cysteine also promoted stomatal closure in NBR1-independent way in plants grown in the optimal medium but in contrast, reduced the number of open stomata in plants from sulfur deficient medium. Interaction network analysis of the proteins co-purifying with NBR1 revealed links with proteins involved in degradation systems, and endosomal trafficking and a surprizing connection with nuclear transport. In addition, several proteins co-purifying with NBR1 were found only in sulfur deficient conditions. One of them, ribosomal protein S6 (RPS6) was further confirmed as a direct NBR1 interactor. Localization of the RPS6 interaction sites in NBR1 indicated that ubiquitin binding domain of NBR1 is not required for this interaction what means that it is rather not the classical “ubiquitinated target - autophagy receptor” interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS:  The AtNBR1-TAP (line for NBR1 complexes isolation) and TAP (control line) were grown in -S for either 4 days (4d-S) or for 10 days (10d-S) or in sufficient S (nS). Each portion of plant material was analyzed in duplicates. Total protein was isolated separately from shoots and roots of 2-4 plants each. Each portion of plant material was prepared in biological duplicates. Each sample were precipitated with -20°C cold acetone.  LC MS/MS analysis: Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 50 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at TY, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ng/ml trypsin (CAT NO V5280, Promega) at 37°C. Finally, to stop digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. Mixture was centrifuged at 4°C, 14 000 g for 30 min, to remove solid remaining. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Velos LTQ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with the Max-Quant (Version 1.5.7.4) platform search parameters: match between runs (match time window 0.7min, alignment time 20min), enzyme: trypsin/p; specific; max missed 2, minimal peptide length 7aa, variable modification: methionine oxidation, N-term acetylation, phosphorylation STY, ubiq GG, fixed: cysteine alkylation, main search peptide tolerance 4.5ppm, protein FDR 0.01. The reference Arabidopsis thaliana proteome database from TAIR was used (downloaded on 2017.03.17, 35 386 entries). Semiquantitative analysis of CoIP results using protein intensity comparison (Orlowska K. et al. 2013 NAR) Protein abundance was defined as the mean signal intensity calculated by MaxQuant software for a protein (mean value from two or one replicates) divided by its molecular weight. Specificity was defined as the ratio of protein signal intensity measured in the bait purification to background level (which is the protein signal intensity in the negative control purification; background level was arbitrarily set to 1 for proteins not detected in the negative control).

### Publication Abstract
Plants exposed to sulfur deficit elevate the transcription of <i>NBR1</i> what might reflect an increased demand for NBR1 in such conditions. Therefore, we investigated the role of this selective autophagy cargo receptor in plant response to sulfur deficit (-S). Transcriptome analysis of the wild type and NBR1 overexpressing plants pointed out differences in gene expression in response to -S. Our attention focused particularly on the genes upregulated by -S in roots of both lines because of significant overrepresentation of cytoplasmic ribosomal gene family. Moreover, we noticed overrepresentation of the same family in the set of proteins co-purifying with NBR1 in -S. One of these ribosomal proteins, RPS6 was chosen for verification of its direct interaction with NBR1 and proven to bind outside the NBR1 ubiquitin binding domains. The biological significance of this novel interaction and the postulated role of NBR1 in ribosomes remodeling in response to starvation remain to be further investigated. Interestingly, NBR1 overexpressing seedlings have significantly shorter roots than wild type when grown in nutrient deficient conditions in the presence of TOR kinase inhibitors. This phenotype probably results from excessive autophagy induction by the additive effect of NBR1 overexpression, starvation, and TOR inhibition.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Nbr1

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAS Pawinskiego 5a,  02-106 Warsaw

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Sirko
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, PAS Pawinskiego 5a,  02-106 Warsaw


