### Accession
PXD000263

### Title
Proteome analysis of the MO3.13 cell line from human oligodendrocytes

### Description
MO3.13 is an immortal human-human hybrid cell line that express phenotypic characteristics of primary oligodendrocytes. It was created by fusing a 6-thioguanine-resistant mutant of the human rhabdomyosarcoma RD (cancer of skeletal muscle) with adult human oligodendrocytes by a lectin-enhanced polyethylene glycol procedure. In contrast to the tumor parent, MO3.13 expressed surface immunoreactivity for galactosyl cerebroside(GS) and intracellular immunoreactivity for myelin basic protein (MBP), proteolipid protein (PLP), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). MO3.13 also exhibit the markers of immature oligodendrocytes GalC (galactosylceramidase) and CNPase. Upon differentiation, the MO3.13 cells have been also shown to express the MBP and MOG markers. Data analysis: Each MS raw file was processed using ProteoWizard for the generation of a MGF file. These were processed in SearchGUI, which runs the search engines Open Mass Spectrometry Search Algorithm (OMSSA) and X!Tandem against the UniProt human protein database (release 2013_08, 20,266 sequences).  Search parameters were: peptide and fragment ion mass accuracy 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively; protein and peptide FDRs 1%; two miss cleavages; trypsin as enzyme; fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modifications: methionine oxidation. In order to generate one single proteome dataset of MO3.13, resulting data was processed in PeptideShaker.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Myelination of the CNS is performed by oligodendrocytes (OLs), which have been implicated in brain disorders, such as multiple sclerosis and schizophrenia. We have used the human oligodendroglial cell line MO3.13 to establish an OL reference proteome database. Proteins were prefractionationated by SDS-PAGE and after in-gel digestion subjected to nanoflow LC-MS analysis. Approximately 11&#x2009;600 unique peptides were identified and, after stringent filtering, resulted in 2290 proteins representing nine distinct biological processes and various molecular classes and functions. OL-specific proteins, such as myelin basic protein (MBP) and 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP), as well as other proteins involved in multiple sclerosis and schizophrenia were also identified and are discussed. Proteins of this dataset have also been classified according to their chromosomal origin for providing useful data to the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP). Given the importance of OLs in the etiology of demyelinating and oligodendrogial disorders, the MO3.13 proteome database is a valuable data resource. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000263 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000263).

### Keywords
Human; oligodendrocytes; proteome; c-hpp

### Affiliations
Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology

### Submitter
Daniel Martins-de-Souza

### Lab Head


