### Accession
PXD006098

### Title
Dynamic RNA-protein interactions underlie the zebrafish maternal-to-zygotic transition

### Description
During the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT), transcriptionally silent embryos rely on post-transcriptional regulation of maternal mRNAs until zygotic genome activation (ZGA). RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are important regulators of post-transcriptional RNA processing events, yet their identities and functions during developmental transitions in vertebrates remain largely unexplored. Using mRNA interactome capture, we identified 227 RBPs in zebrafish embryos before and during ZGA, hereby named the zebrafish MZT mRNAbound proteome. This protein constellation consists of many conserved RBPs, with additional embryo- and stage-specific mRNA interactors that likely reflect the dynamics of RNA-protein interactions during MZT. The enrichment of numerous splicing factors like hnRNP proteins before ZGA was surprising, because maternal mRNAs were found to be fully spliced. To address potentially unique roles of RBPs in embryogenesis, we focused on hnRNP A1. iCLIP and subsequent mRNA reporter assays revealed a function for hnRNP A1 in the regulation of poly(A) tail length and translation of maternal mRNAs through sequence-specific association with 3’UTRs before ZGA. Comparison of iCLIP data from two developmental stages revealed that hnRNP A1 dissociates from maternal mRNAs at ZGA and instead regulates the nuclear processing of pri-miR-430 transcripts, which we validated experimentally. The shift from cytoplasmic to nuclear RNA targets was accompanied by a dramatic translocation of hnRNP A1 and other pre-mRNA splicing factors to the nucleus in a transcription-dependent manner. Thus, our study identifies global changes in RNA-protein interactions during vertebrate MZT and shows that hnRNP A1 RNA-binding activities are spatially and temporally coordinated to regulate RNA metabolism during early development.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted 1x LDS protein fraction was heated  to 80°C and separated on a 4%-12% NuPage NOVEX gradient gel in MOPS buffer (Thermo). In-gel digestion was performed essentially as previously described (Rappsilber 2007, PMID: 17703201). Peptides were desalted on stage tips and stored at room temperature until analysis. The peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (15-20 cm, 75 μm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch)) by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC series uHPLC system (Thermo) coupled to an Q Exactive series mass spectrometer (Thermo). For elution, a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 200 nl/min was applied within an overall 105 min (Q Exactive Plus) or 240 min (Q Exactive) instrument method. The instruments were operated in a top10 data-dependent acquisition with a full scan (QE: 70k, 300-1750 m/z; QEP: 70k, 300-1650 m/z) and up to 10 HCD fragmentations.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant v.1.5.0.0 (Cox 2008, PMID: 19029910) and searched with the incorporated Andromeda search engine against the supplied Uniprot danio rerio fasta file (39.559 entries). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The search was performed with an initial mass tolerance of 7 ppm mass accuracy for the precursor and 20 ppm for the MS/MS spectra in the HCD fragmentation mode. Standard settings were applied except match between runs and the LFQ quantitation was activated. Search results were filtered with MaxQuant at false discovery rate of 0.01 on protein and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
During the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT), transcriptionally silent embryos rely on post-transcriptional regulation of maternal mRNAs until zygotic genome activation (ZGA). RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are important regulators of post-transcriptional RNA processing events, yet their identities and functions during developmental transitions in vertebrates remain largely unexplored. Using mRNA interactome capture, we identified 227 RBPs in zebrafish embryos before and during ZGA, hereby named the zebrafish MZT mRNA-bound proteome. This protein constellation consists of many conserved RBPs, some of which are potential stage-specific mRNA interactors that likely reflect the dynamics of RNA-protein interactions during MZT. The enrichment of numerous splicing factors like hnRNP proteins before ZGA was surprising, because maternal mRNAs were found to be fully spliced. To address potentially unique roles of these RBPs in embryogenesis, we focused on Hnrnpa1. iCLIP and subsequent mRNA reporter assays revealed a function for Hnrnpa1 in the regulation of poly(A) tail length and translation of maternal mRNAs through sequence-specific association with 3' UTRs before ZGA. Comparison of iCLIP data from two developmental stages revealed that Hnrnpa1 dissociates from maternal mRNAs at ZGA and instead regulates the nuclear processing of <i>pri-mir-430</i> transcripts, which we validated experimentally. The shift from cytoplasmic to nuclear RNA targets was accompanied by a dramatic translocation of Hnrnpa1 and other pre-mRNA splicing factors to the nucleus in a transcription-dependent manner. Thus, our study identifies global changes in RNA-protein interactions during vertebrate MZT and shows that Hnrnpa1 RNA-binding activities are spatially and temporally coordinated to regulate RNA metabolism during early development.

### Keywords
Embryo, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


