### Accession
PXD029350

### Title
Multiplexed isobaric quantitative cross-linking reveals drug-induced interactome changes in breast cancer cells

### Description
In vivo application of an extended set of six iqPIR reagents (6-plex iqPIR) allowing multiplexed quantitative interactome analysis of up to six biological samples in a single LC-MS acquisition.  Multiplexed iqPIR is demonstrated on MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with five different Hsp90 inhibitors revealing large scale protein conformational and interaction changes specific to the molecular class of the inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 cells were treated with 5 different Hsp90 inhibitors and then cross-linked in vivo with 6-plex iqPIR.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Comet and XLinkProphet.

### Publication Abstract
The study of protein structures and interactions is critical to understand their function. Chemical cross-linking of proteins with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is a rapidly developing structural biology technique able to provide valuable insight into protein conformations and interactions, even as they exist within their native cellular environment. Quantitative analysis of cross-links can reveal protein conformational and interaction changes that occur as a result of altered biological states, environmental conditions, or pharmacological perturbations. Our laboratory recently developed an isobaric quantitative protein interaction reporter (iqPIR) cross-linking strategy for comparative interactome studies. This strategy relies on isotope encoded chemical cross-linkers that have the same molecular mass yet produce unique and specific isotope signatures upon fragmentation in the mass spectrometer which can be used for quantitative analysis of cross-linked peptides. The initial set of iqPIR molecules allowed for binary comparisons. Here, we describe the <i>in vivo</i> application of an extended set of six iqPIR reagents (6-plex iqPIR), allowing multiplexed quantitative interactome analysis of up to six biological samples in a single LC-MS acquisition. Multiplexed iqPIR is demonstrated on MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with five different Hsp90 inhibitors revealing large scale protein conformational and interaction changes specific to the molecular class of the inhibitors.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Breast cancer, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Genome Sciences, Bruce Lab, University of Washington, USA.
University of Washington

### Submitter
Helisa Wippel

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
Genome Sciences, Bruce Lab, University of Washington, USA.


