### Accession
PXD012453

### Title
Integrated analysis of label-free quantitative proteomics and bioinformatics reveal insights into signaling pathways in male breast cancer

### Description
The project contains raw and result files from a proteomic profiling of a male breast cancer (MBC) case. Label-free quantification-mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS) and bioinformatics analysis were employed to investigate the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) among distinct tissue samples: the primary breast tumor, axillary metastatic lymph nodes and the adjacent non-tumor breast tissue. An additional proteomic comparative analysis was performed with a primary breast tumor of a female patient. A number of Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA) (QIAGEN Inc.) and functional annotation tools were used to further analyze the DEPs. Altogether, our findings revealed deregulated proteins into signaling pathways involved in the cancer development and provided a landscape of proteomic data for the MBC research.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extracts were obtained from homogenization with 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and 0.1 M DTT (100 μl buffer per 10 mg tissue) in TissueLyser II sample disruptor (Qiagen Corp. MD, USA) at an oscillation frequency of 25 Hz for 3 minutes and heated to 95ºC. Homogenization and heating were repeated three times followed by sonication and centrifugation to remove cellular debris. Samples (25 µg) were previously separated in 1D-PAGE 10% (v/v) acrylamide gels, reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with 12.5 ng/µl trypsin at 37 °C. The peptides were extracted and desalted with C18 Stage Tips. The LFQ-MS was performed on EASY-nLC 1000 chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. DDA mode was set in the MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 and protein identification was performed against human uniprot protein database (UniProtKB, 24 May 2017, 70,939 entries). Trypsin was set as the enzyme, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. For peptide identification, at least seven amino acids were required. An FDR of 1% was independently applied for both peptide and protein identification. LFQ option was enabled to quantify the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare malignancy that accounts for about 1.8% of all breast cancer cases. In contrast to the high number of the "omics" studies in breast cancer in women, only recently molecular approaches have been performed in MBC research. High-throughput proteomics based methodologies are promisor strategies to characterize the MBC proteomic signatures and their association with clinico-pathological parameters. In this study, the label-free quantification-mass spectrometry and bioinformatics approaches were applied to analyze the proteomic profiling of a MBC case using the primary breast tumor and the corresponding axillary metastatic lymph nodes and adjacent non-tumor breast tissues. The differentially expressed proteins were identified in the signaling pathways of granzyme B, sirtuins, eIF2, actin cytoskeleton, eNOS, acute phase response and calcium and were connected to the upstream regulators MYC, PI3K SMARCA4 and cancer-related chemical drugs. An additional proteomic comparative analysis was performed with a primary breast tumor of a female patient and revealed an interesting set of proteins, which were mainly involved in cancer biology. Together, our data provide a relevant data source for the MBC research that can help the therapeutic strategies for its management.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Bioinformatics analysis, Label-free mass spectrometry, Proteomics, Male breast cancer

### Affiliations
Genetics Department, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Michel Batista

### Lab Head
Dr Enilze Maria de Souza Fonseca Ribeiro
Genetics Department, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil


