### Accession
PXD038870

### Title
Tryptophan zipper hydrogels: bioactive self-healing antimicrobial matrices

### Description
Natural materials can reversibly self-assemble into hierarchical networks with diverse structural and functional properties. Recreating these dynamic architectures using peptide-based synthetic materials has been an elusive goal, hindered by challenges in relating sequence to structure to function.  Here we report on the de novo discovery of short peptides based on the “tryptophan zipper” (Trpzip) motif that self-assemble into hierarchically structured hydrogels. Trpzip hydrogels have a tunable modulus and show self-healing, stress relaxation, antimicrobial properties, and biocompatibility. The low yield point allows syringe extrusion with cytoprotection, and cell harvest with a flick of the wrist. Integrating a pendant cell adhesion motif promotes human intestinal organoid growth and differentiation, with polarity control and improved shape fidelity. Considering these unique characteristics, we anticipate Trpzip hydrogels will prove a versatile reagent for biotechnology and medicine.

### Sample Protocol
Adult stem cell derived Intestinal organoid cultures from rectal biopsies obtained from molecular and integrative Cystic Fibrosis (miCF) Biobank were established from crypts isolated from four to six rectal biopsies. After 7 days of culture in either Matrigel or Trpzip gels, organoids were retrieved from the matrices and lysed in 50µl of RIPA buffer (Life Technologies 89900) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11836153001) with sonication (15 cycles of 30 sec on/30 sec off) at 4°C using the Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode B01060010). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Lysates were reduced (5 mM DTT, 37°C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM IA, RT, 30 min) and incubated with trypsin at 37°C for 18 h, at a 1:20 ratio (w/w) and desalted with two SDB-RPS disk (Empore, Sigma Cat # 66886-U). Proteolytic peptide samples were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands), and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using a 90 min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw peak lists were analysed using MaxQuant (version 2.1.3) with the Andromeda algorithm. Search parameters were: ±4.5 ppm tolerance for precursor ions; ±0.5 Da for peptide fragments; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications; and enzyme specificity as trypsin with two missed cleavages possible. Peaks were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (August 2022 release). Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Soft materials in nature are formed through reversible supramolecular assembly of biological polymers into dynamic hierarchical networks. Rational design has led to self-assembling peptides with structural similarities to natural materials. However, recreating the dynamic functional properties inherent to natural systems remains challenging. Here we report the discovery of a short peptide based on the tryptophan zipper (trpzip) motif, that shows multiscale hierarchical ordering that leads to emergent dynamic properties. Trpzip hydrogels are antimicrobial and self-healing, with tunable viscoelasticity and unique yield-stress properties that allow immediate harvest of embedded cells through a flick of the wrist. This characteristic makes Trpzip hydrogels amenable to syringe extrusion, which we demonstrate with examples of cell delivery and bioprinting. Trpzip hydrogels display innate bioactivity, allowing propagation of human intestinal organoids with apical-basal polarization. Considering these extensive attributes, we anticipate the Trpzip motif will prove a versatile building block for supramolecular assembly of soft materials for biotechnology and medicine.

### Keywords
Organoids, Matrigel, Hydrogel

### Affiliations
UNSW Sydney
School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia

### Submitter
Abhishek Vijayan

### Lab Head
Dr Shafagh Waters
School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia


