### Accession
PXD006062

### Title
Chinese Hamster Ovary cell proteins co-purified with recombinant HIV-1 envelopes, part 3

### Description
Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells are frequently used to produce recombinant HIV envelope protein gp120.  In this study, we characterized the CHO proteins that become co-purified with gp120 when lectin affinity chromatography is used.  Many of co-purified CHO proteins identified were extracellular matrix components.  We verified a method for separating gp120 from these CHO proteins with anion exchange chromatography, and assessed the biochemical activity of gp120 preparations with and without co-purified CHO proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For in-gel digestion, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized with coomassie blue.  Individual protein bands were excised and dehydrated by 3 washes with acetonitrile.  Gel pieces were rehydrated in buffer containing 25mM ammonium bicarbonate and 5mM DTT, and incubated for 45min at 56°C.  Cysteines were alkylated in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate and 80mM iodoacetamide for 30min.  Gel slices were rinsed with water, dehydrated in acetonitrile, and then rehydrated in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 12.5ng/uL trypsin and incubated overnight at 37°C.  Tryptic peptides were extracted by one wash with water and three washes with 50% acetonitrile containing 5% formic acid, and were vacuum-concentrated to 10µL. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-Acquity UPLC system (Waters) and in-house developed nano spray ionization source.  30cm columns were prepared in-house from fused silica capillary tubing (75µm inner diameter x 360µm outer diameter, Kinesis Scientific) with laser-pulled tips and packed with 5µm C18 resin with 120 Å  pore size (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, ESI Source Solutions).  Mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (A), and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B).  5µL of sample was loaded onto the column from the autosampler and desalted for 40min with 2% mobile phase B at 300nL/min.  Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5-30% mobile phase B over 80min and a flow rate of 300nL/min.  The column was then washed with 80% mobile phase B for 10min, followed by equilibration with 2% mobile phase B for 20min prior to subsequent injections.  Eluted peptides were detected using a data-dependent acquisition method.  Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed in the orbitrap mass analyzer from 375-1575 m/z at 120k resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 7 x 105 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 50ms.  After survey scans, tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state of 2-4 and greater than 1 x 104 intensity by isolating them in the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z.  High-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was applied with normalized collision energy of 30%, and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the ion trap.  The ion count target for MS/MS was set to 1 x 104 and the maximum injection time limited to 100ms.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 30s with 10ppm mass tolerance around the precursor and its isotopes.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were converted to the mzXML format using ReAdW (version 2016.1.0) converter.  The mzXML files were searched against a Cricetulus griseus protein sequence database downloaded from UniProt appended with common contaminant sequences (24,000 total sequence entries).  A database search was performed using Comet (version 2016.01 rev. 2) with the following search parameters:  20 ppm precursor tolerance, concatenated target-decoy search, tryptic digest allowing 2 missed cleavages, oxidized methionine variable modification, and carboxyamidomethylation static modification on cysteine.  Comet search results were then processed with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet tools from the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline software suite (version 5.0.0 Typhoon).

### Publication Abstract
Gut-homing &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub><sup>high</sup> CD4<sup>+</sup> T lymphocytes have been shown to be preferentially targeted by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and are implicated in HIV-1 pathogenesis. Previous studies demonstrated that HIV-1 envelope protein gp120 binds and signals through &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> and that this likely contributes to the infection of &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub><sup>high</sup> T cells and promotes cell-to-cell virus transmission. Structures within the second variable loop (V2) of gp120, including the tripeptide motif LDV/I, are thought to mediate gp120-&#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> binding. However, lack of &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> binding has been reported in gp120 proteins containing LDV/I, and the precise determinants of gp120-&#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> binding are not fully defined. In this work, we report the novel finding that fibronectins mediate indirect gp120-&#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> interactions. We show that Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells used to express recombinant gp120 produced fibronectins and other extracellular matrix proteins that copurified with gp120. CHO cell fibronectins were able to mediate the binding of a diverse panel of gp120 proteins to &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> in an <i>in vitro</i> cell binding assay. The V2 loop was not required for fibronectin-mediated binding of gp120 to &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub>, nor did V2-specific antibodies block this interaction. Removal of fibronectin through anion-exchange chromatography abrogated V2-independent gp120-&#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> binding. Additionally, we showed a recombinant human fibronectin fragment mediated gp120-&#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> interactions similarly to CHO cell fibronectin. These findings provide an explanation for the apparently contradictory observations regarding the gp120-&#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> interaction and offer new insights into the potential role of fibronectin and other extracellular matrix proteins in HIV-1 biology.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Immune tissues within the gut are severely damaged by HIV-1, and this plays an important role in the development of AIDS. Integrin &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> plays a major role in the trafficking of lymphocytes, including CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, into gut lymphoid tissues. Previous reports indicate that some HIV-1 gp120 envelope proteins bind to and signal through &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub>, which may help explain the preferential infection of gut CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. In this study, we demonstrate that extracellular matrix proteins can mediate interactions between gp120 and &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> This suggests that the extracellular matrix may be an important mediator of HIV-1 interaction with &#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub>-expressing cells. These findings provide new insight into the nature of HIV-1-&#x3b1;<sub>4</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>7</sub> interactions and how these interactions may represent targets for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Chinese hamster, Hiv, Extracellular matrix, Gp120, Cho, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
David Plotnik

### Lab Head
Dr Shiu-Lok Hu
University of Washington


