### Accession
PXD023644

### Title
Understanding the role of RbgA in the assembly process of the 50S subunit.

### Description
Ribosomes must be formed quickly (to support cellular growth demands) and accurately (to ensure proper translation of the genetic code). The assembly of ribosomes in vivo requires not only the constituent rRNAs and ribosomal proteins (r-proteins), but also assembly factors. Several of these factors are GTPases. However, the molecular role that these GTPases play is not understood. Hypotheses range from serving a regulatory/checkpoint role to serving a direct mechanical role in structural rearrangements (such as serving as an RNA chaperone). The objective of our research is to identify the precise function of one of these essential GTPases in the assembly of the 50S subunit and provide a clear picture for the molecular rearrangements associated with its function. This essential GTPase from Bacillus subtilis, the model organism for Gram-positive bacteria, is RbgA, which constitute a key player in the late maturation steps of the 50S ribosome subunit.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Purified ribosome subunits were individually mixed in equimolar ratios (5 pmol each) with 15N-labeled 70S purified ribosomes in a volume of 10 ul in buffer E. One volume of 8M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8 was added to the samples, which were then reduced with 5 mM DTT (55 mM stock in 50 mM Tris pH8 and 8M urea) for 30 minutes at 37 °C in with gentle agitation (Thermomixer set at 350 RPM). Cysteines were then alkylated in 16 mM iodoacetamide (192 mM stock in 50 mM Tris pH 8 and 8 M urea) at room temperature in the dark for an additional 30 minutes. Trypsin / Lys-C (V5073, Promega ) was added at a 1:25 enzyme to protein ratio, and the Lys-C digestion was allowed to proceed for 4 hours at 37 °C with gentle agitation. Urea was finally diluted to 1 M using 50 mM Tris pH 8 to allow the trypsin digestion to proceed overnight. All agitations were done in a thermomixer at 350 RPM. Next day, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and acetonitrile (ACN) were added to final concentrations of 0.5 % and 2 %, respectively, and the peptide samples were cleaned on Peptide Cleanup C18 Spin Tubes (Agilent, 5188-2750 ) as per manufacturer recommendations, with the exception that peptides were eluted with 80 % ACN containing 0.5 % TFA. Eluted peptides were brought to dryness, then they were resuspended in 34 ul of 2 % ACN with 1 % formic acid (FA) and an internal retention time (iRT) standard peptide mix (Biognosys, Ki-3002-1) . Samples volumes corresponding to 1.4 ug each were injected in technical triplicates on a PicoFrit fused silica capillary column (15 cm x 75 μm i.d; New Objective), self-packed with C-18 reverse-phase resin (Jupiter 5 μm particles, 300 Å pore size; Phenomenex) using a high-pressure packing cell on the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems). Solvent A was 2 % ACN with 1 % FA, while solvent B was 99 % ACN with 1 % FA. Peptides were loaded on-column at a flowrate of 600 nl/min, and eluted over a 2-slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nl/min. Solvent B was increased from 2 to 45 % over 120 min, and from 45 to 85 % over 10 min. The column was coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon nanoelectrospray Flex ion source. We employed a library-free WiSIM-DIA strategy to collect and analyze the data.  WiSIM-DIA. Full scans acquisitions (300-530, 530-760 and 760-990 m/z) were carried out in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 240,000. Each full scan was followed by 20 linear trap acquisition windows at 12 m/z increments, covering each full scan. Matching m/z window precursor ions were fragmented by HCD at a 30 % collision energy. MS ion fill times and AGC targets were set to 50 ms and 3x104, and to 47 ms and 5x104 for MS2, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis. Raw files were analyzed by directDIA with Spectronaut v.13.12.200217.43655 (Biognosys) using a fasta library consisting of the large ribosomal subunit proteins of Bacillus subtilis strain 168 extracted from UP000001570.fasta (downloaded on 2/14/2020). Considered peptide length was 6-52 amino acids with two miscleavages tolerances, using semi-specific Trypsin/P rules. The data was extracted with both MS and MS2 tolerance levels set at dynamic with correction factors of 1.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modifications while oxidation of methionine and protein N-termini acetylation were set as variable. Machine learning across experiment was selected for proteins and precursors identification with both Qvalues cutoffs at 0.01. For quantification, MS1 was set to a minimum of 3 interference-free precursors; MS2 was set to a minimum of 4 interference-free fragments. Quantification was made at the MS1 level by using median XIC areas on peptide precursors levels. Only proteotypic peptides meeting the Qvalue threshold were considered. MS1 XIC isotopic envelopes were visually inspected for manual approval or rejection. Across all runs, 105 precursors had a full profile, with 93 peptides matching to 28 proteins and groups. Globally, 8-9 data points were measured per peak, and data completeness was 98.5 %. Median CVs for each sample group varied from 2.5 to 2.9 % with an overall average peak capacity of 319.1 (ranging from 315.4 to 324.9 for each conditions), and a median XIC width of 4 min across samples (ranging from 3.8 to 4.2 min per condition). The light to heavy precursors median raw intensities ratios were normalized on uL24 to obtain relative protein occupancies values for all triplicate, which were then plotted using ggplot2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rbga; ylqf; cryo-electron microscopy., Ribosome assembly; 50s subunit; ul6

### Affiliations
1-Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine; Université de Montréal; C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montréal,  Québec, H3C 3J7; Canada.  2-Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, H2W 1R7; Canada.   3-Faculty of Medicine, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, H3A 1A3; Canada.
Institut de recherches cliniques Montreal (IRCM)
Universite de Montreal

### Submitter
Marlene Oeffinger

### Lab Head
Dr Marlene Oeffinger
1-Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine; Université de Montréal; C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre-Ville, Montréal,  Québec, H3C 3J7; Canada.  2-Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, H2W 1R7; Canada.   3-Faculty of Medicine, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, H3A 1A3; Canada.


