### Accession
PXD020762

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of MLK Family Kinases in Arabidopsis

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most prevalent post-translational modifications found in eukaryotic systems and serves as a key molecular mechanism by which protein function is regulated in response to environmental stimuli. The Mut9-Like Kinases (MLKs) are a plant-specific family of Ser/Thr kinases that have been linked to light, circadian, and abiotic stress signaling. Here we use quantitative phosphoproteomics in conjunction with global proteomic analysis to explore the role of the MLKs in daily protein dynamics. In the absence of MLK family kinases,proteins involved in light, circadian, and hormone signaling as well as several chromatin modifying enzymes were found to have altered phosphorylation profiles. Additionally, mlk mutant seedlings were found to have elevated glucosinolate accumulation and increased sensitivity to DNAdamage. Our analysis in combination with previously reported data supports the involvement of MLKs in a diverse set of stress responses and developmental processes, suggesting that the MLKs may serve as key regulators linking environmental inputs to developmental outputs.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis wild type and mutant seedlings were homogenized and extracted for protein. Protein samples were subjected to trypsin digestion, phosphopeptide enrichment, TMT labeling, high pH RP fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1. Byonic v2.11 was used as search engine. For quantitation, reporter ion intensity integration tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Abundance ratios for mutant/wild type pairwise comparisons were calculated from the average peptide abundance of mutant and wild-type biological replicates. The Motif-X algorithm was used to extract significantly enriched phosphorylation motifs. Enrichment analysis of Gene ontology (GO) categories was performed with g:Profiler.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation is one of the most prevalent posttranslational modifications found in eukaryotic systems. It serves as a key molecular mechanism that regulates protein function in response to environmental stimuli. The Mut9-like kinases (MLKs) are a plant-specific family of Ser/Thr kinases linked to light, circadian, and abiotic stress signaling. Here we use quantitative phosphoproteomics in conjunction with global proteomic analysis to explore the role of the MLKs in daily protein dynamics. Proteins involved in light, circadian, and hormone signaling, as well as several chromatin-modifying enzymes and DNA damage response factors, were found to have altered phosphorylation profiles in the absence of MLK family kinases. In addition to altered phosphorylation levels, mlk mutant seedlings have an increase in glucosinolate metabolism enzymes. Subsequently, we show that a functional consequence of the changes to the proteome and phosphoproteome in mlk mutant plants is elevated glucosinolate accumulation and increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. Combined with previous reports, this work supports the involvement of MLKs in a diverse set of stress responses and developmental processes, suggesting that the MLKs serve as key regulators linking environmental inputs to developmental outputs.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, 63132, USA

### Submitter
Dmitri Nusinow

### Lab Head
Dr Dmitri A. Nusinow
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, 63132, USA


