### Accession
PXD035085

### Title
Immunological Sexual Dimorphism in Placenta and Its Response to Benzene Exposure

### Description
There is increasing concern regarding the adverse effects of air pollution on human health, and benzene is a major toxic compound in air pollution. Maternal benzene exposure has been associated with reproductive complications, such as preterm birth, low birth weight, and immunological and neurological complications in the offspring. However, it is poorly understood how benzene induces these complications. Our objective was to establish a full body inhalation mouse model for maternal benzene exposure that mimics clinical phenotypes observed in human populations, and characterize the maternal immune activation and placental response in our model. Here, we report that maternal immune activation triggered by benzene exposure during pregnancy leads to increased resorptions, abnormal placenta development and low birth weight of fetus. More importantly, there is a sexual dimorphic response to benzene exposure in female and male placentas. In the male placenta, the transcriptome changes reveal a more immunologically relevant profile, while females have a metabolically related profile. Furthermore, we discover the sexual dimorphic response could be a consequence of the sexual dimorphism of placenta at baseline, which indicates the significant difference between sexes in terms of the immunological processes in the placenta, both in human and mouse. Therefore, our findings established a benzene exposure mouse model and indicated the sexual dimorphism of placenta, which provides valuable reference for the future pregnancy studies.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Protein extraction and digestion:  Samples of mouse placenta were collected by punch biopsy using Integra 1.5 mm disposable biopsy punches. Samples were ejected into 1.5 ml LoBind Eppendorph tubes and frozen for transfer for processing. Four biological replicates per treatment condition were prepared. Tissues were homogenized using a Next Advance Bullet Blender Storm 24 with a single 3.2 mm Stainless Steel bead at power setting 8 for 1 minute in 200 µl 2 % lithium dodecyl sulfate (LiDS).  Following homogenization the samples were centrifuge to decrease foaming then heated at 95℃ for 5 min to stop all enzymatic activity {Ref: PMID: 20567768 }.  After heating, 40 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to buffer the samples and they were then reduced with 5 mM dithiotheitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 37℃, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark and the reaction was stopped with a second addition of 5 mM DTT. LiDS was removed by adding 10 % of the sample volume of 12 % phosphoric acid followed by protein precipitation with 7 sample volumes of 90 % methanol with 10 % TEAB. Precipitates were collected by centrifugation at 5000×g for 1 min, then washed twice with 80 % methanol, 1% TEAB and 19% H2O. Pellets were air dried then re-suspended in 50 mM TEAB prior to digestion with 1:200 (w/w) trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) for 1 hr at 47℃ then at 37℃ overnight. Peptide concentration was estimated using Pierce TM Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific TM, USA).         2.2. TMT labeling and High pH-Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation:  Peptides were diluted to 1.0 ug/ul in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.2) and 30 ug aliquoted for labeling with TMTpro reagents. The designated TMTpro 18 plex reagent (200 ug) (ThermoFisher, USA) was dissolved in 20 µL acetonitrile then immediately added to the peptide sample. The peptide–TMTpro reaction was incubated for two hours at RT, then stopped by the addition of 8 μl of 1 M Tris, pH 8 with incubation for 15 min at 25°C. Labelled samples were evaluated for effective labeling then pooled. The pooled samples were fractionated using the High pH Reversed-Phase fractionation kit (Pierce, USA). A step gradient of increasing acetonitrile (ACN) concentrations including 5, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 30 and 50% ACN in 0.1% Triethylamine was applied to elute bound peptides in 13 fractions. Each fraction was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored until analysis by mass spectrometry.  2.3. Mass spectrometry analysis      Samples were analyzed using a Vanquish Neo nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). An Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm × 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100Å), and Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm × 25 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100Å) were used to collect and separate peptides.  Alkaline reversed phase fractions were analyzed using a 120 minute gradient of 5 % to 36 % ACN with positive voltage set at 2,000 V.  MS1 resolution was 120K, scan range 375-1500, charge states from 2-7 were accepted and excluded after 1 time for a period of 60 seconds.  For MS2 quadrupol isolation with an isolation window of 0.7 Da was used.  First mass was fixed at 110 Da. Fragmentation was by HCD with a collision energy of 35. MS2 resolution was set at 50K and all data were collected in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 using the Sequest HT algorithm with Percolator and the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (downloaded 20210330 with 17,035 entries). The search parameters included trypsin with two missed cleavages. Variable modification by oxidation of M (+15.995) or deamidation of N or Q (+0.984) as well as acetylation (+42.011) of protein N-termini. Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021) and TMTpro modification of K and of peptide N-termini (+304.207) were set as static modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.04 Da, respectively. Percolator was used for sequence validation with false discovery rate with a cut-off of 1% used for confident identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal immune activation (MIA) by environmental challenges is linked to severe developmental complications, such as neurocognitive disorders, autism, and even fetal/maternal death. Benzene is a major toxic compound in air pollution that affects the mother as well as the fetus and has been associated with reproductive complications. Our objective was to elucidate whether benzene exposure during gestation triggers MIA and its impact on fetal development. We report that benzene exposure during pregnancy leads MIA associated with increased fetal resorptions, fetal growth, and abnormal placenta development. Furthermore, we demonstrate the existence of a sexual dimorphic response to benzene exposure in male and female placentas. The sexual dimorphic response is a consequence of inherent differences between male and female placenta. These data provide crucial information on the origins or sexual dimorphism and how exposure to environmental factors can have a differential impact on the development of male and female offspring.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Placenta, Maternal immune activation, Benzene exposure, Sexual dimorphism

### Affiliations
Wayne State University
Scientific Director, C.S. Mott Center for Human Growth and Developmen

### Submitter
Paul Stemmer

### Lab Head
Dr Gil G. Mor
Scientific Director, C.S. Mott Center for Human Growth and Developmen


