### Accession
PXD004365

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of exoproteome and membrane enriched fractions of PAK and PAK pJN2133 strains

### Description
This work characterizes a P.aeruginosa strain with low levels of c-di-GMP resultant from the overexpression of the phosphodiesterase PA2133. Phenotypic characterization showed that biofilm formation, adhesion to epitheliel cells, and motility are severely impaired in this strain. We applied both, DIGE / MALDI-TOF/TOF and shotgun LC/MS/MS quantitative proteomic analysis to exoproteome and enriched membrane protein fractions. Results from both complementary strategies were in agreement and revealed motility, type III secretion, and chemotaxis to be the main affected processes by PA2133 overexpression. These results are the first to show that flagella synthesis, twitching motility, and chemotaxis are negatively regulated by low c-di-GMP levels in P.aeruginosa and thus confront our current undertsandings of c-di-GMP signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Exoproteins and membrane enriched fractions were run on 1 cm lenght SDS gels (12% acrylamide). In gel Cys alkylation was performed by incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 56°C followed by incubation with 55mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min prior to in-gel digestion. In gel digestion and peptide extraction was performed as described above. Tryptic peptides were separated using nano-HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000 Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures were injected into an Acclaim PepMap C18 nno-trap column (75 um x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 50 um x 150 mm C18 Easy spray column (PepMap RSLC, 2 um, 100 A)at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Peptide elution was achieved with a 100 min gradient from 5% to 55% of mobile phase B (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Online MS analysis was carried out in a data dependent mode (full scan followed by MS/MS of the top 10 m/z in each segment) using a dynamic exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis was performed in accordance to recently published PatternLab for proteomics 4.0 software (http://www. patternlabforproteomics.org) protocol for data analysis. The proteome from Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain K was downloaded from UniProt (May 2015) (http://www.uniprot.org) and a target-reverse database including the 127 most common contaminants was generated using PatternLab's databse generation tool. Thermo raw file were searched against database using the integrated Comet search engine (v.2015.2)with the following parameters: mass tolerance from the measured precursor m/z (ppm): 700; enzyme: trypsin, enzyme specificity: fully-specific, missed cleavages: 1; variable modifications: methionine oxidation; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using PatternLab's Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module in order to achieve a list of identifications with less than 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level. Results were post-processed to only accept peptides with six or more residues, proteins with at least one peptide spectrum match with an Xcorr greater than two and only identifications with two or more peptides, otherwise. These last filters led to an FDR, at the protein level, to be lower than 1% for all search results

### Publication Abstract
The second messenger c-di-GMP regulates the switch between motile and sessile bacterial lifestyles. A general feature of c-di-GMP metabolism is the presence of a surprisingly large number of genes coding for diguanylate cyclases and phosphodiesterases, the enzymes responsible for its synthesis and degradation respectively. However, the physiological relevance of this apparent redundancy is not clear, emphasizing the need for investigating the functions of each of these enzymes. Here we focused on the phosphodiesterase PA2133 from Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an important opportunistic pathogen. We phenotypically characterized P. aeruginosa strain K overexpressing PA2133 or its inactive mutant. We showed that biofilm formation and motility are severely impaired by overexpression of PA2133. Our quantitative proteomic approach applied to the membrane and exoprotein fractions revealed that proteins involved in three processes were mostly affected: flagellar motility, type III secretion system and chemotaxis. While inhibition of biofilm formation can be ascribed to the phosphodiesterase activity of PA2133, down-regulation of flagellar, chemotaxis, and type III secretion system proteins is independent of this enzymatic activity. Based on these unexpected effects of PA2133, we propose to rename this gene product FcsR, for Flagellar, chemotaxis and type III secretion system Regulator.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa; c-di gmp; phosphodiesterase

### Affiliations
Lab's head
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Jessica Rossello

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Lab's head


