### Accession
PXD004044

### Title
Comparison of hair bundle proteomes from WT and Pls1-knockout mouse utricles

### Description
With their stereotyped dimensions and orderly arrangement, as well as their essential role in auditory and vestibular function, stereocilia of sensory hair cells provide a particularly prominent example of the importance of cellular actin protrusions. Uniformity of actin packing in stereocilia is mediated by actin crosslinkers of the plastin, fascin, and espin families. While mice lacking ESPN (espin) have no vestibular function, we found that mice that either lacked PLS1 (plastin 1) or had nonfunctional FSCN2 (fascin 2) had vestibular function that was modestly reduced, with double-mutant mice being more strongly affected. Despite its outsized importance in functional assays, targeted mass spectrometry indicated that ESPN only accounted for ~15% of the total crosslinkers in mouse utricle stereocilia. PLS1 was the most abundant of the crosslinkers, and the second-most-abundant protein overall in stereocilia. Stereocilia lacking PLS1 were shorter and thinner than wild-type stereocilia. Surprisingly, while wild-type stereocilia had random liquid packing of their actin filaments, stereocilia lacking PLS1 had orderly hexagonal packing. Stereocilia with normal PLS1 but that lacked functional FSCN2 had normal liquid packing and normal dimensions. All three crosslinkers are required for normal stereocilia structure and function, but PLS1 biases stereocilia towards liquid packing, which allows stereocilia to grow to greater diameter.

### Sample Protocol
Utricles were dissected from wild-type or Pls1-null mice; hair bundles were isolated using the twist-off technique. Proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin, and peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Velos ion-trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
SEQUEST (v.28, rev. 12) was used to search MS2 spectra against version 62 of the Ensembl mouse protein database, with concatenated sequence-reversed entries to estimate error thresholds, 179 common contaminant sequences and their reversed forms, and an entry corresponding to the short form of XIRP2, an abundant hair bundle protein). Database processing was performed using custom Python scripts (http://www.ProteomicAnalysisWorkbench.com). SEQUEST searches for all samples were performed with trypsin enzyme specificity. Average parent ion mass tolerance was 2.5 Da. Monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance was 1.0 Da. A variable modification of +16.0 Da on methionine residues was also allowed. Peptides identified with SEQUEST were assembled into proteins the PAW pipeline. Proteins were quantified using MS2 intensities, normalized for molecular mass. To test whether any proteins were differentially expressed in wild-type and Pls1-/- mice, we used an empirical Bayes test with adjustment for false-discovery due to multiple comparisons. Proteins were not filtered by number of identification per condition, but rather as many proteins as possible were kept as long as the model could be fit. The computation was done using the limma package in R Statistical Computing Environment (www.r-project.org)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fimbrin, Stereocilia, Plastin, Espin, Hair cells, Utricle, Fascin, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239  USA

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland  OR  97239  USA


