### Accession
PXD017960

### Title
Novel role of TrkC in diabetic nephropathy and cross-talk of TrkC with insulin-related signaling

### Description
Diabetic nephropathy is a major cause of end-stage renal disease. Kidney podocytes play a central role in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy. With their intercellular contacts they assemble part of the kidney filter. Many molecular mechanisms of the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy are not elucidated and targeted therapies are lacking. Nephron-specific TrkCknockout (TrkC-KO) and TrkC overexpressing mice exhibit features of diabetic nephropathy such as enlarged glomeruli with mesangial proliferation, basement membrane thickening, albuminuria and podocyte loss when aging. Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (Igf1R)- associated gene expression was regulated in TrkC-KO mice glomeruli by qPCR. Phosphoproteins associated with insulin, erb-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase (Erbb) and Toll-like receptor signaling were enriched in lysates of podocytes treated with the TrkC ligand neurotrophin-3(Nt-3) in a mass spectrometry analysis. Activation of TrkC by Nt-3 resulted in phosphorylation of the Igf1R on activating tyrosine residues in podocytes. Our results identify TrkC to be a potentially targetable mediator of diabetic nephropathy.

### Sample Protocol
Following incubation with NT3 samples were lysed in 6M guanidinium buffer containing 10mM TCEP, 55mM chloroacetamide and 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and first digested with LysC for 3 h at 37°C, followed by 6-fold dilution with 50mM Tris-HCl, addition of trypsin and a continued second digest phase over night at 37°C. Samples were then desalted using SepPak cartridges, lyophilized and subjected to offline, concatenated high-pH reversed phase fractionation using a XBridge C18 BEC reversed phase column (4.6 x 250mm) and a multilinear gradient running from 0-25% B in 90min, from 25 - 40% B in 5min and w wash out phase at 90% B for 10min before re-equilibration at starting condigions ( A:10mM NH4OH; B:10mM NH4OH, 90% acetonitril). Following lyophilization, phosphopeptides were then enriched by TiO2 from the resulting 12 peptide pools and 3 flowthrough fractions, the latter one being extracted twice. LC-MSMS anaylsis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), online coupled via a Nanoflex ion source and a home-packed coated silica emitter tip (20 cm length, 75 µm ID, 360 µm OD; C18: 1.9µm, Dr. Maisch;). Online reversed phase chromatography conditions were: 3 - 30% B in 60min; 30 - 60% B in 15 min; 60 - 90% B in 2 min (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) followed by a 3 min washout phase at 90% B and re-equilibration at starting conditions. ). The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (spray voltage 2.1 kV; column temperature maintained at 45°C using a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany)). MS1 scan resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and the mass range to m/z 300–1750. AGC target value was 3E6 with a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Fragmentation of peptides was achieved by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a top12 method. Dynamic exclusion of previously identified peptides was allowed and set to 20 s, singly charged and peptides assigned with charge of 6 and more were excluded from the analysis. Data were recorded with Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computional platform (version 1.5.5.1; Cox and Mann, 2008). Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse human Uniprot database (UP000000589_10090.fasta, version from 12/2015) including common lab contaminants. The allowed initial mass deviation was set to 7ppm and 20ppm in the search for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids was selected. The minimal score for a correctly identified modified peptide as set to 40. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed; the ‘match between runs’ option was turned on. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met), N - acetylation at the protein terminus and phosphorylation at S, T, or Y residues were defined as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Podocyte, Neurotrophin, Trkc, Phosphoproteomics, Ntf3, Diabetic nephropathy, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


