### Accession
PXD001453

### Title
Spatial variation in transcript and protein abundance of Atlantic salmon during feeding migration in the Baltic Sea

### Description
The fitness and reproductive output of fishes can be affected by environmental disturbances. In this study, transcriptomics and label-free proteomics were combined to investigate Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) sampled from three different field locations within the Baltic Sea (Baltic Main Basin (BMB), Gulf of Finland (GoF) and Bothnian Sea (BS)) during marine migration. The expression of several stress related mRNAs and proteins of xenobiotic metabolism, oxidative stress, DNA damage and cell death were increased in salmon from GoF compared to salmon from BMB or BS. Respiratory electron chain and ATP synthesis related gene ontology-categories were upregulated in GoF salmon whereas those associated with RNA processing and synthesis, translation and protein folding decreased. Differences were seen also in metabolism and immune function related gene expression.  Comparisons of the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles between salmon from GoF and salmon from BMB or BS suggest environmental stressors, especially exposure to environmental contaminants, as a main explanation for differences. Salmon feeding in GoF are thus “disturbed by hazardous substances”. The results may also be applied in evaluating the conditions of pelagic ecosystems in the different parts of Baltic Sea.

### Sample Protocol
For liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS2) analysis, tissues were homogenized in 100 mM K-phosphate buffer with 150 mM KCl, pH 7.4 and protease inhibitors: 500nM PMSF, 2ng/ml LAP and 2ng/ml approteinin. The samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 10 000 g, +4 °C. Supernatants were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C.  Proteins were quantified using the BCA (bicinchoninic acid) protein assay (Pierce, IL, USA). An aliquot of sample containing 100 µg of protein was taken into a new tube and acetone-precipitated. Cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated, and proteins were digested with trypsin overnight. Samples were desalted using Empore C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) and the peptide concentrations were estimated by measuring the absorbance in 280nm by Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (version 3.7.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific).   The 24 liver peptide samples were analysed in a randomized order by microcapillary liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation – tandem mass spectrometry (µLC/ESI-MS/MS) on an ESI-hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Easy Nano LC nano-liquid chromatography (nLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).  An amount of 200 ng of peptides in 5 µl of 1 % HCOOH was injected into the nLC system, where peptides were separated by their hydrophobicity using reversed-phase chromatography. An in-house packed 2.5 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter trap column packed with C18 particles (Magic AQ C18 resin - 5 µm/200Å, Bruker-Michrom, Billerica, MA, USA) was used for desalting and concentrating of peptides, and a 15 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column packed with the same C18 particles was used for peptide separation. A 100 min long gradient from 98 % solvent A (98 % H2O, 2 % ACN and 0.2 % HCOOH) to 35 % solvent B (95 % ACN, 5 % H2O and 0.2 % HCOOH) with a flow rate 0.3 µl/min was used for peptide elution. Sample loading, solvent delivery and scan functions were controlled by Xcalibur software (version 2.6.0 SP3 Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were analysed in Orbitrap Velos in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode, where the 15 most intense doubly or triply charged parent masses were automatically selected for fragmentation. Mass scanning (MS1) was performed in positive-ion mode in the Orbitrap mass analyser, where a low resolution preview scan and subsequent survey scan (MS) at a resolution of 60 000 was performed. The Automatic Gain Control (AGC) of the Orbitrap was set to 106 and the mass range for analysis was from 300-2000 m/z. Precursor ions were selected for fragmentation (MS/MS) by collision induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap mass analyser, after which they were added to an exclusion list for 60s to prevent their re-analysis.

### Data Protocol
The database searches for the 22 successfully acquired spectrum files were performed in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288 Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Mascot algorithm. Two files were removed due to instrument instability during the run. The spectra were searched against a Uniprot salmon database supplemented with common protein contaminants in laboratory from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (10039 sequences, accessed July-2011). A reversed version of this database was used in the decoy search performed within Proteome Discoverer by Percolator algorithm. Search parameters were as followed: The enzyme used was trypsin, methionine oxidation was chosen as dynamic and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, decoy database search was performed, one missed cleavage site was allowed, accepted precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da and false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% defined by Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The fitness and reproductive output of fishes can be affected by environmental disturbances. In this study, transcriptomics and label-free proteomics were combined to investigate Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) sampled from three different field locations within the Baltic Sea (Baltic Main Basin (BMB), Gulf of Finland (GoF), and Bothnian Sea (BS)) during marine migration. The expression of several stress related mRNAs and proteins of xenobiotic metabolism, oxidative stress, DNA damage, and cell death were increased in salmon from GoF compared to salmon from BMB or BS. Respiratory electron chain and ATP synthesis related gene ontology-categories were upregulated in GoF salmon, whereas those associated with RNA processing and synthesis, translation, and protein folding decreased. Differences were seen also in metabolism and immune function related gene expression. Comparisons of the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles between salmon from GoF and salmon from BMB or BS suggest environmental stressors, especially exposure to contaminants, as a main explanation for differences. Salmon feeding in GoF are thus &#x201c;disturbed by hazardous substances&#x201d;. The results may also be applied in evaluating the conditions of pelagic ecosystems in the different parts of Baltic Sea.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Proteomics, Atlantic salmon, Environmental stress, Baltic sea

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Department of Biology, FI-20014 University of Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Mirella Kanerva

### Lab Head
Dr Kristiina A. Vuori
Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Department of Biology, FI-20014 University of Turku, Finland


