### Accession
PXD025726

### Title
E2 Rad6 controls cellular response to oxidative stress

### Description
Protein ubiquitination is an essential process that rapidly regulates protein synthesis, function, and fate in dynamic environments. Among its non-proteolytic functions, K63 ubiquitin accumulates in yeast cells exposed to oxidative stress, stalling ribosomes at elongation. K63 ubiquitin conjugates accumulate because of redox inhibition of the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp2, however, the role and regulation of ubiquitin conjugating enzymes in this pathway remained unclear. Here we found that the E2 Rad6 binds and modifies elongating ribosomes during oxidative stress. We elucidated a mechanism by which Rad6 and its human homolog UBE2A are redox-regulated by forming reversible disulfides with the E1 activating enzyme, Uba1. We further showed that Rad6 activity is necessary to regulate translation, antioxidant defense, and adaptation to stress. Finally, we showed that Rad6 is required to induce phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2α, providing a novel link for K63 ubiquitin, elongation stalling, and the integrated stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were cultured to mid-log phase into synthetic SILAC media supplemented with light or heavy lysine isotopes (L-Lys8 13C, 15N; Cambridge Isotopes). Cells were grown for at least 10 generations in SILAC medium before being treated with 0.6 mM H2O2 for 30 min at 30 C. Rad6 immunoprecipitation: Rad6-HA (light, GMS483) and Rad6C88S-HA (heavy, GMS493) cells were disrupted under denaturing conditions in standard buffer containing 8M urea and 5 mM EDTA. Urea was diluted to 1M prior to anti-HA immunoprecipitation (2 h at 4 C) and beads were washed for 5 times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. Samples were eluted by 30 min incubation with 15 mM DTT, digested overnight with Trypsin/Lys-C (1:20 w/w, Promega), desalted using C18 Hypersep Spin Column (Thermo), and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (MeCN), 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Up to 1 µg of digests were analyzed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Fusion Lumos high-resolution accurate mass tandem mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray flex ion source. Briefly, peptides were trapped on a Symmetry C18 180 μm × 20 mm column (5 μl/min at 0.1 % MeCN) followed by an analytical separation using a 1.7-μm ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 C18 75 μm × 250 mm column (Waters) with a 90-minute gradient of 5–30 % MeCN with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min and column temperature of 55°C. Data collection on the Fusion Lumos MS was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a 120,000-resolution (at m/z 200) full MS scan from 375-1500 m/z with a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 4e5 ions and maximum IT of 50 ms. Peptides were selected for data-dependent MS/MS using charge state filtering, monoisotopic precursor selection, and a dynamic exclusion of 20 sec. MS/MS was performed using higher energy C-Trap dissociation with a collision energy of 30 ± 5 % with detection in the ion trap using rapid scanning, an AGC target of 1e4 and maximum IT of 100 ms. A time-dependent (2 sec) method was used. The RAW data files were processed using MaxQuant to identify and quantify protein and peptide abundance. The spectra were matched against the yeast S. cerevisiae Uniprot database. Protein identification was performed using 10 ppm tolerance with a posterior global FDR of 1% based on the reverse sequence of the yeast FASTA file. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable post-translational modification while cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as fixed.

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination is an essential process that rapidly regulates protein synthesis, function, and fate in dynamic environments. Within its non-proteolytic functions, we showed that K63-linked polyubiquitinated conjugates heavily accumulate in yeast cells exposed to oxidative stress, stalling ribosomes at elongation. K63-ubiquitinated conjugates accumulate mostly because of redox inhibition of the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp2; however, the role and regulation of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2) in this pathway remained unclear. Here, we show that the E2 Rad6 associates and modifies ribosomes during stress. We further demonstrate that Rad6 and its human homolog UBE2A are redox regulated by forming a reversible disulfide with the E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme (Uba1). This redox regulation is part of a negative feedback regulation, which controls the levels of K63 ubiquitination under stress. Finally, we show that Rad6 activity is necessary to regulate translation, antioxidant defense, and adaptation to stress, thus providing an additional physiological role for this multifunctional enzyme.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Yeast, Rad6, E1, K63 ubiquitin

### Affiliations
Duke University, Department of Biology, USA
Duke University

### Submitter
Gustavo Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Gustavo Silva
Duke University, Department of Biology, USA


