### Accession
PXD030928

### Title
BRAHMA-containing chromatin remodelling complex prevailing in Arabidopsis vegetative organs is a homolog of mammalian non-canonical  SWI/SNF complexes and requires BRD subunits for assembly and stability

### Description
The SWI/SNF family of chromatin remodeling complexes is evolutionarily conserved and present in yeast, animals and plants. While the biological functions of plant SWI/SNF complexes have been studied in detail, their composition is still elusive. To clarify this picture we used protein extracts from Arabidopsis plants in vegetative phase of growth to perform a series of immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry experiments, using GFP-tagged BRM ATPase as a bait. The analysis of MS data showed that the dominant form of SWI/SNF complex present in these extracts has a specific subunit composition including ARP4 and 7, SWI3C, SWP73B and BRIP2, as well as three bromodomain containing subunits, BRD1, 2 and 13. This subunit composition and the lack of the core SWI/SNF subunit BSH (SNF5/INI1) both strongly resemble the characteristics of the specific subclass of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes referred to as non-canonical BAFs, indicating that homologues of these complexes also exist in plants. We next found that depletion of the all three BRDs severely affected the assembly of this form of BRM-associated SWI/SNF complex. However, while BRD1 and BRD2 were found sufficient to allow complex formation, BRD13 was only required under BRD1/2 deficiency. The analyses of IP/MS results using BRM-GFP in different brd mutant backgrounds as well as BRD1-GFP indicate that SWI/SNF assemblies containing only one BRD isoform, BRD1 or BRD2, do exist. Furthermore, our data indicate that BRD1/2 may be necessary for the incorporation of BRIP2 subunit into the complex. Together, our results shed new light on the structural and functional diversification of SWI/SNF complexes in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis BRM-GFP and BRD1-GFP immunoprecipitation was performed according to the previously published protocol (Jarończyk  et al., 2021), with some modifications. Briefly, 4 g of ground plant material were resuspended in 12 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1% TritonTMX-100, 2% glycerol, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF) containing protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free, Roche), and proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Sigma) and incubated for 1h. Cell lysates were cleared by filtering through two layers of Mira-cloth (Calbiochem, St. Louis, MO) and centrifuged at 20000 x g for 15 min in 4°C. Cleared supernatant was subsequently mixed with 25 µl of GFP-Trap agarose beads (ChromoTek). After 45 min at 4°C the beads were washed 2 times with lysis buffer and 5 times with washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% glycerol, 1 mM DTT). The immunoprecipitated proteins were then subjected to on-bead digestion. Agarose beads with bound proteins were suspended in 100 µl of 5 mM TCEP (Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine), 100 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated for 1 h in 60°C. After that time MMTS (S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate) was added to final concentration of 8 mM. The samples were incubated for 10 min in room temperature. After that time 500 ng of trypsin was added and the samples were incubated overnight in 37°C and centrifuged. Supernatants were collected and used for LC-MS analyses.  LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with use of Evosep One LC with Endurance EV-106 chromatographic column (15cm × 150µm, C-18 resin bead size 1.9 µm) installed coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS (Warsaw). Peptides obtained by trypsin digestion were loaded onto disposable EvoTips by centrifugation and processed following the manoufacturer’s recommended protocol. EvoTips with bound peptides were placed in autosampler of Evosep One LC. Samples were analysed following 88–minute long manoufacturer’s recommended method (gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid as a pairing agent). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode working with a resolution of 60 000 for MS scans and 15 000 for MS/MS scans. A higher-collision energy (HCD) device was utilized for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The obtained RAW data were processed with Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science, London, UK). Resulting files were uploaded to Mascot server installed in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, IBB PAS and searched against the A. thaliana Tair 10 database (35,386 entries). Mascot search parameters used were: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification used, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M); peptide mass tolerance, 15 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.01 Da; up to two missed cleavages. Data were imported into MScan software (proteom.ibb.waw.pl), which allowed their filtration and presentation. We applied a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.05 for peptide identification and a Mascot score of at least 30 for protein identification threshold. Only proteins with at least two matched high confident peptides were further processed. Experimental background proteins were subtracted based on the 6 control GFP IP/MS experiments processed using the same parameters. Data from IP/MS experiments are found in Supplemental Datasets 1-7. Calculations of mean peptide numbers were performed for each genotype using data from 3 biological replicates with the most total peptides corresponding to SWI/SNF subunits excluding baits.

### Publication Abstract
ATP-dependent SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complexes are conserved multi-subunit assemblies that control genome activity. Functions of SWI/SNF complexes in plant development and growth have been well established, but the architecture of particular assemblies is unclear. In this study, we elucidate the organization of Arabidopsis SWI/SNF complexes formed around a BRM catalytic subunit, and define the requirement of bromodomain-containing proteins BRD1/2/13 for the formation and stability of the entire complex. Using affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry, we identify a set of BRM-associated subunits and demonstrate that the BRM complexes strongly resemble mammalian non-canonical BAF complexes. Furthermore, we identify BDH1 and 2 proteins as components of the BRM complex and, using mutant analyses, show that BDH1/2 are important for vegetative and generative development, as well as hormonal responses. We further show that BRD1/2/13 represent unique subunits of the BRM complexes, and their depletion severely affects the integrity of the complex, resulting in the formation of residual assemblies. Finally, analyses of BRM complexes after proteasome inhibition revealed the existence of a module consisting of the ATPase, ARP, and BDH proteins, assembled with other subunits in a BRD-dependent manner. Together, our results suggest modular organization of plant SWI/SNF complexes and provide a biochemical explanation for mutant phenotypes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Brd, Swi/snf, Brahma, Brm

### Affiliations
University of Warsaw
Laboratory of Systems Biology, University of Warsaw

### Submitter
Maciej Kotliński

### Lab Head
Dr Rafał Archacki
Laboratory of Systems Biology, University of Warsaw


