### Accession
PXD016401

### Title
Definition of functionally and structurally distinct repressive states in the nuclear receptor PPARγ

### Description
The repressive states of nuclear receptors (i.e., apo or bound to antagonists or inverse agonists) are poorly defined, despite the fact that nuclear receptors are a major drug target. Most ligand bound structures of nuclear receptors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ), are similar to the apo structure. Here we use NMR, accelerated molecular dynamics and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to define the PPARγ structural ensemble. We find that the helix 3 charge clamp positioning varies widely in apo and is stabilized by efficacious ligand binding. We also reveal a previously undescribed mechanism for inverse agonism involving an omega loop to helix switch which induces disruption of a tripartite salt-bridge network. We demonstrate that ligand binding can induce multiple structurally distinct repressive states. One state recruits peptides from two different corepressors, while another recruits just one, providing structural evidence of ligand bias in a nuclear receptor.

### Sample Protocol
Five microliters of ten micromolar protein was diluted into twenty microliters of protein storage buffer, quenched by mixing with twenty-five microliters of 3M urea and 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Each sample was passed through an immobilized pepsin column, and the digested peptides were captured on a C8 trap column and desalted. Peptides were separated across a C18 column with a linear gradient of 4–40% CH3CN and 0.3% formic acid, with a gradient of 5 minutes for HDX and a one hour for MSMS. Mass spectrometric data were acquired using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MSMS search using Mascot was used to identify peptides present using a score threshold of 20. This list of peptides was then used to initially search the undeuterated control raw mass spectrometry data. and subsequently the on exchange raw files spanning several time points. The rate of exchange over the time points was calculated using HDX Workbench software.

### Publication Abstract
The repressive states of nuclear receptors (i.e., apo or bound to antagonists or inverse agonists) are poorly defined, despite the fact that nuclear receptors are a major drug target. Most ligand bound structures of nuclear receptors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor &#x3b3; (PPAR&#x3b3;), are similar to the apo structure. Here we use NMR, accelerated molecular dynamics and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to define the PPAR&#x3b3; structural ensemble. We find that the helix 3 charge clamp positioning varies widely in apo and is stabilized by efficacious ligand binding. We also reveal a previously undescribed mechanism for inverse agonism involving an omega loop to helix switch which induces disruption of a tripartite salt-bridge network. We demonstrate that ligand binding can induce multiple structurally distinct repressive states. One state recruits peptides from two different corepressors, while another recruits just one, providing structural evidence of ligand bias in a nuclear receptor.

### Keywords
Nuclear receptor, Pparγ, Protein structure

### Affiliations
Scripps Florida

### Submitter
Bruce Pascal

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Griffin
Scripps Florida


