### Accession
PXD006058

### Title
Grain proteome response to nitrogen and sulfur supply in einkorn (Triticum monococcum)

### Description
Wheat grain storage proteins (GSPs) make up most of the protein content of grain and determine flour end-use value. The synthesis and accumulation of GSPs depend highly on nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S) availability and it is important to understand the underlying control mechanisms. Here we studied how the einkorn (Triticum monococcum ssp. monococcum) grain proteome responds to different amounts of N and S supply during grain development. Two subproteomes were analyzed : albumin-globulin and nuclear proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear proteins were extracted from einkorn grains, according to Bancel et al. (2015). Albumins and globulins were extracted from whole grains according to Marion et al.(1994). Protein pellets were digested in solution with trypsin. Liquid chromatography was performed on a NanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent). Eluted peptides were analyzed with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) using a nanoelectrospray interface.

### Data Protocol
Nuclear and albumin-globulin proteins were identified by matching peptides against the Uniprot protein database version 2014_07 limited to the Triticum genus using X!Tandem version Sledgehammer 2013.09.01.1 (www.thegpm.org/tandem). Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using X!TandemPipeline version 3.3.4 (http:// pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/). Relative quantification of all identified peptides was done using MassChroQ software version 2.1.3 (Valot et al., 2011) and extracting ion chromatograms (XICs) for all identified peptides and integrating the area of XIC peaks at the corresponding retention time.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat grain storage proteins (GSPs) make up most of the protein content of grain and determine flour end-use value. The synthesis and accumulation of GSPs depend highly on nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S) availability and it is important to understand the underlying control mechanisms. Here we studied how the einkorn (Triticum monococcum ssp. monococcum) grain proteome responds to different amounts of N and S supply during grain development. GSP composition at grain maturity was clearly impacted by nutrition treatments, due to early changes in the rate of GSP accumulation during grain filling. Large-scale analysis of the nuclear and albumin-globulin subproteomes during this key developmental phase revealed that the abundance of 203 proteins was significantly modified by the nutrition treatments. Our results showed that the grain proteome was highly affected by perturbation in the N:S balance. S supply strongly increased the rate of accumulation of S-rich &#x3b1;/&#x3b2;-gliadin and &#x3b3;-gliadin, and the abundance of several other proteins involved in glutathione metabolism. Post-anthesis N supply resulted in the activation of amino acid metabolism at the expense of carbohydrate metabolism and the activation of transport processes including nucleocytoplasmic transit. Protein accumulation networks were analyzed. Several central actors in the response were identified whose variation in abundance was related to variation in the amounts of many other proteins and are thus potentially important for GSP accumulation. This detailed analysis of grain subproteomes provides information on how wheat GSP composition can possibly be controlled in low-level fertilization condition.

### Keywords
Albumin globulin, Grain, Nuclear proteome, Nitrogen, Sulfur, Triticum monococcum

### Affiliations
INRA
UMR 1095 GDEC, INRA, Clermont-Ferrand, France

### Submitter
Titouan Bonnot

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Ravel
UMR 1095 GDEC, INRA, Clermont-Ferrand, France


