### Accession
PXD023678

### Title
Major determinants of airway epithelial cell sensitivity to S. aureus alpha-toxin:  Disposition of toxin heptamers by extracellular vesicle formation and lysosomal degradation

### Description
Alpha-toxin is a major virulence factor of Staphylococcus aureus and plays an important role in S. aureus-induced pneumonia. Different sensitivities toward the toxin of various host cell types have been observed. In this study we investigated internalization of pore-containing areas of the plasma membrane in these cell types as well as potential pathways for heptamer degradation (lysosomal, proteasomal) or disposal (formation of exosomes/microvesicles containing toxin pores). Comparisons of heptamer degradation rates under inhibition of lysosomal or proteasomal degradation revealed that an important route of heptamer degradation at least in S9 cells seemed to be the lysosomal pathway while proteasomal degradation did not seem to be relevant. Exosomes prepared from culture supernatants of toxin-exposed S9 cells, contained alpha-toxin as well as low amounts of marker proteins of exosomes and microvesicles. These results indicate that the ability of lysosomal degradation of internalized toxin heptamers may be the most important determinant of toxin-resistance of some types of airway epithelial cells.  In this study, we compared the proteomes of rHla treated (90 min), 8 h starvation and, 48 h starvation for the S9 cells by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
S9 cells were cultivated on 10 cm cell culture dishes up to a confluence of >90% in a serum-free growth medium for respiratory epithelial cells (C-21060, PromoCell, Heidelberg, Germany). These S9 cells were treated with 2,000 ng/ml rHla for 90 min and then washed twice with 10 ml PBS to remove unbound rHla completely. Fresh growth medium (10 ml) was added to the cells and they were cultivated for 8 h. S9 cells treated with PBS for 90 min and then incubated for 8 h and 48 h in a starvation medium (base medium without fetal calf serum) served as controls. To extract possible extracellular vesicles from cell culture media, differential ultracentrifugation was used, which is described previously (Théry et al., 2006). Pellets were dissolved in 200 µl 5 % SDS in A. bidest. Samples were transferred to 1.6 ml low binding reaction vessels and frozen at - 80 °C until further use. To extract the proteins for MS analysis, samples were shaken twice for 10 min with 3 min ultra sonication in between. Afterwards, centrifugation at 17.000 × g for 10 min at room temperature was performed and supernatants were transferred to a new 1.5 ml low binding reaction vessel and MgCl2 stock solution was added to a final concentration of 4 mmol/l to the samples. To cleave interfering DNA, samples were treated with 0.005 U/µl benzonase and subsequently incubated in an ultrasonic bath for 5 min and then centrifuged for 30 min at 17.000 × g. Supernatants were then transferred to new 1.5 ml low binding reaction vessels and the protein concentrations were determined by using a Micro BCA Assay (Pierce Micro BCATM Protein Assay Kit) and a NanoDrop™ 8000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific™) according to manufacturer’s instruction. The SP3 protocol (SP3 = single pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation) was used for on-bead protein digestion and peptide purification (Blankenburg et al., 2019). In brief, 4 μg protein per sample were bound to a mix of carboxylate modified hydrophilic and hydrophobic magnetic beads on which the proteins were cleaved with trypsin (protein : protease ratio 25:1). The peptides were then eluted with 2% DMSO and measured with a Q Exactive™ Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Bonn, Germany) in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode as previously described (Palma Medina et al., 2019.

### Data Protocol
To identify the proteins from the MS data, the software Spectronaut™ 13 (v13.13.200417.43655) (Biognosys AG) was used in directDIA™ mode against the Uniprot protein database limited to human protein entries (04/2019) supplemented with the sequence of S. aureus rHla. Therefore, trypsin/P was set as digestion enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed and oxidation of methionine was enabled as variable modification. Global sparse imputation based on protein q-value cutoff of 0.001 was set as analysis strategy. Statistical analysis was performed using R version 4.0.2 (2020-06-22). Raw data were median normalized over the MS2 total peak area intensities (EG.TotalQuantity) for ions with a q-value cutoff <0.001. Missing values were replaced using the half-minimal intensity value from the whole dataset and methionine oxidized peptides were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Alpha-toxin is a major virulence factor of <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>. Monomer binding to host cell membranes results in the formation of heptameric transmembrane pores. Among human model airway epithelial cell lines, A549 cells were most sensitive toward the toxin followed by 16HBE14o<sup>-</sup> and S9 cells. In this study we investigated the processes of internalization of pore-containing plasma membrane areas as well as potential pathways for heptamer degradation (lysosomal, proteasomal) or disposal (formation of exosomes/micro-vesicles). The abundance of toxin heptamers upon applying an alpha-toxin pulse to the cells declined both in extracts of whole cells and of cellular membranes of S9 cells, but not in those of 16HBE14o<sup>-</sup> or A549 cells. Comparisons of heptamer degradation rates under inhibition of lysosomal or proteasomal degradation revealed that an important route of heptamer degradation, at least in S9 cells, seems to be the lysosomal pathway, while proteasomal degradation appears to be irrelevant. Exosomes prepared from culture supernatants of toxin-exposed S9 cells contained alpha-toxin as well as low amounts of exosome and micro-vesicle markers. These results indicate that lysosomal degradation of internalized toxin heptamers may be the most important determinant of toxin-resistance of some types of airway epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Transmembrane pores, Virulence factors, Cellular sensitivity, Alpha-toxin, Airway epithelial cells, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
uni
University of Greifswald, Animal Physiology and Biochemistry, Felix Hausdorff-Strasse 1, D - 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
christian hentschker

### Lab Head
Dr Jan-Peter Hildebrandt
University of Greifswald, Animal Physiology and Biochemistry, Felix Hausdorff-Strasse 1, D - 17489 Greifswald, Germany


