### Accession
PXD011039

### Title
Microautophagy of storage proteins in maize aleurone cells.

### Description
Pulldown of an ER localized HPPase to identify putative ER microautophagy receptors.

### Sample Protocol
Either the tonoplast or microsomal fraction was isolated from a crude Zea Mayze protein kernel extract and a pulldown using an antibody against an ER HPPase was conducted. proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive ESI-MS in combination with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column.  HCD fragmentation of the top 8 strongest peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, excluding precursors that had an unassigned, +1, +7, +8 or >+8 charge state.  MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 ms.  Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 4 x 103 counts.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra from each sample analyzed in quadruplicate were searched against the Arabidopsis proteome database by Proteome Discoverer (ThermoFischer) and assigned by SEQUEST HT assuming a maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da, and a the target false discovery rate (FDR) of either 0.01 (high confidence) or 0.05 (medium confidence).  Label-free quantification as was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a minimum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 using unique peptides, and “3 Top N” peptides used for area calculation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Zea mays, Er-pulldown

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Fionn McLoughlin

### Lab Head
Dr Marisa S Otegui
Department of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA


