### Accession
PXD033198

### Title
Myo19 Interacting Proteins IP-MS

### Description
This project is aimed to detect the interacting proteins of mitochondria-tageting actin motor Myo19.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis->Myo19 antibody->protein A/G beads ->SDS-PAGE gels->MS

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra data were acquired in the Orbitrap as well with a resolution of 15,000 (FWHM) at m/z 200 Da and AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 100% with a maximum IT of 22 ms. Isolation width was 1.6 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set at 30%. FAIMS CV were set as -45V and -65V. The MS data were aligned with UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot reviewed human proteome database.

### Publication Abstract
The folded mitochondria inner membrane-cristae is the structural foundation for oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and energy production. By mechanically simulating mitochondria morphogenesis, we speculate that efficient sculpting of the cristae is organelle non-autonomous. It has long been inferred that folding requires buckling in living systems. However, the tethering force for cristae formation and regulation has not been identified. Combining electron tomography, proteomics strategies, super resolution live cell imaging and mathematical modeling, we reveal that the mitochondria localized actin motor-myosin 19 (Myo19) is critical for maintaining cristae structure, by associating with the SAM-MICOS super complex. We discover that depletion of Myo19 or disruption of its motor activity leads to altered mitochondria membrane potential and decreased OXPHOS. We propose that Myo19 may act as a mechanical tether for effective ridging of the mitochondria cristae, thus sustaining the energy homeostasis essential for various cellular functions.

### Keywords
Myo19 ip-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

### Submitter
Xiaoyu Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Congying Wu
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.


