### Accession
PXD019454

### Title
Plasmodium berghei LAPs form an extended protein complex that facilitates crystalloid targeting and biogenesis

### Description
Passage of malaria parasites through mosquitoes involves multiple developmental transitions, from gametocytes that are ingested with the blood meal, through to sporozoites that are transmitted by insect bite to the host. During the transformation from gametocyte to oocyst, the parasite forms a unique transient organelle named the crystalloid, which is involved in sporozoite formation. In Plasmodium berghei, a complex of six LCCL domain-containing proteins (LAPs) reside in the crystalloid and are required for its biogenesis. However, little else is known about the molecular mechanisms that underlie the crystalloid's role in sporogony. In this study, we have used transgenic parasites stably expressing LAP3 fused to GFP, combined with GFP affinity pulldown and high accuracy mass spectrometry, to identify an extended LAP interactome of some fifty proteins. We show that many of these are targeted to the crystalloid, including members of two protein families with CPW-WPC and pleckstrin homology-like domains, respectively. Our findings indicate that the LAPs are part of an intricate protein complex, the formation of which facilitates both crystalloid targeting and biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples in SDS sample buffer were digested with trypsin by a modified version of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure of in solution digestion (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Samples were reduced in sample buffer with 100mM DTT for 3 minutes at 95 before centrifuging them in Amicon Ultra filter tubes (30kDa cut off) for 15 minutes at 16000g and subsequent dilution of samples with 300ul of 50mM ABC buffer. Samples were centrifuged once more to ensure maximal removal of DTT and SDS followed by alkylation step with 50mM of 2-Chloroacetamide (Sigma). Single step overnight trypsin digestion at enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100 was carried out at 37oC. Tryptic digests were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA and purified by STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry data was searched by Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) for protein identification. Peak lists were generated for the top 12 most intense MS peaks in 100 Da windows by MaxQuant prior to the database search. The protein database contained protein sequences from P. berghei (http://plasmodb.org/common/downloads/release-29/PbergheiANKA/fasta/data/) and from mouse (http://www.uniprot.org/downloads, downloaded at 2 November 2016) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Andromeda search parameters for protein identification were set to tolerance of 6 ppm for the parental peptide and 0.5Da for fragmentation spectra and trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 miscleaved sites. Deamination of glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and asparagine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carboxyamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification. Minimal required peptide length was specified at 7 amino acids. Peptides and proteins detected by at least two peptides in one of the samples with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% were accepted. Excluded from validation were proteins identified by site only, external contaminants and reversed proteins. Proteins were quantified by normalized summed peptide intensities (Cox et al., 2014) computed in MaxQuant with the label free quantification (LFQ) option switched on. Hierarchical clustering of relative LFQ profiles ranging from 0 to 1 was performed in Perseus 1.3.7.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Passage of malaria parasites through mosquitoes involves multiple developmental transitions, from gametocytes that are ingested with the blood meal, through to sporozoites that are transmitted by insect bite to the host. During the transformation from gametocyte to oocyst, the parasite forms a unique transient organelle named the crystalloid, which is involved in sporozoite formation. In Plasmodium berghei, a complex of six LCCL domain-containing proteins (LAPs) reside in the crystalloid and are required for its biogenesis. However, little else is known about the molecular mechanisms that underlie the crystalloid's role in sporogony. In this study, we have used transgenic parasites stably expressing LAP3 fused to GFP, combined with GFP affinity pulldown and high accuracy mass spectrometry, to identify an extended LAP interactome of some fifty proteins. We show that many of these are targeted to the crystalloid, including members of two protein families with CPW-WPC and pleckstrin homology-like domains, respectively. Our findings indicate that the LAPs are part of an intricate protein complex, the formation of which facilitates both crystalloid targeting and biogenesis. SIGNIFICANCE: Reducing malaria parasite transmission by mosquitoes is a key component of malaria eradication and control strategies. This study sheds important new light on the molecular composition of the crystalloid, an enigmatic parasite organelle that is essential for sporozoite formation and transmission from the insect to the vertebrate host. Our findings provide new mechanistic insight into how proteins are delivered to the crystalloid, and indicate that the molecular mechanisms that underlie crystalloid function are complex, involving several protein families unique to Plasmodium and closely related organisms. The new crystalloid proteins identified will form a useful starting point for studies aimed at unravelling how the crystalloid organelle facilitates sporogony and transmission.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Malaria, Proteomics, Crystalloid, Laps

### Affiliations
Plymouth University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry
School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Plymouth, UK

### Submitter
Vikram Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Vikram Sharma
School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Plymouth, UK


