### Accession
PXD016225

### Title
Trichodesmium field metaproteomes

### Description
This project presents field metaproteomics data from Trichodesmium colonies collected from the surface ocean. Most were collected from the tropical and subtropical Atlantic ocean, but there is also data from the long term Bermuda Atlantic Time Series and Hawaii Ocean Time Series. Trichodesmium is a globally important marine microbe and its growth and nitrogen fixation activity is limited by nutrient availability in the surface ocean. This dataset was generated to answer questions about limitations on Trichodesmium's growth and activity in the nature.

### Sample Protocol
Colonies were collected from phytoplankton nets and decanted onto filters. Cells were lysed with SDS extraction buffer and purified by organic precipitation. They were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested in gel, then separated by a 2D in-line orthogonal chromatography (a PLRP, then a C18 column) with a Thermo Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC system, then analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Peptide to spectrum matches were performed in SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) using a publically available Trichodesmium metagenome (IMG ID 2156126005) plus the contents of the CyanoGEBA genomes (Shih et al 2013). Statistical validation was performed in Scaffold (Proteome Software) at the 1% protein and peptide FDR levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diazotroph, Nitrogen fixation, Ocean, Trichodesmium, Marine microbe

### Affiliations
Department of Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

### Submitter
Noelle Held

### Lab Head
Dr Makoto Saito
Department of Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution


