### Accession
PXD035322

### Title
Identification of biological pathways and processes regulated by NEK5 in breast epithelial cells via an integrated proteomic approach

### Description
Specific members of the Nima-Related Kinase (NEK) family have been linked to cancer development and progression, and a role for NEK5, one of the least studied members, in breast cancer has recently been proposed. However, while NEK5 is known to regulate centrosome separation and mitotic spindle assembly, NEK5 signalling mechanisms and function in this malignancy require further characterization. To this end, we established a model system featuring overexpression of NEK5 in the immortalized breast epithelial cell line MCF-10A. MCF10A cells overexpressing NEK5 exhibited an increase in clonogenicity under monolayer conditions and enhanced acinar size and abnormal morphology in 3D Matrigel culture. Interestingly, they also exhibited a marked reduction in Src activation and downstream signalling.  To interrogate NEK5 signalling and function in an unbiased manner, we applied a variety of MS-based proteomic approaches. Determination of the NEK5 interactome by Bio-ID identified a variety of protein classes  including the kinesins KIF2C and KIF22, the mitochondrial proteins TFAM, TFB2M and MFN2, RhoH effectors and the negative regulator of Src, CSK. Characterization of proteins and phosphosites modulated upon NEK5 overexpression by global MS-based (phospho)proteomic profiling revealed impact on the cell cycle, DNA synthesis and repair, Rho GTPase signalling, the microtubule cytoskeleton and hemidesmosome assembly.  Overall, the study indicates that NEK5 impacts diverse pathways and processes in breast epithelial cells, and likely plays a multifaceted role in breast cancer development and progression.

### Sample Protocol
we established a new model system for NEK5 in breast cancer, demonstrating that NEK5 overexpression in MCF-10A immortalized human mammary epithelial cells enhanced clonogenicity and led to aberrant growth in 3D culture. Moreover, interrogation of this model via an integrated proteomic approach involving definition of the NEK5 interactome by BioID and global (phospho)proteomics revealed novel functions for this kinase and unsuspected impact on known oncogenic signalling pathways.

### Data Protocol
Maxquat output were further analysed as follows. Student’s t-test followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test was used for statistical analyses. The data in this study are presented as the mean and error bars represent the standard deviation. The data were acquired from at least three independent experiments. *p < 0.05 was considered significant differences among the experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
Specific members of the Nima-Related Kinase (NEK) family have been linked to cancer development and progression, and a role for NEK5, one of the least studied members, in breast cancer has recently been proposed. However, while NEK5 is known to regulate centrosome separation and mitotic spindle assembly, NEK5 signalling mechanisms and function in this malignancy require further characterization. To this end, we established a model system featuring overexpression of NEK5 in the immortalized breast epithelial cell line MCF-10A. MCF-10A cells overexpressing NEK5 exhibited an increase in clonogenicity under monolayer conditions and enhanced acinar size and abnormal morphology in 3D Matrigel culture. Interestingly, they also exhibited a marked reduction in Src activation and downstream signalling. To interrogate NEK5 signalling and function in an unbiased manner, we applied a variety of MS-based proteomic approaches. Determination of the NEK5 interactome by Bio-ID identified a variety of protein classes including the kinesins KIF2C and KIF22, the mitochondrial proteins TFAM, TFB2M and MFN2, RhoH effectors and the negative regulator of Src, CSK. Characterization of proteins and phosphosites modulated upon NEK5 overexpression by global MS-based (phospho)proteomic profiling revealed impact on the cell cycle, DNA synthesis and repair, Rho GTPase signalling, the microtubule cytoskeleton and hemidesmosome assembly. Overall, the study indicates that NEK5 impacts diverse pathways and processes in breast epithelial cells, and likely plays a multifaceted role in breast cancer development and progression. Video Abstract.

### Keywords
Neks; nek5; kinase; breast cancer; proteomics; bioid

### Affiliations
Monash University
1Cancer Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia

### Submitter
Terry Lim

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Daly
1Cancer Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia


