### Accession
PXD003238

### Title
Mapping the O-mannose glycoproteome in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
O-Mannosylation is a vital protein modification conserved from fungi to humans. In an essential step towards the full understanding of O-mannosylation we mapped the O mannose glycoproteome in baker´s yeast.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell lysates and enriched membrane fractions were reduced, alkylated and digested with proteases and PNGase F. Proteolytic digest were enriched by concanavalin A chromatography and analyzed by nano-LC FT-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
O-Mannosylation is a vital protein modification conserved from fungi to humans. Yeast is a perfect model to study this post-translational modification, because in contrast to mammalsO-mannosylation is the only type ofO-glycosylation. In an essential step toward the full understanding of proteinO-mannosylation we mapped theO-mannose glycoproteome in baker's yeast. Taking advantage of anO-glycan elongation deficient yeast strain to simplify sample complexity, we identified over 500O-glycoproteins from all subcellular compartments for which over 2300O-mannosylation sites were mapped by electron-transfer dissociation (ETD)-based MS/MS. In this study, we focus on the 293O-glycoproteins (over 1900 glycosylation sites identified by ETD-MS/MS) that enter the secretory pathway and are targets of ER-localized proteinO-mannosyltransferases. We find thatO-mannosylation is not only a prominent modification of cell wall and plasma membrane proteins, but also of a large number of proteins from the secretory pathway with crucial functions in protein glycosylation, folding, quality control, and trafficking. The analysis of glycosylation sites revealed thatO-mannosylation is favored in unstructured regions and &#x3b2;-strands. Furthermore,O-mannosylation is impeded in the proximity ofN-glycosylation sites suggesting the interplay of these types of post-translational modifications. The detailed knowledge of the target proteins and theirO-mannosylation sites opens for discovery of new roles of this essential modification in eukaryotes, and for a first glance on the evolution of different types ofO-glycosylation from yeast to mammals.

### Keywords
Glycoproteome, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, O-mannose

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark


