### Accession
PXD001214

### Title
Rsp5/Nedd4 is the major ubiquitin ligase that targets cytosolic misfolded proteins upon heat-stress

### Description
The heat-shock response is a complex cellular program that induces major changes in protein translation, folding and degradation to alleviate toxicity caused by protein misfolding. While heat-shock has been widely used to study proteostasis, it remained unclear how misfolded proteins are targeted for proteolysis in these conditions. We found that Rsp5 and its mammalian homologue Nedd4 are the main E3-ligases responsible for the increased ubiquitination induced by heat-stress. We determined that Rsp5 ubiquitinates cytosolic misfolded proteins upon heat-shock for proteasome degradation. We found that ubiquitination of heat-induced substrates requires the Hsp40 co-chaperone Ydj1 that is further associated with Rsp5 upon heat-shock. Additionally, ubiquitination is also promoted by PY Rsp5-binding motifs found primarily in the structured regions of stress-induced substrates, which can act as heat-induced degrons. Our results support a bipartite recognition mechanism combining direct and chaperone-dependent ubiquitination of misfolded cytosolic proteins by Rsp5.

### Sample Protocol
rsp5-1_expt1_GlyGly and rsp5-1_expt2_GlyGly: To identify potential heat-induced misfolded substrates of Rsp5, duplicate triple SILAC coupled with di-Gly peptide IP experiments were done. Wild-type yeast cells were grown in light (K0) and medium (K4) lysine containing media and rsp5-1 cells were grown in media with heavy (K8) lysine. Both light-labeled (wild-type) and heavy-labeled (rsp5-1) cells were subjected to heat-shock treatment at 45°C for 20min prior to cell lysis. Differentially labeled cells were lysed in 8M urea separately, and equal amount of lysate from each labeled cells was mixed for trypsin digestion. Around 30mg proteins in final 2M urea were digested by trypsin (1/100) at 30°C for 36 hours. Acidified peptides were then enriched and desalted using high-capacity C18 column (ThermoFisher) and eluted by 50% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid. 1/8 of the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif Kit (Cell Signaling Technology) was used to immuno-precipitate (IP) diGly peptides. Speed-vac dried peptides were resuspended in PTMScan IP buffer for IP, which was performed according to the manufactured protocol. Pulled-down peptides were eluted with 0.15 % (vol/vol) Trifluoroacetic and desalted using C18 stage-tips before mass spectrometry analysis.        rsp5-1_expt1_lysate_f1-6: To determine whether the Rsp5-denpendent glygly sites in the IP1 experiment (rsp5-1_expt1_glygly) are truly Rsp5-denpendent or mis-assigned due to the indirect effect of Rsp5 to the protein expression levels in cells, we performed SCX fractionation of the mixed lysates (light+medium+heavy) used in IP1. Around 60 µg proteins in final 2M urea were digested by trypsin (1/100) at 35°C for 20 hours. Acidified peptides were then fractionated in SCX column with 100, 200, 300, 400, 500mM and 1M NaCl. Desalted peptides in each fraction were then eluted by 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.       Native lysis used in Figure 5d: To test the isolation efficiency of the lysis method for the cytosolic fraction, we performed mass spectrometric analysis on the lysate obtained by the method. Yeast cells were lysed in native buffer without any detergent. Proteins from the supernatant fraction were precipitated using methanol-chloroform method and resuspended in 8M urea. Dissolved proteins were then digested by trypsin in 2M urea solution at 35°C for 18 hours. Digested peptides were desalted by C18 stage-tipping prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples in all experiments were analyzed by a LTQ-Obitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 Series HPLC using a nanospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific). For the IP experiments, a 120min HPLC gradient and HCD ionization method for the top 5 ions from each cycle in LTQ were used to identify di-Gly containing peptides (ubiquitinated peptides). For fractionation and native lysis experiments, a 90 and 180min HPLC gradient and CID ionization method for the top 15 ions from each cycle in LTQ were used respectively. ProteomeDiscoverer (version 1.2.0.208, ThermoFisher) was used to process all the data.

### Publication Abstract
The heat-shock response is a complex cellular program that induces major changes in protein translation, folding and degradation to alleviate toxicity caused by protein misfolding. Although heat shock has been widely used to study proteostasis, it remained unclear how misfolded proteins are targeted for proteolysis in these conditions. We found that Rsp5 and its mammalian homologue Nedd4 are important E3 ligases responsible for the increased ubiquitylation induced by heat stress. We determined that Rsp5 ubiquitylates mainly cytosolic misfolded proteins upon heat shock for proteasome degradation. We found that ubiquitylation of heat-induced substrates requires the Hsp40 co-chaperone Ydj1 that is further associated with Rsp5 upon heat shock. In addition, ubiquitylation is also promoted by PY Rsp5-binding motifs found primarily in the structured regions of stress-induced substrates, which can act as heat-induced degrons. Our results support a bipartite recognition mechanism combining direct and chaperone-dependent ubiquitylation of misfolded cytosolic proteins by Rsp5.

### Keywords
Rsp5, Cytosolic protein quality control, Heat-shock

### Affiliations
Mayor Lab the Centre for High-Thoughput Biology Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology the University of British Columbia
Centre for High Throughput Biology

### Submitter
Neng Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Fang
Mayor Lab the Centre for High-Thoughput Biology Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology the University of British Columbia


