### Accession
PXD002001

### Title
Human HeLa SILAC LC MS/MS -  Hypoxia Strongly Affects Mitochondrial Ribosomal Proteins and Translocases, as Shown by Quantitative Proteomics of HeLa Cells

### Description
Human HeLa cells were either kept in a hypoxic environment or under normoxic conditions. 137 proteins were found to be regulated, with maximum alteration of 18-fold. In particular, three clusters of differentially regulated proteins were identified, showing significant up-regulation of glycolysis and down-regulation of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and translocases. This interaction is likely orchestrated by HIF-1. We also investigated the effect of hypoxia on the cell cycle, which is arrested at a restriction point in G1, and shows a prolonged S phase under these conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Human HeLa cells were either kept in a hypoxic environment or under normoxic conditions. Cells cultured in media containing unlabeled amino acids (´light´) in 19% O2 were used as control, and compared with isotopically labeled (´heavy´) cells grown in hypoxia (1% O2).The cell lysates from each labeling, heavy and light, were mixed 1:1, subjected to SDS-PAGE, trypsinized and subjected to NanoLC-LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with MaxQuant utilizing the Andromeda search engine with the IPI human database. Functional annotation was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources version 6.7

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia is an important and common characteristic of many human tumors. It is a challenge clinically due to the correlation with poor prognosis and resistance to radiation and chemotherapy. Understanding the biochemical response to hypoxia would facilitate the development of novel therapeutics for cancer treatment. Here, we investigate alterations in gene expression in response to hypoxia by quantitative proteome analysis using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in conjunction with LCMS/MS. Human HeLa cells were kept either in a hypoxic environment or under normoxic conditions. 125 proteins were found to be regulated, with maximum alteration of 18-fold. In particular, three clusters of differentially regulated proteins were identified, showing significant upregulation of glycolysis and downregulation of mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and translocases. This interaction is likely orchestrated by HIF-1. We also investigated the effect of hypoxia on the cell cycle, which shows accumulation in G1 and a prolonged S phase under these conditions. Implications. This work not only improves our understanding of the response to hypoxia, but also reveals proteins important for malignant progression, which may be targeted in future therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Hypoxia, Hela silac

### Affiliations
UiO
University of Oslo  Department of Biosciences  Cancer Proteomics  P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Christian Koehler

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
University of Oslo  Department of Biosciences  Cancer Proteomics  P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway


