### Accession
PXD011624

### Title
Validation expression of nine proteins by parallel reaction monitoring

### Description
In this study, the levels of expression of nine proteins in the presence of ampicillin (LBP_cg0109, Small heat shock protein; LBP_cg0397, L-serine dehydratase, beta subunit; LBP_cg0719, hypothetical protein; LBP_cg0720, hypothetical protein; LBP_cg0721, Alkaline shock protein; LBP_cg0722, Alkaline shock protein; LBP_cg2704, Formate acetyltransferase activating enzyme; LBP_cg0885, Malate dehydrogenase) were validated by parallel reaction monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were prepared in triplicate by collecting and lysing the collected cells with SDT lysate. The protein concentration of the supernatants was assayed with the Pierce BCA protein Assay kit. 200 µg of protein was mixed with 30 μl SDT buffer and denatured in 8 M urea buffer. The low molecular weight components in the denatured protein mix were removed by repeated ultrafiltration. Then, the filtrates were incubated in 100 μl iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark to block reduced cysteine residues. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin in 40 μl TEAB buffer overnight at 37°C. For each sample, the peptides were collected after centrifugation through the filter.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using Skyline. The differentially expressed proteins in each sample were quantified relative to the standard reference.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lactobacillus plantarum, Expression, Lc-prmms

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University.
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Jie Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Wenyi Zhang
Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Ministry of Education, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, China


