### Accession
PXD025219

### Title
Bacterial RF3 Senses Chaperone Function in Co-translational Folding

### Description
Molecular chaperones assist in protein folding by interacting with nascent polypeptide chains (NCs) during translation, but whether the ribosome can sense chaperone defects and abort translation of misfolding NCs has not been explored. Here we used quantitative proteomics in E. coli to investigate the ribosome-associated chaperone network and the consequences of its dysfunction. Trigger factor and the DnaK (Hsp70) system are the major NC-binding chaperones. HtpG (Hsp90), GroEL and ClpB contribute increasingly, when DnaK is deficient. Surprisingly, misfolding of NCs due to defects in co-translational chaperone function or amino acid analog incorporation, results in recruitment of the non-canonical release factor RF3 to the ribosome. RF3 then cooperates with RF2 in mediating premature chain termination of a subset of abundant NCs, allowing their efficient degradation. This function of RF3 reduces the accumulation of misfolded proteins. It is critical for proteostasis maintenance and cell growth under conditions of limited chaperone availability.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were either digested by in-gel digestion protocol or FASP method using trypsin as the protease.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25) for peptide and protein identification; the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Escherichia coli sequences from UniProtKB. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide and protein levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular chaperones assist with protein folding by interacting with nascent polypeptide chains (NCs) during translation. Whether the ribosome can sense chaperone defects and, in response, abort translation of misfolding NCs has not yet been explored. Here we used quantitative proteomics to investigate the ribosome-associated chaperone network in E.&#xa0;coli and the consequences of its dysfunction. Trigger factor and the DnaK (Hsp70) system are the major NC-binding chaperones. HtpG (Hsp90), GroEL, and ClpB contribute increasingly when DnaK is deficient. Surprisingly, misfolding because of defects in co-translational chaperone function or amino acid analog incorporation results in recruitment of the non-canonical release factor RF3. RF3 recognizes aberrant NCs and then moves to the peptidyltransferase site to cooperate with RF2 in mediating chain termination, facilitating clearance by degradation. This function of RF3 reduces the accumulation of misfolded proteins and is critical for proteostasis maintenance and cell survival under conditions of limited chaperone availability.

### Keywords
Co-translational folding, Molecular chaperones

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Cellular Biochemistry

### Submitter
Roman Körner

### Lab Head
Dr F. Ulrich Hartl
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Cellular Biochemistry


