### Accession
PXD006787

### Title
Proteogenomic study of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis strain NCPPB382

### Description
Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis is an important Gram-positive phytopathogenic bacteria that causes bacterial wilt and canker in tomato. The genome of the type strain, NCPPB382, has been sequenced and annotated, however comparative genomics suggests that certain regions are under- or misannotated. In order to improve the genome annotation, we have undertaken a proteogenomic study of this important pathogen. Samples were grown in culture and the proteome of the pellet and supernatant were analyzed separately using shotgun HPLC-MS/MS. These proteomics datasets were analyzed and a number of missing gene were found and a number of existing gene calls were modified.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis strain NCPPB382 (Cmm382) were grown for 24 hours to early log phase in a defined minimal medium. The supernatant was separated from the pellet by centrifugation.  The cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffers. A French press was used to disrupt the cells, and the cell debris was removed from the lysate by centrifugation. Protein was precipitated from the lysate by adding TCA/acetone, and protein pellets were formed by centrifugation. The pellets were washed in cold acetone and air dried.  Filtered supernatant was concentrated using centrifugal filter units and 10K membranes. The concentrated proteins were precipitated by adding TCA/acetone, and protein pellets were formed by centrifugation. The pellets were washed in cold acetone and air dried.  Protein pellets from both pellet and supernatant were resuspended in a mixture of urea/TEAB. The proteins were reduced with DTT, and the urea concentration was lowered. Trypsin was added and digestion occurred for 18 hours.  A Dionex UltiMate (TM) 3000 HPLC system was used to fractionate the pellet and supernatant samples. The fractions were pooled to form twelve fractions for the pellet and six for the supernatant. MS/MS analysis was performed on each fraction using an Oribtrap Fusion(TM) Tribrid(TM) mass spectrometer.  The full details of the sample processing protocol will be provided in a future manuscript.

### Data Protocol
A protein database was constructed from a six-frame translation of the Cmm382 genome. The Sequest HT module within Proteome Discover (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 2.2 was used to match the raw spectra against this database. Search parameters included, allowing semi-tryptic peptides with one missed tryptic cleavage, fixed methyltio modifications of cysteines and variable oxidation modification of methionines. The Percolator module in Proteome Discover was used filter the peptide matches with an FDR threshold of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. michiganensis, Hplc-msms

### Affiliations
Emerging Pests and Pathogens Researh Unit  Robert W. Holley Center, USDA-ARS-NEA 538 Tower Road, Ithaca, NY 14853
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Paul Stodghill

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Stodghill
Emerging Pests and Pathogens Researh Unit  Robert W. Holley Center, USDA-ARS-NEA 538 Tower Road, Ithaca, NY 14853


