### Accession
PXD047675

### Title
Systematic analysis of non programmed frameshift suppression in E. coli via translational tiling proteomics

### Description
Programmed ribosomal frameshifting is a process that augments the coding capacity of particular mRNA transcripts. Programmed ribosomal frameshifting may occur during the decoding of chromosomally encoded genes in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Although programmed ribosomal frameshifting has been intensively studied, less is known about the occurrence of translation errors that result in frameshifts. Detection of unexpectedly efficient frameshift suppression in E. coli (at levels ranging from 1% to 10% with two unrelated test proteins) led us to investigate the scope of events responsible for restoration of the native frame. To enable a comprehensive approach, we developed a targeted mass-spectrometry method–“translational tiling proteomics”–allowing interrogation of the full set of possible –1 slippage events that could lead to the observed instances of frameshift suppression in vitro and in cells. Our findings point to an unexpectedly high basal level of ribosomal frameshifting, suggest that frameshifted products may contribute more significantly to the proteome than generally assumed, and raise the possibility that particular pseudogenes may specify functional proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins for mass spectrometry were purified under denaturing conditions using two different procedures. Procedure A: E. coliDH5-Z1 carrying the PclpB-lacZ reporter were co-transformed with pBR-based plasmids carrying IPTG-inducible full-length frameshift variants on and pSC101TS-NEW1 carrying IPTG-inducible New1-CFP. Procedure B: Plasmids carrying truncated frameshift variants were co-transformed into E. coli DH5-Z1 carrying the PclpB-lacZ reporter, plated, induced, and harvested according to procedure A.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Comet-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using MSconvert. Database searching used a FASTA file consisting of common contaminants, the peptide lists of interest, and the E. coli proteome (Uniprot_releaserelease-2020_06, 4518 entries). This FASTA file was concatenated with one composed of the sequences in the reversed order for database searching. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and the product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate. Specifically, PSM filtering was performed considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Frameshift, E. coli

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology,  Harvard Medical School,  Boston MA 02115

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Wade Harper
Department of Cell Biology,  Harvard Medical School,  Boston MA 02115


