### Accession
PXD030129

### Title
Mitochondrial antiviral-signalling protein is a client of the BAG6 QC complex

### Description
The heterotrimeric BAG6 complex coordinates the direct handover of newly synthesised tail-anchored (TA) membrane proteins from an SGTA-bound preloading complex to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) delivery component TRC40. In contrast, defective precursors, including aberrant TA proteins, form a stable complex with this cytosolic protein quality control factor, enabling such clients to be either productively re-routed or selectively degraded. We identify the mitochondrial TA protein MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral-signalling protein) as an endogenous client of both SGTA and the BAG6 complex. Our data suggest that the BAG6 complex binds to a cytosolic pool of MAVS before its misinsertion into the ER membrane, from where it can subsequently be removed via ATP13A1-mediated dislocation. This BAG6-associated fraction of MAVS is dynamic and responds to the activation of an innate immune response, suggesting that BAG6 may modulate the pool of MAVS that is available for coordinating the cellular response to viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid-free beads were resuspended in 8 M urea dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and disulphide bonds were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at 30°C for 60 min. After cooling the samples to room temperature, free cysteines were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Following alkylation, urea was diluted to 1 M using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and proteins were subjected to overnight digestion with Mass Spec Grade Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega). The beads were then pulled down and the solutions containing the digested peptides were desalted using AssayMap C18 cartridges mounted on an AssayMap Bravo liquid handling system (Agilent Technologies) and subsequently dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and concentration determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were then analyzed by LCMS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nanoLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were resolved on a 250 mm ´ 75 μm Aurora C18 reversed-phase analytical column (IonOpticks) over a 120 min organic gradient (1-5% solvent B over 1 min, 5-23% solvent B over 72 min, 23-34% solvent B over 45 min and 34-48% solvent B over 2 min) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min (60oC). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive data-dependent acquisition mode. MS1 spectra were measured in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 350- 1700. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Up to twelve MS2 spectra per duty cycle were triggered, fragmented by HCD, and acquired at a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 5 x 104, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 25. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance around the precursor.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using MaxQuant software (v1.5.5.1) searching against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (downloaded in January 2019) and the GPM cRAP database containing common contaminants. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search, where initial mass recalibration was completed, and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Product ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. The maximum precursor ion charge state used for searching was 7. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications. Enzyme was set to trypsin in a specific mode and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for searching. The target-decoy-based false discovery rate (FDR) filter for spectrum and protein identification was set to 0.01. Protein label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were exported from MaxQuant and analysed through SAINTexpress software (v3.6.3) (Teo et al., 2014) using default parameters to identify proximal interactions. Controls were set as both myc-BioID2 and PEX19-BioID2 samples. High-confidence bait-prey interactions were identified using a BFDR (Bayesian FDR) threshold of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Bag6, Bioid2, Mavs

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Professor of Biochemistry School of Biological Sciences Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health.  University of Manchester The Michael Smith Building Oxford Road Manchester. M13 9PT.

### Submitter
Craig Lawless

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen High
Professor of Biochemistry School of Biological Sciences Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health.  University of Manchester The Michael Smith Building Oxford Road Manchester. M13 9PT.


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: not available
- cell type: Myc, PEX19, WT, L295D, UplusT
- disease: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: NT=Q Exactive Plus;AC=MS:1002634
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=Variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable

