### Accession
PXD005092

### Title
A plasmid goes viral - Analysis of protein compostition of membrane vesicles (MVs), plasmid vesicles (PVs) and membrane fractions of different Halorubrum lacusprofundi strains.

### Description
Analysis of protein compostition of membrane vesicles (MVs), plasmid vesicles (PVs) and membrane fractions of different Halorubrum lacusprofundi strains.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of membrane vesicles and host cell membrane fraction for mass spectrometry Isolated MV’s/PV’s were further purified by applying 0.5 ml aliquots on top of a pre-layered sucrose gradient (0.9, 1.1, 1.2,1.3, 1.4 and 1.5 M sucrose in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 3.5 M NaCl, pH 7.5) and subsequent centrifugation at 40,000 x g at 4 °C for 40 hours. No clear band was observed, but cell debris were found in the bottom of the tube while vesicles remained within the gradient. Vesicles were precipitated from the gradient with a final concentration of 10% PEG 4000 at 4 °C for 12 hours and subsequent centrifugation at 21,000 x g at 4 °C for 1 hour. Attempts to purify PV’s through CsCl gradients (0.9-1.45 g/ml in DBCM2) failed due to PV aliquots not entering the gradient. To obtain the membrane fraction, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 6000 x g and the pellet was resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 3.5 M NaCl, pH 7.5 supplemented with 1% SDS. Cells were disrupted by sonication for 3 x 30 sec at 60 % amplitude using a Branson Digital Sonifier® with 2 min incubation on ice and mixing between each sonication step. Remaining cells and cell debris were removed be centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 24 min at 4 °C and a second centrifugation of the obtained supernatant at 16,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. Membranes were collected by precipitation with a final concentration of 10% PEG 4000 at 4 °C for 12 hours and subsequent centrifugation at 21,000 x g at 4 °C for 1 hour. Mass spectrometry The pellets were resuspend in lysis buffer containing 2% sodium deoxycholate (w/v), 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.4, 5mM DTT and proteinase inhibitor. The pellets were vortexed, sonicated for 10 min followed by centrifugation for 10 min. Supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The lysate was then reduced, alkylated and digested overnight. Digest peptides were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). Samples (2.5 µl) were concentrated and desalted onto a micro C18 precolumn (300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex) with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % TFA) at 15 µl/min. After a 4 min wash the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port UPLC valve, Valco, Houston, TX) into line with a fritless nano column (75µ x ~15cm) containing C18AQ media (1.9µ, 120 Å Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen Germany). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 200 nl/min over 30 min. High voltage 2000 V was applied to low volume Titanium union (Valco) with the column oven heated to 45°C (Sonation, Biberach, Germany) and the tip positioned ~ 0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=300°C) of a QExactive Plus (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the QExactive operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired (resolution = 70,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003) Up to the 10 most abundant ions (>80,000 counts, underfill ratio 10%) with charge states > +2 and <+7 were sequentially isolated (width m/z 2.5) and fragmented by HCD (NCE = 30) with a AGC target of 100,000 ions (resolution = 17,500 at m/z 200). M/z ratios selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using Mascot Daemon/Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science, London, England) and submitted to the database search program Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). Search parameters were: Precursor tolerance 4 ppm and product ion tolerances ± 0.05 Da; Met(O) carboxyamidomethyl-Cys specified as variable modification, enzyme specificity was trypsin, 1 missed cleavage was possible and customized databases (Hrr. lacusprofundi R1S1, Hrr. lacusprofundi ACAM34, pR1SE and pR1SE2) were searched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Plasmid, Membrane vesicles, Haloarchaea

### Affiliations
University of NSW, BABS
UNSW

### Submitter
Susanne Erdmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Cavicchioli
University of NSW, BABS


