### Accession
PXD029379

### Title
Label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis on skeletal muscle stem cells and reprogrammed skeletal muscle stem and progenitor cells

### Description
Direct lineage reprogramming provides a unique system to study cell fate transitions and unearth molecular mechanisms that safeguard cellular identity. We previously reported on direct conversion of mouse fibroblasts into induced myogenic progenitor cells (iMPCs) by transient MyoD overexpression in concert with small molecules treatment. Here we employed integrative multi-omic approaches to delineate the molecular landscape of fibroblast reprogramming into iMPCs in comparison to transdifferentiation into myogenic cells solely by MyoD overexpression. Utilizing bulk RNA-sequencing and mass spectrometry, we uncovered molecular regulators and pathways that endow a myogenic stem cell identity on fibroblasts only in the presence of small molecule treatment. In addition, we demonstrate that Pax7+ cells in iMPCs share molecular attributes with myoblasts, however in addition express unique genes, proteins and pathways that are indicative of a more activated satellite cell-like state in vitro. Collectively, this study charts a molecular blueprint for reprogramming fibroblasts into muscle stem and progenitor cells and further establishes the fidelity of stable iMPC cultures in capturing skeletal muscle regeneration in vitro for disease modeling and basic research applications.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured cells were collected using a cell scraper, snap-frozen in dry ice for 30 mins and stored at -80°C. For protein extraction and digestion, cell pellets were lysed by using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany) according to the updated version of the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 100 - 200 µg of the cell pellets were solubilized in ‘Lyse’ buffer, boiled at 95°C for 10 mins and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 30s under the ultrasonic amplitude to 85%. Then cell lysates were transferred to the cartridge and digested by adding 50 µL of the ‘Digest’ solution. After an hour of incubation at 37°C, 100 µL of ‘Stop’ solution was added to halt protein digestion. The cartridge was centrifuge at 3800 xg and the through-put was discarded. The peptides remaining in the iST-filter of the cartridge were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µL of ‘LC-Load’ buffer for MS-Analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Channel A was filled with 0.1% formic acid in water while channel B filled with 0.1% formic acid and 99.9% acetonitrile. For each sample, 1-2 µL of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). After 3 mins of initial hold at 5% B, a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 83 mins and 22 to 32% B in additional 10 mins was applied. The column was cleaned after the run by increasing to 95% B and holding 95% B for 10 mins prior to re-establishing loading condition. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectrum (300−1,500 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500,000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5,000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. In charge state screening, singly assigned and unassigned charge states, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The data obtained from the mass spectrometry proteomics were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Swissprot Mus musculus reference proteome (taxonomy 10090, version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was treated as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation treated as a variable. Trypsin/P was set for enzyme specificity, allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. Peptides with FDR < 0.01 and proteins with FDR < 0.05 were processed for further steps. Label free quantification was carried out by applying a 2 minutes window for match between runs. LFQ intensity results from MaxQuant were used for a hierarchical clustering across all samples implemented in Perseus software. For differential protein expression analysis, each sample file was kept separate in the experimental design to acquire individual quantitative values in the MaxQuant experimental design template. Fold changes of proteins were calculated based on intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. Filtration for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing a maximum of 4 missing values, normalization with a modified robust z-score transformation and the t-test with pooled variance to compute p-values were implemented using the functions in R package SRMService. If all measurements of a protein are missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo fold change was calculated replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition. Proteins showing variable expression with adjusted p-value < 0.05 and two-fold change were considered to be differentially expressed between the conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Transient MyoD overexpression in concert with small molecule treatment reprograms mouse fibroblasts into induced myogenic progenitor cells (iMPCs). However, the molecular landscape and mechanisms orchestrating this cellular conversion remain unknown. Here, we undertook an integrative multiomics approach to delineate the process of iMPC reprogramming in comparison to myogenic transdifferentiation mediated solely by MyoD. Using transcriptomics, proteomics, and genome-wide chromatin accessibility assays, we unravel distinct molecular trajectories that govern the two processes. Notably, only iMPC reprogramming is characterized by gradual up-regulation of muscle stem cell markers, unique signaling pathways, and chromatin remodelers in conjunction with exclusive chromatin opening in core myogenic promoters. In addition, we determine that the Notch pathway is indispensable for iMPC formation and self-renewal and further use the Notch ligand Dll1 to homogeneously propagate iMPCs. Collectively, this study charts divergent molecular blueprints for myogenic transdifferentiation or reprogramming and underpins the heightened capacity of iMPCs for capturing myogenesis ex vivo.

### Keywords
Reprogramming, Lfq, Satellite cells, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Laboratory of Regenerative and Movement Biology, Dept. of Health Sciences and Technology ETH Zurich, Schorenstrasse 16, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland

### Submitter
Adhideb Ghosh

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Ori Bar-Nur
Laboratory of Regenerative and Movement Biology, Dept. of Health Sciences and Technology ETH Zurich, Schorenstrasse 16, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland


