### Accession
PXD004072

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of the Themis1 interactome in murine thymocytes

### Description
Themis1, a recently described T-lineage specific protein, is essential for thymic positive and negative selection. Although Themis1 has been clearly identified as a component of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) signalosome, its precise role in TCR signaling remains unclear. Here, we used quantitative proteomic and TCR signaling reporter mice to gain insight into Themis1 signaling function. Mass spectrometry analysis of the Themis1 interactome identified Grb2, SHP1 and Vav1 as the principal interacting partners of Themis1 in thymocytes. The dataset contains mass spectrometry results from the analysis of 6 different kind of AP-MS purifications (based on immunoprecipitation using a Themis1 antibody) starting from the following samples: - thymocytes from WT mice, non stimulated (noted WT NS) - thymocytes from WT mice, stimulated with pervanadate (noted WT P) - thymocytes from GRB2 +/- mice (with decreased expression of GRB2), non stimulated (noted GRB2 NS) - thymocytes from GRB2 +/- mice (with decreased expression of GRB2), stimulated with pervanadate (noted GRB2 P) - thymocytes from Themis1 -/- mice (knock-out for Themis1), non stimulated (noted KO NS) - thymocytes from Themis1 -/- mice (knock-out for Themis1), stimulated with pervanadate (noted KO P) Three biological replicates were prepared for these 6 different conditions (noted, 1,2,3), yielding 18 analyzed samples. Three technical nanoLC-MS runs were acquired for each sample (noted R1, R2, R3), leading to the 54 nanoLC-MS raw files contained in the dataset.

### Sample Protocol
Thymocytes from WT, Grb2+/-, and Themis1-/- mice were stimulated or not with pervanadate for 5 min at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by cell lysis and Themis1 was immunoprecipitated in cleared lysate with protein A-sepharose resin coated with a polyclonal rabbit anti-Themis1 antibody. Themis1 complexes were eluted with the corresponding Themis1 antigenic peptide. Protein samples were reconstituted in 1X final Laemli buffer, loaded on a 1D SDS-PAGE gel (0.15 x 8 cm), and the electrophoretic migration was stopped as soon as the proteins entered the separating gel, in order to isolate all proteins in a single gel band. The corresponding gel slice was excised, washed twice with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and once with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile (1:1). Proteins were in-gel digested using 0.6 µg of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by successive incubations in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% formic acid-acetonitrile (1:1). The extracted fractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in speed-vac, and resuspended with 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for MS analysis. The iRT peptides (iRT Kit, Biognosys) were spiked in all samples to monitor the stability of the nanoLC-MS system during the analytical sequence. Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Q-ExactivePlus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five µL of each sample were loaded on a C-18 precolumn (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex) in a solvent made of 5% acetonitrile and 0.05% TFA and at a flow rate of 20 µL/min After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C-18 column (75 µm ID x 15 cm, Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were eluted using a 5 to 50% gradient of solvent B over 105 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min The Q-ExactivePlus was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350-2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 70000. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 seconds to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. Triplicate technical LC-MS measurements were performed for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and for quantitative analysis. Data were searched against Mouse entries of the Swissprot protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Knowledgebase release 2013_06, Mouse taxonomy, 16699 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerances MS/MS mode was set to 0.5 Da.  Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and minimum number of unique peptides was set to one. Andromeda results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at a both a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 0.5min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs.

### Publication Abstract
The T cell signaling protein Themis1 is essential for the positive and negative selection of thymocytes in the thymus. Although the developmental defect that results from the loss of Themis1 suggests that it enhances T cell receptor (TCR) signaling, Themis1 also recruits Src homology 2 domain-containing phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) to the vicinity of TCR signaling complexes, suggesting that it has an inhibitory role in TCR signaling. We used TCR signaling reporter mice and quantitative proteomics to explore the role of Themis1 in developing T cells. We found that Themis1 acted mostly as a positive regulator of TCR signaling in vivo when receptors were activated by positively selecting ligands. Proteomic analysis of the Themis1 interactome identified SHP-1, the TCR-associated adaptor protein Grb2, and the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav1 as the principal interacting partners of Themis1 in isolated mouse thymocytes. Analysis of TCR signaling in Themis1-deficient and Themis1-overexpressing mouse thymocytes demonstrated that Themis1 promoted Vav1 activity both in vitro and in vivo. The reduced activity of Vav1 and the impaired T cell development in Themis1(-/-) mice were due in part to increased degradation of Grb2, which suggests that Themis1 is required to maintain the steady-state abundance of Grb2 in thymocytes. Together, these data suggest that Themis1 acts as a positive regulator of TCR signaling in developing T cells, and identify a mechanism by which Themis1 regulates thymic selection.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Thymocytes, Interactome, Themis1, Tcr signalling

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Anne Gonzalez de PeredoI
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France


