### Accession
PXD011304

### Title
Macromolecular connectivity landscape of mammalian brain

### Description
Connectivity webs mediate the unique biology of mammalian brain. Yet while cell and gene circuit maps are increasing in resolution, knowledge of the molecular interaction networks of the brain is limited. Here, we applied multidimensional biochemical fractionation with precision mass spectrometry to survey endogenous macromolecules in adult mouse brain. We defined a global ‘interactome’ landscape consisting of hundreds of multi-protein complexes, most never reported before. Brain selective assemblies exhibit distinctive biophysical and functional attributes, including enrichment for synaptic, RNA-binding and other evolutionarily conserved proteins showing tissue-, regional- and cell-type specificity. Strikingly, many macromolecules have links to diverse neurological disorders and disease variants, illustrating the broad pathophysiological relevance of the network. We validated a putative 15-member complex associated with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis using reciprocal pulldowns and a transgenic rodent model, establishing balancing functions in alternative splicing and disease progression. This resource facilitates exploration of the mechanistic basis of neuronal function, synaptic plasticity and diseases of the central nervous system.

### Sample Protocol
12 week old male CD1 mice were euthanized and the brains excised, washed several times in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline to remove blood and frozen in -80˚C. Soluble protein extracts were gently prepared from cerebral tissue different isolation procedures. The lysates were then subject to extensive non-denaturing biochemical fractionation followed by precision mass spectrometry (MS) to identify and quantify stably-associated proteins that reproducibly co-elute together. Altogether, 550 biochemical fractions were collected, trypsinized and analyzed individually by nanoflow liquid chromatography EASY nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to precision Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Depending on sample complexity in each fractionation experiment, 60 or 90-min gradients were used to elute peptides from columns.  Subsequent database searching and stringent filtering (false discovery rate <1% at both the peptide- and protein-level) produced 4,749 high-confidence protein identifications.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16; http://maxquant.org/) under standard settings using the Uniprot mouse database (UP000000589).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Macromolecues, Neurological diseases, Mouse brain, Synaptic and neuronal proteins, Multi-protein complexes, Bichemical fractionation, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Donnelly CCBR, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andrew Emili
Donnelly CCBR, University of Toronto, Toronto ON M5S 3E1, Canada


