### Accession
PXD009687

### Title
Integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells

### Description
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) are a widely-used model system to study many pathological and physiological processes associated with the cardiovascular system. An understanding of genes and proteins that are expressed in any cell type is a fundamental need which facilitates study of molecular changes in disease states and response to various stimuli. In this study, we employed next generation sequencing and mass spectrometry to profile the transcriptome and proteome of primary HUVECs. Analysis of 145 million paired-end reads from next generation sequencing confirmed expression of 12,186 protein-coding genes (FPKM>0.1), 439 novel long non-coding RNAs and revealed 6,089 novel isoforms that were not annotated in GENCODE. A comparison of the transcripts against human gene expression data for 53 tissues catalogued by the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project revealed a number of HUVEC-specific genes. Proteomics analysis identified 6,477 proteins including confirmation of N-termini for 1,091 proteins and isoforms for 149 proteins for which transcriptomic evidence was also observed. Alternate translational start sites for seven proteins and alternate splicing in seven proteins were also identified. A database search to specifically identify other post-translational modifications provided evidence for a number of modification sites on 117 proteins which include ubiquitylation, lysine acetylation, mono, di- and tri-methylation. Based on the data from this study and a survey of other databases, we provide evidence for 11 “missing proteins,” which are proteins for which protein level evidence is lacking or insufficient. Proteogenomic analysis identified novel N-termini and exon-exon junctions at both RNA and protein levels by searching against a translated database created from alternate transcript assembly. Peptides supporting the novel events of expressed proteins are further validated by synthesis and spectral comparison. Alternative allelic expression of genes arising from transcription of two alleles of a gene in chromosome pairs is observed. By creating a custom database of proteins incorporated with sample specific single amino acid variations (SAAV) we identified alternative alleles for 207 expressed proteins with 245 peptides with SAAV. Overall, we believe that the integrated approach employed in this study is widely applicable to study any primary cell type for deeper molecular characterization.

### Sample Protocol
HUVEC cells were harvested by scraping the cells in 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 100 mM Tris, pH 7.6 after washing with cold phosphate buffered saline. Subsequently, the cells were sonicated for 20 seconds followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 5 min at room temperature. Two hundred µg of proteins were reduced and alkylated at room temperature for 30 min with shaking at 800 rpm. After reduction and alkylation, the proteins were precipitated by adding cold acetone followed by incubation at -20oC for 2 h. The sample was centrifuged at 17,000 x g at 4 oC for 5 min, washed with methanol and dried in vacuum. For enzyme digestion of proteins, 10 µg of sequencing grade trypsin in 0.5 ml TEAB were added to the dried protein followed by shaking at 4oC at 1000 rpm for 1 h. The enzyme digestion was conducted at 37oC overnight. The peptides were fractionated by StageTip strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) as described previously [25]. Briefly, the peptides were reconstituted in 200 ul of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 min. Two plugs of SCX disk (Polystyrene-divinylbenzene copolymer modified with sulfonic acid) were used for a preparation StageTip column. Eighty ug of peptides were loaded on the StageTip column and centrifuged at 2,000 x g until all the sample solution passed through the column. Eighty ug of peptides were loaded on the StageTip column and centrifuged at 2,000 x g until all the sample solution passed through the column. For the elution of the first fraction, 80 ul of SCXx1 (50 mM ammonium acetate (AA), 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA)) was loaded and centrifuged at 2,000 x g until all the solution passed through the column. This elution was repeated for SCXx2 (75 mM AA, 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA), SCXx3 (125 mM AA, 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA), SCXx4 (200 mM AA, 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA), SCXx5 (300 mM AA, 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) FA), and Buffer X (5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) ACN). The eluted samples were dried in vacuum.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with SEQUEST and Mascot (v2.2.06) search engines. The mass spectrometry data was searched against neXtProt human protein database and common contaminants. Trypsin was specified as protease allowing up to two missed cleavages. Top 10 most abundant peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and acetylation of protein N-termini, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of Serine/Threonine/Tryptophan amino acids as variable modifications were specified. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was limited to 0.02 Da. Initial peptide spectral matches are further validated by Percolator to ascertain the assignments using estimated posterior-error probabilities (PEP). Only tryptic peptides longer than seven amino acids with up to two missed cleavages were considered. The data were searched in target-decoy approach and filtered by applying 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide and protein levels. Additional analysis for identification of post-translational modifications is carried out by searching with variable modifications of lysine acetylation, lysine and arginine methylation, demethylation and trimethylation and lysine ubiquitylation.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular profile of every human cell type is essential for understanding its role in normal physiology and disease. Technological advancements in DNA sequencing, mass spectrometry, and computational methods allow us to carry out multiomics analyses although such approaches are not routine yet. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) are a widely used model system to study pathological and physiological processes associated with the cardiovascular system. In this study, next-generation sequencing and high-resolution mass spectrometry to profile the transcriptome and proteome of primary HUVECs is employed. Analysis of 145 million paired-end reads from next-generation sequencing confirmed expression of 12&#xa0;186 protein-coding genes (FPKM &#x2265;0.1), 439 novel long non-coding RNAs, and revealed 6089 novel isoforms that were not annotated in GENCODE. Proteomics analysis identifies 6477 proteins including confirmation of N-termini for 1091 proteins, isoforms for 149 proteins, and 1034 phosphosites. A database search to specifically identify other post-translational modifications provide evidence for a number of modification sites on 117 proteins which include ubiquitylation, lysine acetylation, and mono-, di- and tri-methylation events. Evidence for 11 "missing proteins," which are proteins for which there was insufficient or no protein level evidence, is provided. Peptides supporting missing protein and novel events are validated by comparison of MS/MS fragmentation patterns with synthetic peptides. Finally, 245 variant peptides derived from 207 expressed proteins in addition to alternate translational start sites for seven proteins and evidence for novel proteoforms for five proteins resulting from alternative splicing are identified. Overall, it is believed that the integrated approach employed in this study is widely applicable to study any primary cell type for deeper molecular characterization.

### Keywords
Proteoform, Proteogenomics, Allelic expression, Rna-seq, Transcriptome, Lc-ms/ms, Huvec, Mass-spectrometry, Splice variants

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205


