### Accession
PXD006272

### Title
Systematic analysis of the lysine acetylome reveals diverse functions of lysine acetylation in the oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica

### Description
Lysine acetylation of proteins, a major post-translational modification, plays a critical regulatory role in almost every aspects in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Yarrowia lipolytica, an oleaginous yeast, is considered as a model for bio-oil production due to its ability to accumulate a large amount of lipids. However, the function of lysine acetylation in this organism is elusive. Here, we performed a global acetylproteome analysis of Y. lipolytica ACA-DC 50109. In total, 3163 lysine acetylation sites were identified in 1428 proteins, which account for 22.1% of the total proteins in the cell. Fifteen conserved acetylation motifs were detected. The acetylated proteins participate in a wide variety of biological processes. Notably, a total of 65 enzymes involved in lipid biosynthesis were found to be acetylated. The acetylation sites are distributed in almost every type of conserved domains in the multi-enzymatic complexes of fatty acid synthetases, suggesting an important regulatory role of lysine acetylation in lipid metabolism. Moreover, protein interaction network analysis reveals that diverse interactions are modulated by protein acetylation. The provided dataset probably illuminates the crucial role of reversible acetylation in oleaginous microorganisms, and serves as an important resource for exploring the physiological role of lysine acetylation in eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
The oleaginous yeast Y. lipolytica strain ACA-DC 50109 was grown in yeast peptone dextrose (YPD) (10.0 g/L yeast extract, 20.0 g/L bacto peptone, and 20.0 g/L glucose). The cells were harvested by centrifugation. The centrifuged cell pellet was suspended in 8 M urea supplemented with 1% triton-100, 50 mM nicotinamide, 3 µM trichostatin A, 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail III. Samplewas first sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 50mM NAM, 3 µM TSA, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mMNaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 20 min, 20% to 35% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 2 min then holding at 80% for the last 5 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. MS2 fixed first mass set as 100.

### Data Protocol
The protein and acetylation site identification was performed through MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). The tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt_B. amyloliquefaciens database (28,235 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database.  The GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA). The proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, molecular function and cellular component. The protein subcellular localization was analyzed with wolfpsort. Secondary structures were predicted using NetSurfP. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) were used to annotate protein pathways. GO term, protein domain, and KEGG pathway enrichment were performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resources 6.7. Motif-X software was used to analyze the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of acetyl-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. All the database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, other parameters with default values. For further hierarchical clustering based on categories, all the acetylation substance categories obtained after enrichment were first collated along with their p values,  and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with p-value<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation of proteins, a major post-translational modification, plays a critical regulatory role in almost every aspects in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Yarrowia lipolytica, an oleaginous yeast, is considered as a model for bio-oil production due to its ability to accumulate a large amount of lipids. However, the function of lysine acetylation in this organism is elusive. Here, we performed a global acetylproteome analysis of Y. lipolytica ACA-DC 50109. In total, 3163 lysine acetylation sites were identified in 1428 proteins, which account for 22.1% of the total proteins in the cell. Fifteen conserved acetylation motifs were detected. The acetylated proteins participate in a wide variety of biological processes. Notably, a total of 65 enzymes involved in lipid biosynthesis were found to be acetylated. The acetylation sites are distributed in almost every type of conserved domains in the multi-enzymatic complexes of fatty acid synthetases. The provided dataset probably illuminates the crucial role of reversible acetylation in oleaginous microorganisms, and serves as an important resource for exploring the physiological role of lysine acetylation in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Acetylproteome, Oleaginous yeast, Lipid biosynthesis, Lysine acetylation, Yarrowia lipolytica

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China
2The Key Laboratory of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong Province, College of Agronomy and Plant Protection, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China

### Submitter
lin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
2The Key Laboratory of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong Province, College of Agronomy and Plant Protection, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, China


