### Accession
PXD037976

### Title
Disturbed Balance of Protein Phosphatase Type 2A (PP2A) is Driving Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition in Human Pan-creatic Cancer Patients

### Description
The incidence for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is rising which has a low survival rate. In cancer, Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal transition (EMT) contribute to an aggressive phenotype. Protein Phosphatase Type 2A (PP2A) are initially regarded as tumor suppressors, the connection with EMT in patients is uncertain. We investigated the relation of a ‘PP2A’ gene signature (en-compassing catalytic, structural and regulatory subunits; and endogenous PP2A inhibitors and activators) with EMT in PDAC patients. We could demonstrate a link between PDAC and EMT in four patient datasets using datamining, correlation study and gene set analysis. Furthermore, we identified a strong association of PP2A with EMT in advanced pancreatic cancer patients and in particular a significant upregulation of PP2A inhibitor genes in aggressive/EMT-high PDAC. In vitro, pharmacological inhibition of PP2A through Okadaic acid induced EMT in human pancreatic cells. Two different cell models were developed and their morphology, gene and protein expression determined. In the more advanced OA-induced EMT model (OA7G), statistical changes in proteins of natural PP2A-inhibitors was observed and this requires further investigations. Translationally, these observations indicate that PP2A could be a central factor in cancer and it is therefore attractive to test compounds that can target PP2A enzyme activity in PDAC.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were homogenized at a concentration of 1 mg/ml in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science). Homogenates were allowed to stand at room temperature for 1h, before being centri-fuged at room temperature for 15 min at 13,000 rpm. The supernatant was subjected to reduction, alkylation and quenching with 5 mM DTT, 15 mM iodoacetamide and 15 mM DTT, respectively. Twenty microliter of the resulting solution was diluted five times in trypsin digestion buffer, containing 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 5% CH3CN, 0.01% ProteaseMAX (Promega) and 0.5 µg modified trypsin (Pierce). After overnight diges-tion at 37°C, the samples were brought to 1% TFA and centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 rpm. The supernatant was subjected to desalting with C18 spin columns (Pierce) and 1/15 th of the sample was loaded on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap100 pre-column (C18, particle size 3 μm, pore size 100 Å, diameter 75 μm, length 20 mm, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 PepMap analytical column (particle size 2 μm, pore size 100 Å, diameter 50 μm, length 500 mm, Thermo Scientific) using a 4 h linear gradient (300 nL/min) coupled to a Q Exac-tive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identiﬁed by Mascot (Matrix Science) using Uniprot Homo sapiens (194619 sequences) as a database. Carbamidomethylation (C) was included as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation and Oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed, peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 20 mmu for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Progenesis software (Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for relative quanti-fication of proteins using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 Percolator node for peptide val-idation (FDR < 1%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer; epithelial-to-mesenchymal progression; protein phosphatases type 2a; gene expression; proteomics; in vivo results; drug target

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Laboratory of Digestive Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven & University Hospitals Leuven, Geb. Onderwijs & Navorsing 4, room 07.465, Herestraat 49, Bus 603, B 3000, Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Rita Derua

### Lab Head
Dr Jos van Pelt
Laboratory of Digestive Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven & University Hospitals Leuven, Geb. Onderwijs & Navorsing 4, room 07.465, Herestraat 49, Bus 603, B 3000, Leuven, Belgium


