### Accession
PXD031988

### Title
Flotillin-2 regulates EGFR activation, degradation, and cancer growth

### Description
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is frequently dysregulated in a variety of cancers. The ubiquitin ligase Cbl regulates degradation of activated EGFR through ubiquitination and acts as an adaptor to recruit proteins required for trafficking.  We used Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) mass spectrometry (MS) to compare Cbl complexes in the absence and presence of EGF stimulation.  We identified over a hundred novel Cbl interactors, and a secondary siRNA screen found that knockdown of Flotillin-2 (FLOT2) led to increased phosphorylation and degradation of EGFR upon EGF stimulation in HeLa cells.  In H441 cells, FLOT2 knockdown increased EGF-stimulated EGFR phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and downstream signaling, reversible by the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib. CRISPR knockout of FLOT2 in HeLa cells confirmed EGFR downregulation, increased signaling, and increased dimerization and trafficking to the early endosome. FLOT2 interacts with both Cbl and EGFR.  Downregulation of EGFR upon FLOT2 loss is Cbl-dependent, as co-knockdown of Cbl and Cbl-b restored EGFR levels.  Stable overexpression of FLOT2 in HeLa cells decreased EGF-stimulated EGFR phosphorylation and ubiquitination. Overexpression of wild type (WT) FLOT2, but not the soluble G2A FLOT2 mutant, inhibited EGFR phosphorylation upon EGF stimulation in HEK293T cells.  FLOT2 loss induces EGFR-dependent proliferation and anchorage-independent cell growth.  Lastly, FLOT2 knockout increases tumor formation and tumor volume in nude mice and NSG mice, respectively.  These data demonstrate that FLOT2 negatively regulates EGFR activation and dimerization, as well as its subsequent ubiquitination, endosomal trafficking, and degradation.  FLOT2 negatively regulates proliferation in vitro and in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC mass spectrometry  HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM SILAC lysine and arginine-free medium (#88364, ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% FBS. Three-state SILAC media were prepared to contain different stable-isotope labeled versions of arginine (0.398 mM) and lysine (0.798 mM). All heavy isotope labeled amino acids (99% pure) were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA). Media were prepared containing non-labeled arginine and lysine (light), 13C6 arginine (#CLM-2265) and 4,4,5,5-D4 lysine (#DLM-2640) (medium), and 13C615N4 arginine (#CNLM-539) and 13C615N2 lysine (#CNLM-291) (heavy). The labeling efficiency was evaluated with MS after five passages of HeLa cells in the labeling media. Upon achieving >97% labeling efficiency, Hela cells were plated on 150 mm dishes to reach 90% confluency, starved for 5 hours and treated as follows: no EGF stimulation (light), stimulation with 100 ng/mL EGF for 30 min (medium) and stimulation with 100 ng/mL EGF for 30 min with 3-hour pretreatment with 800 nM YM201636 (heavy). The effectiveness of treatment with YM201636 was assessed under the microscope, as this treatment results in the formation of easily detectable intracellular vesicles in HeLa cells (1) and by immunoblotting to demonstrate the decreased down regulation of the EGFR. Upon treatments, the cells were lysed in Lysis buffer (10 mM TrisHCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 10% Glycerol) containing 1 mM Sodium Vanadate and the protease inhibitor cocktail Complete Mini (Roche). Then, Cbl was immunoprecipitated from 20-50 mg of total protein from each treatment using anti-Cbl AB coupled to agarose beads (sc-170 AC, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from Cbl AB-agarose beads with Pierce IgG Elution Buffer (21004, pH 2.8) and the pH was adjusted to 7 with 1M Tris buffer (pH 8). The eluate was then transferred to the Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filter units 10 kDa (UFC801024, Millipore) to reduce the volume and to exchange the buffer for 20 mM HEPES. The immunoprecipitated proteins from three treatments were mixed and either denatured by 9 M Urea/20 mM HEPES buffer or mixed with 2x Laemmli Sample Buffer (1610737, Bio-Rad) and separated by SDS-PAGE to analyze individual fractions. In both cases the samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with modified sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 30oC for 16 h. Mass spectrometry analysis of tryptic peptides was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA)  mass spectrometer interfaced with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA)  as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.4.0.3) with the Andromeda search engine.  MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human protein database (May 2013, 38523 entries) and quantification was performed using default parameters for three state-SILAC in MaxQuant as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling is frequently dysregulated in various cancers. The ubiquitin ligase Casitas B-lineage lymphoma proto-oncogene (Cbl) regulates degradation of activated EGFR through ubiquitination and acts as an adaptor to recruit proteins required for trafficking. Here, we used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture mass spectrometry to compare Cbl complexes with or without epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation. We identified over a hundred novel Cbl interactors, and a secondary siRNA screen found that knockdown of Flotillin-2 (FLOT2) led to increased phosphorylation and degradation of EGFR upon EGF stimulation in HeLa cells. In PC9 and H441&#xa0;cells, FLOT2 knockdown increased EGF-stimulated EGFR phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and downstream signaling, reversible by EGFR inhibitor erlotinib. CRISPR knockout (KO) of FLOT2 in HeLa cells confirmed EGFR downregulation, increased signaling, and increased dimerization and endosomal trafficking. Furthermore, we determined that FLOT2 interacted with both Cbl and EGFR. EGFR downregulation upon FLOT2 loss was Cbl dependent, as coknockdown of Cbl and Cbl-b restored EGFR levels. In addition, FLOT2 overexpression decreased EGFR signaling and growth. Overexpression of wildtype (WT) FLOT2, but not the soluble G2A FLOT2 mutant, inhibited EGFR phosphorylation upon EGF stimulation in HEK293T cells. FLOT2 loss induced EGFR-dependent proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. Lastly, FLOT2 KO increased tumor formation and tumor volume in nude mice and NSG mice, respectively. Together, these data demonstrated that FLOT2 negatively regulated EGFR activation and dimerization, as well as its subsequent ubiquitination, endosomal trafficking, and degradation, leading to reduced proliferation in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo.

### Keywords
Cell proliferation, Phosphorylation, Tumor growth, Flot2, Mapk, Cbl, Mass spectrometry, Egfr

### Affiliations
NIH/NCI
Women’s Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Lipkowitz
Women’s Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892


