### Accession
PXD010284

### Title
A549 CD38 proteomic analysis, part 1

### Description
A549 CD38 proteomic analysis, three biological replicate, the first replication

### Sample Protocol
Protein (200 μg) was extracted from CD38(-) and CD38(+) cells and mixed. Protein disulfides were reduced by dithiothreitol at 5 mM for 60 min at room temperature. Next, free cysteine residues were alkylated with iodoacetamide at 12 mM for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. Protein samples were digested with trypsin for 14 h at 37°C. Peptides were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Thermo-Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA). Eluents were centrifuged by speedvac followed by HPLC separation. Collected eluents were combined into 12 fractions and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists from LC-MS/MS analysis were generated with the SEQUESTTM searching algorithm using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were searched against the UniProt human reference proteome (release on March 17, 2017, containing 21,042 entries) using an in-house Proteome Discoverer Searching Algorithm (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search criteria were: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage sites were allowed; oxidation of methionine, 13C(6)15N(2) at lysine, 13C(6) at arginine, and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as the fixed modification; and precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for all MS and 20 mmu for all MS2 spectra. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the percolator function provided by Proteome Discoverer, with a cutoff score of 1% based on decoy database searching. Proteome Discoverer Searching Algorithm was used for protein quantification. Briefly, relative protein expression ratios were calculated using the peak area of Lys0Arg0 divided by the peak area of Lys8Arg6. Only peptides assigned to a given protein group were considered unique. Proteins with two or more unique peptide matches were regarded as confident identifications and further quantified. Differences in protein abundance between sample and control groups were calculated by averaging unique peptide ratios for that protein. Quantitative precision was expressed as protein ratio variability.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
A549 cd38, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
tsinghua university

### Submitter
weixuan wang

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng, Deng
Tsinghua University


