### Accession
PXD038478

### Title
The role of RNF149 in the pre-emptive quality control substrate ubiquitination

### Description
Protein quality control is a continuous process in which a protein's folding status is constantly monitored. Mislocalized proteins (MLP), are processed by the various quality control pathways, as they are often misfolded due to inappropriate cellular surroundings. Polypeptides that fail to translocate into the ER due to an inefficient signal peptide, mutations or ER stress are recognized by the pre-emptive ER associated quality control (pEQC) pathway and degraded by the 26S proteasome. In this report we reveal the role of RNF149, a membrane bound E3 ligase in the ubiquitination of known pEQC substrates. We demonstrate its selective binding only to non-translocated proteins and its association with known pEQC components. Impairment in RNF149 function increases translocation flux into the ER and manifests in a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) phenotype, a pathological condition associated with pEQC impairment. Finally, the dynamic localization of  RNF149 may provides a molecular switch to regulate pEQC during ER stress. This project is lead by Ariel Stanhill (ariel.stanhill@gmail.com,Department of Natural and Life Sciences, The Open University of Israel, Raanana, Israel)

### Sample Protocol
Elutions were suplemented with 5% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl. The protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, after loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/1M triethylammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with 250ng trypsin for 1.5 h at 47 °C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dry. Samples were kept at −20 °C until analysis. ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 5% to 35%B in 55 min, 27% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon).  Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 200m/z), mass range of 375-1500m/z, AGC of 1e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 25 sec  and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was imported into Maxquant software version 2.0.1.0 using the default parameters with the following changes: min. peptide length was set to 6, LFQ min. ratio count = 1, LFQ quantification was based on unique peptides only and the match between runs option was enabled. Data was searched against the human sequences Swissprot (January 2022 version, containing 20360 entries) appended with common laboratory contaminant proteins and the relevant RNF149 sequence. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines and Protein N-terminal acetylation. Search results were filtered to achieve maximum false discovery rate of 1% at the protein level. The LFQ intensities were used for further calculations using Perseus version 1.6.2.3. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only. The LFQ intensities were log transformed and only proteins that had at least 2 valid values in at least one experimental group were kept. The remaining missing values were imputed. A Student’s t-Test was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the WT versus mutant samples.

### Publication Abstract
Protein quality control is a process in which a protein's folding status is constantly monitored. Mislocalized proteins (MLP), are processed by the various quality control pathways, as they are often misfolded due to inappropriate cellular surroundings. Polypeptides that fail to translocate into the ER due to an inefficient signal peptide, mutations or ER stress are recognized by the pre-emptive ER associated quality control (pEQC) pathway and degraded by the 26&#x2009;S proteasome. In this report we reveal the role of RNF149, a membrane bound E3 ligase in the ubiquitination of known pEQC substrates. We demonstrate its selective binding only to non-translocated proteins and its association with known pEQC components. Impairment in RNF149 function increases translocation flux into the ER and manifests in a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) phenotype, a pathological condition associated with pEQC impairment. Finally, the dynamic localization of RNF149 may provide a molecular switch to regulate pEQC during ER stress.

### Keywords
Rnf149, Pre-emptive er associated quality control, Membrane translocation, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Immunology and Regenerative Biology, Faculty of Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Ami Navon
Department of Immunology and Regenerative Biology, Faculty of Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel


