### Accession
PXD026949

### Title
Minor intron splicing efficiency increases with the development of lethal prostate cancer

### Description
Minor intron-containing genes (MIGs) are crucial cell cycle regulators and are essential for cell survival. Thus, we explored whether MIGs play a role in cancer progression and cancer therapy resistance. Here we show that MIG-expression segregates sensitive and resistant prostate cancer cells from each other and them from benign tissue. Moreover, the rate of minor intron splicing, a crucial regulatory node for MIG-expression, was more efficient in patients with advanced prostate cancer. We show that the increased minor spliceosome (MiS) activity is downstream of the androgen receptor signaling axis in both therapy sensitive and insensitive prostate cancer types. The increased MiS activity was in line with the elevated expression of U6atac snRNA, a crucial MiS component. We propose the expression of U6atac as a potential point of vulnerability in cancer. MIGs are uniquely susceptible to the MiS, so we used siRNA against ­U6atac, which like protein-coding transcripts, is downregulated. Inhibition of MiS was sufficient to lower the tumor burden significantly in therapy-resistant (prostate) cancer cells and PCa patient-derived organoids. KD cells displayed elevated minor intron retention and alternative splicing across minor introns of  MIGs which enriched for MAPK activity, DNA repair and cell cycle regulation. Importantly, these findings were confirmed by MassSpec analysis. Collectively our study nominates the MiS as a driver of highly proliferative, rapidly dividing (prostate) cancer cells that bears strong potential as a therapeutic target for many different cancer types.

### Sample Protocol
LNCaP, C4-2, 22Rv1 and PM154 cells (400 000) were seeded in a 6 well and treated for 96 hours with siScrambled or siU6atac RNA (16 pmol). 96 hours post transfection cells were harvested and 50% of the cell pellet was used for U6atac KD confirmation by qRT-PCR. The remaining pellet was washed twice with PBS and subjected to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Cells were lysed in 8M urea/100mM Tris pH8 / protease inhibitors with sonication for 1 minute on ice with 10 seconds intervals. The supernatant was reduced, alkylated and precipitated overnight. The pellet was re-suspended in 8M urea/50mM Tris pH8 and protein concentration was determinate with Qubit Protein Assay (Invitrogen). 10µg protein were digested with LysC 2hours at 37C followed by Trypsin at room temperature overnight. 800ng of digests were loaded in random order onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 50µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto a home packed analytical Nano-column (Reprosil Pur C18-AQ, 1.9µm, 120A, 0.075 mm i.d. x 500mm length) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (0.1% Formic Acid in water/acetonitrile 4,9:95) in 180min at a flow rate of 250nL/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) via a nano-spray ESI source. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.

### Data Protocol
MS data was interpreted with MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0) against a SwissProt human database (release 2019_07) using the default MaxQuant settings, allowed mass deviation for precursor ions of 10 ppm for the first search and maximum peptide mass of 5500 Da; match between runs with a matching time window of 0.7 min was activated, but prevented between different groups of replicates by the use of non-consecutive fractions. Furthermore, the four cell lines were treated as different parameter groups and normalized independently. Settings that differed from the default also included: strict trypsin cleavage rule allowing for 3 missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily conserved minor spliceosome (MiS) is required for protein expression of &#x223c;714&#xa0;minor intron-containing genes (MIGs) crucial for cell-cycle regulation, DNA repair, and MAP-kinase signaling. We explored the role of MIGs and MiS in cancer, taking prostate cancer (PCa) as an exemplar. Both androgen receptor signaling and elevated levels of U6atac, a MiS small nuclear RNA, regulate MiS activity, which is highest in advanced metastatic PCa. siU6atac-mediated MiS inhibition in PCa in&#xa0;vitro model systems resulted in aberrant minor intron splicing leading to cell-cycle G1 arrest. Small interfering RNA knocking down U6atac was &#x223c;50% more efficient in lowering tumor burden in models of advanced therapy-resistant PCa compared with standard antiandrogen therapy. In lethal PCa, siU6atac disrupted the splicing of a crucial lineage dependency factor, the RE1-silencing factor (REST). Taken together, we have nominated MiS as a vulnerability for lethal PCa and potentially other cancers.

### Keywords
Minor intron genes, U6atac, Minor spliceosome, Lineage plasticity, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR) University of Bern Murtenstrasse 35 3008 Bern Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Rubin
Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR) University of Bern Murtenstrasse 35 3008 Bern Switzerland


