### Accession
PXD001210

### Title
An Enhanced in vivo SILAC model for Quantification of Drug Metabolism Enzymes

### Description
Many of the enzymes involved in xenobiotic metabolism are maintained at a low basal level and are only synthesized in response to activation of upstream sensor/effector proteins. This induction can have implications in a variety of contexts, particularly during the study of the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and drug-drug interaction profile of a candidate therapeutic compound. Previously, we combined in vivo SILAC material with a targeted high resolution single ion monitoring (tHR/SIM) LC-MS/MS approach for quantification of 197 peptide pairs, representing 51 drug metabolism enzymes (DME), in mouse liver. However, as important enzymes (for example, cytochromes P450 (Cyp) of the 1a and 2b subfamilies) are maintained at low or undetectable levels in the liver of unstimulated metabolically-labelled mice, quantification of these proteins was unreliable. In the present study, we induced DME expression in labelled mice through synchronous ligand-mediated activation of multiple upstream nuclear receptors, thereby enhancing signals for proteins including Cyps 1a, 2a, 2b, 2c and 3a. With this enhancement, 115 unique, lysine-containing, Cyp-derived peptides were detected in the liver of a single animal, as opposed to 56 in a pooled sample from three uninduced animals. A total of 386 peptide pairs were quantified by tHR/SIM, representing 68 Phase I, 30 Phase II and 8 control proteins. This method was employed to quantify changes in DME expression in the hepatic cytochrome P450 reductase null (HRN) mouse. We observed compensatory induction of several enzymes, including Cyps 2b10, 2c29, 2c37, 2c54, 2c55, 2e1, 3a11 and 3a13, carboxylesterase (Ces) 2a and glutathione S-transferases (Gst) m2 and m3, along with down-regulation of hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (Hsd) 11b1 and 17b6. Using DME-enhanced in vivo SILAC material with tHR/SIM, therefore, permits the robust analysis of multiple DME of import to xenobiotic metabolism, with improved utility for the study of drug pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and of chemically-treated and genetically-modified mouse models.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen liver tissue was thawed in 9 volumes of SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6) then homogenised by rotor-stator (2 x 5 sec at 20k revolutions). The homogenate was heated for 5 minutes at 95°C then briefly sonicated (2 x 5 sec). Debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes. The supernatant containing protein for analysis was removed, aliquoted and stored at -80°C until use. Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE on a 12% bis-tris gel analysis in MOPS running buffer supplemented with antioxidant (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK). A total of 30 and 20 µg protein was loaded into each well for 10 and 3 fraction analysis, respectively. Gels were stained with Coomassie blue R250, destained, then rehydrated. Each gel lane was cut into two bands (Band 1: 80 – 40 kDa, Band 2: 40 – 0 kDa), with a clean scalpel. These were sliced finely (ca. 1 x 1 mm cubes) and collected in 1.5 mL protein LoBind Eppendorf tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). In-gel trypsin-mediated protein digest and extraction of peptides was carried out according to the method of Shevchenko and colleagues (doi: 10.1038/nprot.2006.468). Peptide sample concentration was determined by measurement of A280 on a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and adjusted to 0.2 mg/mL in water containing 0.1% (vol/vol) trifluoroacetic acid and 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide database search was carried out using PEAKS version 6 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) with the UniprotKB mus musculus (taxid: 10090) reference proteome set (43,238 entries, downloaded 25.02.14). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 7 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance set at 0.5 amu. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. SILAC lysine K6 was selected as a fixed modification when metabolically-labeled tissue was under study. Methionine was selected as a variable modification. A maximum of 2 miscleavages were allowed. Quantification of the predefined targeted peptides was carried out using SIEVE version 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using two seed files, depending on the molecular weight region of the gel being analysed, containing retention time and m/z information. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and the minimal intensity for alignment was set automatically, with intensities derived from the first monoisotopic peak. Data from SIEVE were exported to Excel 2010 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA) for calculation of light to heavy peptide ratios. A nanoflow liquid chromatograph (Agilent 1200, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to analyze the protein digests. Approximately 0.4 µg total peptide was loaded onto a trap column at a flow rate of 10 µL/min for 3 min and the flow was then reversed to an Agilent Zorbex nano C18 column (0.0075 mm ID; 15 cm; 3 µm particle size). The peptides were resolved with a 3 hr binary gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min as follows: 0% Buffer B for 5 min followed by 2-30% Buffer B for 140 min, 30-90% Buffer B for 15 min, 90-0% Buffer B for 10 min and 0% Buffer B for 10 min. Buffer A contained 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water and Buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The column was periodically cleaned with a 2 µL injection of buffer containing 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. A Proxeon nanospray source with a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to interface the Agilent nanoLC and LTQ-Orbitrap. Spray voltage was set at 1.8kV. The Orbitrap was tuned using Glu-Fibrinogen B peptide. For the protein/peptide identification, a method that consisted of full scans between 330-1500 a.m.u (in Orbitrap) and data dependent MS/MS with top 6 precursor ions (2+ to 4+ charged) in LTQ was employed. Orbitrap was operated in a profile mode at the resolution of 30,000 or 60,000 with a lock mass set at 445.1200 (polycyclodimethylsiloxane (doi: 10.1074/mcp.T500030-MCP200)), LTQ was operated in a centroid mode with isolation width =1 (m/z), normalized collision energy = 0.25, and activation time = 30 ms. The max fill time for Orbitrap and LTQ were set at 500ms and 50ms, respectively. A dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was used to maximize the acquisition of MS2 on peptides with lower intensity. For tHR/SIM analysis, a method that consisted of full scans between 330-1500 a.m.u (in Orbitrap) and data dependent MS/MS scans with or without defined precursors was employed. A dynamic exclusion of 30 sec and a threshold of 500 counts to trigger MS2 were also applied for MS/MS scans. Non-targeted data dependent MS/MS was performed when there was no targeted precursor found in the MS scan.

### Publication Abstract
Many of the enzymes involved in xenobiotic metabolism are maintained at a low basal level and are only synthesized in response to activation of upstream sensor/effector proteins. This induction can have implications in a variety of contexts, particularly during the study of the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and drug-drug interaction profile of a candidate therapeutic compound. Previously, we combined in vivo SILAC material with a targeted high resolution single ion monitoring (tHR/SIM) LC-MS/MS approach for quantification of 197 peptide pairs, representing 51 drug metabolism enzymes (DME), in mouse liver. However, as important enzymes (for example, cytochromes P450 (Cyp) of the 1a and 2b subfamilies) are maintained at low or undetectable levels in the liver of unstimulated metabolically labeled mice, quantification of these proteins was unreliable. In the present study, we induced DME expression in labeled mice through synchronous ligand-mediated activation of multiple upstream nuclear receptors, thereby enhancing signals for proteins including Cyps 1a, 2a, 2b, 2c, and 3a. With this enhancement, 115 unique, lysine-containing, Cyp-derived peptides were detected in the liver of a single animal, as opposed to 56 in a pooled sample from three uninduced animals. A total of 386 peptide pairs were quantified by tHR/SIM, representing 68 Phase I, 30 Phase II, and eight control proteins. This method was employed to quantify changes in DME expression in the hepatic cytochrome P450 reductase null (HRN) mouse. We observed compensatory induction of several enzymes, including Cyps 2b10, 2c29, 2c37, 2c54, 2c55, 2e1, 3a11, and 3a13, carboxylesterase (Ces) 2a, and glutathione S-transferases (Gst) m2 and m3, along with down-regulation of hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (Hsd) 11b1 and 17b6. Using DME-enhanced in vivo SILAC material with tHR/SIM, therefore, permits the robust analysis of multiple DME of importance to xenobiotic metabolism, with improved utility for the study of drug pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and of chemically treated and genetically modified mouse models.

### Keywords
Toxicology, Cytochrome p450, Drug metabolism, Xenobiotic metabolism, Pharmacology, In vivo silac, Drug-drug interaction

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Research
Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Medical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, James Arrott Drive, Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland

### Submitter
Kenneth MacLeod

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Tze-Jen Huang
Jacqui Wood Cancer Centre, Medical Research Institute, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, James Arrott Drive, Dundee DD1 9SY, Scotland


