### Accession
PXD013968

### Title
Splicing factors control triple-negative breast cancer cell mitosis through SUN2 interaction and sororin intron retention

### Description
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is an aggressive subtype of breast cancer with limited therapeutic opportunities.  Recently, splicing factors have gained attention as potential targets for cancer treatment. We performed an RNAi screen targeting 244 individual splicing factors to systematically evaluate their role in TNBC cell proliferation. We identified nine splicing factors, including SNRPD2, SNRPD3 and NHP2L1, of which depletion inhibited proliferation in two TNBC cell lines by deregulation of sister chromatid cohesion (SCC) via increased sororin intron 1 retention and down-regulation of SMC1, MAU2 and ESPL1. Protein-protein interaction analysis of SNRPD2, SNRPD3 and NHP2L1 identified that seven out of the nine identified splicing factors belong to the same spliceosome complex including novel componentSUN2 that was also critical for efficient sororin splicing. Finally, sororin transcript levels are highly correlated to various proliferation markers in BC patients, suggesting that deregulating sororin levels through targeting of the relevant splicing factors might be a potential strategy to treat TNBC

### Sample Protocol
BAC reporter cell lines were plated in two T175s. 3 days after cell plating, cells were trypsinized, resuspended in full RPMI washed with PBS twice and lysed in 0.3 ml EBC buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.3, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM MgCl2, 1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail (P8340, Sigma-Aldrich)). Lysates were sonicated for 6 times for 10 seconds, 500 U benzonase (E1014, Sigma) in 0.7 ml EBC was added and samples were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C under rotation. NaCl was added till a final concentration of 150 mM, lysates were spinned down for 10 minutes at full speed and lysates were added to 20 µl GFP-Trap A beads suspension (Chromotek) and uncubated for 1.5 hours at 4°C under rotation. For mass spectrometry, beads were washed twice with 1 ml EBC buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and twice with 1 ml 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next, beads were O/N incubated with 250 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 2.5 µg trypsin (V5111, Promega) at 37°C. Overnight digestion was stopped by adding 25% TFA (40967, Sigma) till a final concentration of 1%. Digests were centrifuged for 5 minutes and loaded on a prepared tC18 cartridge (twice washing with acetonitrile, twice washing with 0.1% acetic acid). Peptides were desalted by washing twice with 0.1% acetic acid, after which the peptides were eluted with 0.1% acetic acid/60% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition All the experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 15 cm analytical column with an inner-diameter of 75 μm, in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). 120 minutes chromatography gradients were  performed from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min and the mass spectrometer was operated in a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Two technical repeats were performed for each sample with different methods for MS/MS. A top-10 method and a top-7 method. Both with a scan rage of 400-2000 m/z and a full-scan MS spectra acquired at a target value of 3 × 106 and a resolution of 70,000.  The Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 × 105 and with a resolution of 17,500 for the top-10 method and 35,000 for the top-7. An isolation window of 2.2 m/z, and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The minimum AGC target was 1x103. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were, respectively, 50 and 60 ms for the top-10 method and 50 and 120 ms for the top-7 method. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60 s. Ions with charge 1, and >6, were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis.   Mass spectrometry data analysis All RAW data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) according to (Tyanova et al., 2016a). We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens including canonical and isoform sequences (30 January 2017). Database searches were performed according to standard settings with the following modifications:  digestion with Trypsin/P, allowing 4 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, not allowing Fast LFQ. Match between runs was performed with 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Splicing, Triple-negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.


