### Accession
PXD010080

### Title
KIF1A, TANC2, liprin-a2 interactomes identified by AP-MS.

### Description
The mechanisms by which motor proteins are loaded on vesicles and how cargos are captured at appropriate sites remain unclear. To better understand how KIF1A-based transport is regulated, we identified the KIF1A interactome and focused on three binding partners, the calcium binding protein Calmodulin (CaM) and two synaptic scaffolding proteins: liprin-a and TANC2.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS HEK293 cells were transfected with pe-Biotin-GFP constructs in combination with BirA or with GFP-constructs using polyethylenimine (PEI, Polysciences) according to the manufacturer instructions. Cells were lysed 48h later in RIPA lysis buffer (50mM TrisHCl pH 7.4-7.8, 150mM NaCl, 1%Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate and Protease inhibitors (Roche)), centrifuged at 13.000 rpm for 15 min and the supernatants were incubated for 1h at 4°C with either Streptavidin Dynabeads M-280 (Thermo Scientific) or GFP-trap beads (Chromotek), previously blocked in chicken egg albumin (Life Technologies). Beads were then separated using a magnet (Dynal, Invitrogen) washed twice in low salt washing buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4-7.8, 100 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100), followed by two washing steps in high salt wash buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4-7.8, 500 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) and two final steps in low salt washing buffer (20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4-7.8, 100 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton X-100) to remove binding proteins from HEK293 cells. Brains were obtained from female adult rats and homogenized in 10x volume/weight in tissue lysis buffer (50mM TrisHCl, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.2% NP-40, and protease inhibitors). Brain lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was then incubated for 1h at 4°C with beads previously conjugated with either the biotinylated or the GFP-tagged proteins of interest. Beads were then separated using a magnet (Dynal; Invitrogen) and washed in normal washing buffer (20mM Tris HCl, 150mM KCl, 0.1% TritonX-100) for five times. For MS analysis, the beads were resuspended in 15 μl of  Laemmli Sample buffer (Biorad), boiled at 99ºC for 10 minutes and supernatants were loaded on  4-12% Criterion XT Bis-Tris precast gel (Biorad). Each lane from the gel was cut in 3 slices, destained and digested using trypsin. All samples were analyzed on an ETD enabled LTQ-Orbitrap Elite coupled to Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) or on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Reprosil pur C18, Dr. Maisch, 100 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm; constructed in-house) with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and chromatographically separated over the analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC C18, Agilent Technologies, 50 µm x 50 cm, 2.7 µm) using 90 min linear gradient from 7-30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 150 nL/min. The mass spectrometers were used in a data-dependent mode, which automatically switched between MS and MS/MS. After a survey scan from 350-1500 m/z the 10 or 20 most abundant peptides were subjected to either CID or HCD fragmentation depending on the MS-spectrometer used. MS spectra were acquired in high-resolution mode (R > 30,000), whereas MS2 was in high-sensitivity mode (R > 15,000).  XL-MS For crosslinking experiment, the beads with affinity-precipitated proteins were incubated with 2 mM disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO; ThermoFischer Scientific) crosslinker for 1h at room temperature. The crosslinking reaction was quenched with 20 mM Tris-HCl for 20 min at room temperature. On-beads crosslinked proteins were denatured with 2 mM Urea, reduced with 4 mM dithiothreithol at 56⁰C for 30 min and then alkylated with 8mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were partially digested using trypsin (Promega) at 37⁰C for 2h. The supernatant was removed from the beads, fresh aliquot of trypsin was added and further digested overnight at 37⁰C. Crosslinked protein digests were subsequently desalted and enriched with Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Stage Tips. Obtained fractions were dried and stored at -80⁰C for further use. Crosslinked peptide mixtures were reconstituted in DMSO/FA/HOH 5%/10%/85% (v/v/v) mixture and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to an Agilent UPLC 1290 system (Agilent Technologies). Crosslinked peptide digest was trapped on a pre-column (Reprosil pur C18, Dr. Maisch, 100 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm; constructed in-house) for 10 min with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated on an analytical column (Poroshell 120 EC C18, Agilent Technologies, 50 µm x 50 cm, 2.7 µm) over 65 min with a linear gradient from 10% to 40% B (B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile). MS data acquisition was performed using MS2_MS3 acquisition strategy: at the MS1 level survey scan was recorded in Orbitrap (OT) at 60.000 resolution. For selected precursors collisional-induced dissociation (CID) was applied and signature peaks for the crosslinkers were recorded at 30000 resolution. Fragments exhibiting patterns associated to the DSSO cleavable crosslinker were further subjected to low-resolution MS3 scan in the ion trap (IT).

### Data Protocol
Raw files from AP-MS experiments were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Database search was performed using the Uniprot rat database and Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, UK) as the search engine. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was set as cleavage specificity, allowing a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using percolator, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Additional filters were search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score >20. Raw data files from XL-MS experiments were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with in-house developed nodes for crosslink analysis (Liu et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Tight regulation of neuronal transport allows for cargo binding and release at specific cellular locations. The mechanisms by which motor proteins are loaded on vesicles and how cargoes are captured at appropriate sites remain unclear. To better understand how KIF1A-driven dense core vesicle (DCV) transport is regulated, we identified the KIF1A interactome and focused on three binding partners, the calcium binding protein calmodulin (CaM) and two synaptic scaffolding proteins: liprin-&#x3b1; and TANC2. We showed that calcium, acting via CaM, enhances KIF1A binding to DCVs and increases vesicle motility. In contrast, liprin-&#x3b1; and TANC2 are not part of the KIF1A-cargo complex but capture DCVs at dendritic spines. Furthermore, we found that specific TANC2 mutations-reported in patients with different neuropsychiatric disorders-abolish the interaction with KIF1A. We propose a model in which Ca<sup>2+</sup>/CaM regulates cargo binding and liprin-&#x3b1; and TANC2 recruit KIF1A-transported vesicles.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Liprin-a, Kif1a, Tanc2, Lc-msms.

### Affiliations
Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Riccardo Stucchi

### Lab Head
Dr Casper Hoogenraad
Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.


