### Accession
PXD029805

### Title
In-depth proteomic analyses reveal unique subtype-specific signatures in small cell lung cancer (part I: cell pellets)

### Description
Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) represents about 13–15% of all lung cancers and with a five-year survival rate of less than 7%, it remains one of the most lethal forms of malignant diseases. It has a very aggressive course and is characterized by extensive chromosomal rearrangements, high mutation burden, and almost universal inactivation of the tumor suppressor genes TP53 and RB1. Therefore, the vast majority of SCLC patients are diagnosed with extensive-stage disease when surgery is not feasible and the treatment options are mostly limited to cytotoxic chemotherapy (CHT) and radiation. Importantly, targeted therapies for these patients have so far failed, and the success of immunotherapy in non-SCLC (NSCLC) has not been reflected in SCLC. Although SCLC has been formerly considered as a homogeneous disease with a single morphological type, recent advances in SCLC research have led to the development of subtype-specific classifications primarily based on neuroendocrine (NE) features and unique molecular profiles. Here, we investigate the general cell line characteristics on protein level, the relationship between the RNA-based classification and the protein expression profile, and the distinct biological processes specific for each subtype.

### Sample Protocol
Human SCLC cell lines were maintained in RPMI-1640 with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO), 100 U/ml penicillin and 10 mg/ml streptomycin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. Human cell lines (n=26) (respectives cell pellets and cell media) were processed and subjected to MS-based proteomic analysis. In brief, the cell pellets were solubilized with protein extraction buffer (25  mM DTT, 10% SDS, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8), incubating for 5 min at 95 °C with 500 rpm shaking. The volume of the buffer was dependent on the amount of cells in each sample, i.e. 250 µL of protein extraction buffer was added to samples containing 5M cells. Protein content was extracted via a 20 min sonication at 4 °C (Bioruptor plus, Diagenode) with 40 cycles (15 on / 15 off), followed by a brief centrifugation at 20,000 xg at 18 °C, discarding the leftover pellets. Protein determination was performed on the cell lysates using Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay kit (Thermo Scientific), following the manufacturer's instructions. The protein digestion for both the proteome and secretome (100 µg of proteins per sample) was accomplished using the S-Trap technology (ProtiFi) with few modifications, as previously described by our group [Kuras2021]. Peptide determination was performed for all samples using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (Thermo Scientific), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system  (Thermo Scientific), with an EASY-Spray ion source. Peptides from cell pellets were injected in triplicates (1.5 µg), utilizing two MS methods further detailed. All samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100 Å, nanoViper) and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 300 nL/min, a column temperature of 60°C. A 145 min gradient was applied for separation, using solvents A (0.1% formic acid) and B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN), increasing from 2 to 25% of solvent B in 115 min, then to 32% of B in the next 10 min, increasing to 45% in 7 min. Finally, the gradient increased to 90% in 8 min, continuing for another 5 min. Regarding the MS method, the cell pellet peptides were analyzed with 1 DDA and 2 runs. The top 20 DDA method was applied with full MS scans at m/z 375-1500, resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), target AGC value of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 100 ms, fragmentation with NCE of 28, MS2 scans with a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z), target AGC value of 1e5, maximum injection time of 50 ms, 1.2 m/z of isolation window, ion selection threshold of 8e3 and dynamic exclusion of 40 s. For the DIA analysis, a complete acquisition cycle consisted of 3 MS1 full scans, each followed by 18 MS2 DIA scans with variable isolation windows. Full scans were acquired at m/z 375-1455, with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), target AGC value of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS2 scans were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z), fragmentation with NCE of 28, target AGC value of 1e6, maximum injection time was set to automatic, fixed first mass of 200m/z, and the variable isolation windows were 13.0, 16.0, 26.0 and 61.0 m/z (27, 13, 8, 6 loop count, respectively).

### Data Protocol
Database search was done on Proteome Discoverer v2.4 using SEQUEST HT search engine combined with spectral library search, using the UniprotKB human database (20190115) and Proteome Tools spectral libraries. Dynamic modifications included the oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal, while the carbamidomethylation of cysteine was implemented as a static modification. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Additionally, a maximum two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of maximum 1% were allowed both on peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sclc, Molecular subtypes, Proteomics, Cell lines

### Affiliations
Div. Clinical Protein Science and Imaging, Dept. of Clinical Sciences and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Sweden
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ)

### Submitter
Nicole Woldmar

### Lab Head
Dr Melinda Rezeli
Div. Clinical Protein Science and Imaging, Dept. of Clinical Sciences and Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Sweden


