### Accession
PXD024489

### Title
In-house packed porous graphitic carbon columns for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of N-glycans

### Description
Although many reversed and normal stationary phases have been utilised for the separation of N-glycans, porous graphitic carbon (PGC) chromatography has become desirable because of its higher resolving capability, but is difficult to implement in a robust and reproducible manner. Herein, we demonstrate the analytical properties of a 15 cm fused silica capillary (75 μm i.d., 360 μm o.d.) packed in-house with Hypercarb PGC (3 μm) coupled to an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF mass spectrometer for N-glycan analysis in positive ion mode.

### Sample Protocol
Human neutrophil elastase (300 μg), human serum IgG (300 μg), bovine RNase B (300 μg), and bovine fetuin (600 μg) were heat denatured for 10 min at 95°C. After pooling the glycoproteins, 25 μL of PNGase F (Promega) was added for overnight digestion with intermittent mixing. The sample was aliquoted into six eppendorfs for protein precipitation using a mixture of chloroform/methanol/water in a 1:4:4 ratio. The methanol layer was dried and deaminated with 100 mM ammonium acetate (pH 96 5). After drying, the standards were reduced with 40 μL of 1 M sodium borohydride in 50 mM potassium hydroxide. The samples were neutralised, recombined, and diluted five-fold with water prior to clean up using a pre-equilibrated StrataX-C18 column. The flowthrough was directly loaded onto a pre-equilibrated ENVI-Carb SPE column and washed with water. The analytes were eluted with 40% acetonitrile in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and aliquoted into fresh eppendorfs before drying. Each eppendorf contained an amount of released N-glycans from 100 μg equivalent of the glycoprotein mixture. When required, each eppendorf was reconstituted in 50 μL water, with 2 μL of the glycoprotein standard mixture loaded for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The identification and characterisation of N-glycan structures was based upon criteria established in a previous study [Briggs, M.T., et al., MALDI Mass Spectrometry Imaging of Early- and Late-Stage Serous Ovarian Cancer Tissue Reveals Stage-Specific N-Glycans. Proteomics, 2019. 19(21-22): p. 407 e1800482], which involved the manual assignment and annotation of MS/MS data using GlycoWorkbench software.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation is a common post-translational modification that modulates biological processes such as the immune response and protein trafficking. Altered glycosylation profiles are associated with cancer and inflammatory diseases, as well as impacting the efficacy of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies. Consisting of oligosaccharides attached to asparagine residues, enzymatically released <i>N-</i>linked glycans are analytically challenging due to the diversity of isomeric structures that exist. A commonly used technique for quantitative <i>N-</i>glycan analysis is liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), which performs glycan separation and characterization. Although many reversed and normal stationary phases have been utilized for the separation of <i>N-</i>glycans, porous graphitic carbon (PGC) chromatography has become desirable because of its higher resolving capability, but is difficult to implement in a robust and reproducible manner. Herein, we demonstrate the analytical properties of a 15&#xa0;cm fused silica capillary (75&#xa0;&#xb5;m i.d., 360&#xa0;&#xb5;m o.d.) packed in-house with Hypercarb PGC (3&#xa0;&#xb5;m) coupled to an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF mass spectrometer for <i>N-</i>glycan analysis in positive ion mode. In repeatability and intermediate precision measurements conducted on released <i>N-</i>glycans from a glycoprotein standard mixture, the majority of <i>N-</i>glycans reported low coefficients of variation with respect to retention times (&#x2264;4.2%) and peak areas (&#x2264;14.4%). <i>N-</i>glycans released from complex samples were also examined by PGC LC-MS. A total of 120&#xa0;<i>N-</i>glycan structural and compositional isomers were obtained from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded ovarian cancer tissue sections. Finally, a comparison between early- and late-stage formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded ovarian cancer tissues revealed qualitative changes in the &#x3b1;2,3- and &#x3b1;2,6-sialic acid linkage of a fucosylated bi-antennary complex <i>N-</i>glycan. Although the &#x3b1;2,3-linkage was predominant in late-stage ovarian cancer, the alternate &#x3b1;2,6-linkage was more prevalent in early-stage ovarian cancer. This study establishes the utility of in-house packed PGC columns for the robust and reproducible LC-MS analysis of <i>N-</i>glycans.

### Keywords
Lcmsn-glycan, Porous graphitic carbon, Liquid chromatography, N-glycan, Mass spectrometry, Pgc, Hypercarb

### Affiliations
University of South Australia
Future Industries' Institute, The University of South Australia

### Submitter
Mark Condina

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Hoffmann
Future Industries' Institute, The University of South Australia


