### Accession
PXD023515

### Title
S-nitrosoproteome of subsarcolemmal mitochondria and cytosolic subfractions from the heart of sedentary and exercise-trained rats.

### Description
This project is the study of S-nitrosylated proteins in SSM and cytosolic subfractions from heart of sedentary and exercise trained rats. Iodoacetyl Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) and TMT-peptide enrichment coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis have been used to analyze the modified cysteine residues. Comparisons were performed to reveal the impact of exercise training on protein S-nitrosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were treated with iodoacetyl-TMT to label SNO proteins. After digestion with trypsin, TMT-labeled peptides were enriched using the anti-TMT antibody affinity resin. The resulting peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer coupled with a 120-min gradient time.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MASCOT software search engine. The results were then parsed with IRMA, and spectral counts were compared with PatternLab T-Fold test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exercise training., S-nitrosylation, Shotgun proteomics, Subsarcolemmal mitochondria, Iodo-tmt

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


