### Accession
PXD034008

### Title
Structural mechanism of a drug-binding process involving a large conformational change of the protein target

### Description
Structural biology studies indicate that proteins often undergo large conformational changes when binding small molecules, but atomic-level descriptions of binding events involving such changes have been elusive. A prominent example of binding accompanied by a large conformational change is the binding of Abl kinase to the cancer drug imatinib, a detailed understanding of which could potentially inform future drug-discovery efforts targeting kinases. Here, we report unguided molecular dynamics simulations of Abl-imatinib binding that start from an unbound state and ultimately reach a bound state that is highly consistent with known crystal structures of the Abl- imatinib complex. In the course of this process, we observed that imatinib first selectively engages Abl kinase in its autoinhibitory conformation. Consistent with inferences drawn from previous experimental studies, imatinib then induces a large conformational change of the protein, and this motion is captured in atomic detail by the simulations. Moreover, the simulations reveal a surprising local structural instability in the C-terminal lobe of Abl kinase during binding and, to a lesser degree, in the bound state. The unstable region, which is distal to the imatinib-binding site, includes a number of residues that, when mutated, confer resistance to imatinib therapy by an unknown mechanism. Using NMR, thermostability, and hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) measurements, along with energetic estimates, we determined that these mutations likely destabilize the Abl kinase structure. These findings, along with the simulations, suggest that these mutations confer imatinib resistance by a previously undescribed mechanism in which they exacerbate structural instability in the C-terminal lobe to the degree that the imatinib-bound state is energetically unfavorable.

### Sample Protocol
Hydrogen exchange and LC/MS were performed as described in [Iacob, R. et al. (2009). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106(5), 1386-1391].  A 50 pmol/µL stock solution of Abl kinase (WT, A344V, or M472I) was prepared in 20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, and 5% glycerol in H2O. Deuterium exchange was initiated by a 15-fold dilution of each protein with the identical buffer containing 99.9% D2O (pD 8.0) at room temperature. At each deuterium exchange time point, from 10 s to 4 h, an aliquot from the exchange reaction was removed and labeling was quenched by adjusting the pH to 2.5 with an equal volume of quench buffer (150 mM potassium phosphate in H2O). Quenched samples were immediately injected into the LC/MS system for mass analysis. Samples were digested online using an Poroszyme immobilized pepsin cartridge (2.1 mm x 30 mm, Applied Biosystems, 2313100) at 15 °C for 30 s, then injected into a custom Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC HDX Manager.  The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. The injected peptides were trapped and desalted for 3 min at 100 µL/min using a BEH C18 2.1 x 5mm column (Waters, 186003975) and then separated in 6 min by an 8%-40% acetonitrile:water gradient at 40 µL/min. The separation column was a 1.0x100.0 mm Acquity UPLC C18 BEH (Waters, 186002346) containing 1.7 µm particles. Mass analysis was performed with a XEVO G2 mass spectrometer (Waters Corp., USA) with a conventional electrospray source. The instrument was scanned over the range 100 to 2000 m/z with the following configuration: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/µL at a flow rate of 5 µL/min prior to data collection.  The average amount of back- exchange using this experimental setup was 25%-30%, based on analysis of highly deuterated peptide standards. The error of measuring the mass of each peptide averaged ±0.12 Da in this experimental setup. All experiments were performed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0 (Waters Corporation) using replicates of undeuterated control samples. Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of human Abl kinase (UniProt: P00519), no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35 and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.2, at least 2 consecutive product ions, maximum mass error of 10 ppm.  Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria to this point were further processed by DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) followed by manual inspection of all processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate uptake graphs and difference maps.  Deuterium levels were not corrected for back exchange and thus reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2015). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].

### Publication Abstract
Proteins often undergo large conformational changes when binding small molecules, but atomic-level descriptions of such events have been elusive. Here, we report unguided molecular dynamics simulations of Abl kinase binding to the cancer drug imatinib. In the simulations, imatinib first selectively engages Abl kinase in its autoinhibitory conformation. Consistent with inferences drawn from previous experimental studies, imatinib then induces a large conformational change of the protein to reach a bound complex that closely resembles published crystal structures. Moreover, the simulations reveal a surprising local structural instability in the C-terminal lobe of Abl kinase during binding. The unstable region includes a number of residues that, when mutated, confer imatinib resistance by an unknown mechanism. Based on the simulations, NMR spectra, hydrogen-deuterium exchange measurements, and thermostability measurements and estimates, we suggest that these mutations confer imatinib resistance by exacerbating structural instability in the C-terminal lobe, rendering the imatinib-bound state energetically unfavorable.

### Keywords
Hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry, Molecular dynamics simulations; drug binding; abl kinase; localized unfolding; imatinib resistance, Hdx ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


