### Accession
PXD024356

### Title
Organ-specific inflammaging in mice

### Description
Aging is accompanied by chronic, low-grade systemic inflammation, termed inflammaging, a main driver of age-associated diseases. Such sterile inflammation is typically characterized by elevated levels of pro-inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines and reactive oxygen species causing organ damage. Lipid mediators play important roles in the fine-tuning of both the promotion and the resolution of inflammation. Yet, it remains unclear how lipid mediators fit within the concept of inflammaging and how their biosynthesis and function is affected by aging. Here, we provide comprehensive signature profiles of inflammatory markers in organs afflicted with inflammation of young and old C57BL/6 mice. We reveal an organ-specific footprint of inflammation-related cytokines, chemokines and lipid mediators, which are distinctively affected by aging. While some organs are characterized by a pronounced pro-inflammatory microenvironment and impaired resolution during aging, others display elevated levels of pro-resolving mediators or an overall decrease in inflammatory signaling. Our results demonstrate that it proves difficult to establish a unifying concept for alterations of immunomodulatory mediators as consequence of aging and that organ specificity needs to be considered. Moreover, our data imply that inclusion of lipid mediators into the concept of inflammaging provides a comprehensive tool to characterize the inflammatory microenvironment during aging on a broader and yet, more detailed scope.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome profiling of colon samples from young and old mice was performed following the protocol published by Buczak K. et al. .43 Briefly, 10-20 µg of colon lysates were labelled with 1 µL TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific, #90309) per 10 µg of sample. After 30 min of incubation at room temperature an additional 1 µL of TMT reagents were added and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Labelling efficiency was checked, followed by sample pooling (5-10 µg of each sample), peptide desalting with Oasis® HLB µElution plate (Waters) and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched with Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) using Proteome Discoverer v.2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and further processed with in house written scripts using R v3.6.3 in R Studio Server v1.2.5042, as described in 42.  Proteome data for liver were obtained from Di Sanzo. et al.42 . Proteome data for brain, spleen and lung were taken from Qing Yu et al. (2020)44, and used to prepare Fig. S2A comparing immune cell marker levels between young and old mice. For detailed information about sample processing and measurement please refer to Qing Yu et al. (2020)44. Since methodology and principal data output are comparable to the above-mentioned proteomic profiling used for liver and colon samples, we avoided redundant experiments employing the 3R-principal for animal experiments.

### Data Protocol
Proteome profiling of colon samples from young and old mice was performed following the protocol published by Buczak K. et al. .43 Briefly, 10-20 µg of colon lysates were labelled with 1 µL TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific, #90309) per 10 µg of sample. After 30 min of incubation at room temperature an additional 1 µL of TMT reagents were added and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Labelling efficiency was checked, followed by sample pooling (5-10 µg of each sample), peptide desalting with Oasis® HLB µElution plate (Waters) and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched with Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) using Proteome Discoverer v.2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and further processed with in house written scripts using R v3.6.3 in R Studio Server v1.2.5042, as described in 42.  Proteome data for liver were obtained from Di Sanzo. et al.42 . Proteome data for brain, spleen and lung were taken from Qing Yu et al. (2020)44, and used to prepare Fig. S2A comparing immune cell marker levels between young and old mice. For detailed information about sample processing and measurement please refer to Qing Yu et al. (2020)44. Since methodology and principal data output are comparable to the above-mentioned proteomic profiling used for liver and colon samples, we avoided redundant experiments employing the 3R-principal for animal experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytokines, Proteomics, Aging, Inflammation, Lipid mediators, Resolution

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical/Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Pharmacy, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Philosophenweg 14, 07743 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Werz
Department of Pharmaceutical/Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Pharmacy, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Philosophenweg 14, 07743 Jena, Germany


