### Accession
PXD021710

### Title
Comparing Endocervical Mucus Proteome of Humans and Rhesus Macaques

### Description
Endocervical mucus changes play a key role in regulating fertility throughout the menstrual cycle and in response to hormonal contraceptives. Non-human primates (NHP) provide the most translational animal model for reproductive tract studies, as they have hormonally-regulated menstrual cycles and mucus changes, similar to women. We used TMT labelling and LC-LC/MS to compare the proteins found in the mucus of the rhesus macaque to the mucus of the human endocervix. We found 3,048 total proteins present in both rhesus mucus and human mucus, and of these, 57% showed a similar expression pattern. An even higher similarity occurred in the top 500 most prevalent proteins, with overlap in 341 (68%) proteins. Mucin MUC5B was the most highly expressed mucin protein (top 10 expressed proteins in both) but other key proteins related to mucus structure were present in both samples. We find that the mucus proteome of the endocervical mucus is highly conserved in NHP and women. This supports use of the NHP model system for studies of the endocervix and trials of novel fertility treatments targeting the cervix.

### Sample Protocol
Biological samples: We collected human samples (n=3) from donors undergoing a clinical trial at OHSU examining the effects of the progestin-only mini-pill in women who had undergone ovarian suppression with add-back hormonal therapy. We used a vaginal speculum to expose the cervix and a scopette to clear the external os of any fluid or debris. We then inserted a mucus aspirette (Unimar Aspirette device, Cooper Surgical, Trumbull, CT, USA) into the external os, approximately one centimeter to obtain a sample. The OHSU IRB approved this study and we registered this trial on clincaltrials.gov (NCT02969590).   We collected rhesus mucus samples from reproductive-aged female rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) (n=2) already undergoing necropsy at the Oregon National Primate Research Center (ONPRC) for unrelated reasons. We bi-valved the endocervix specimens and washed and aspirated the luminal surface with 200 l of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) using a 1 ml slip-tip insulin syringe. We also collected serum samples from both the woman and macaques to measure estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P4) levels to verify their hormonal status at the time of the collection. Based on E2 and P4, macaque samples corresponded to early follicular (E2=16 pg/ml, P4 = 0.13 ng/ml) and luteal phase (E2=21, P4= 1.64 ng/ml). We collected human samples under hormonal suppression with leuprolide with add-back hormonal therapy using estradiol patches and oral progestogens. [E2=undetectable pg/ml, P4=0.13 ng/ml, mucus score=1 (out of 15)], high estradiol conditions (E2=356 pg/ml, P4= 0.11 ng/ml, mucus score=13) and conditions where we co-administered high estradiol and oral norethindrone (NET) (E2=303.8 pg/ml, P4=0.08 ng/ml, NET=0.52 ng/ml, mucus score 6).  We probe sonicated approximately 60-200 microliters of each sample using 4% SDS, 0.2% Deoxycholic acid, and 100mM TEAB. We then quantified each sample using a BCA protein assay and used 55 micrograms of tryptic digested sample. Protein recovery from the samples (human, n=3; macaque, n=2) analyzed ranged from 290 micrograms to 5.7 mg with an average recovery of 2.3 mg. Average peptide recovery was 53 micrograms after eFASP digestion of 55 micrograms of protein. We labeled 20 micrograms of peptide digest from each sample with tags from an 11-plex TMT kit (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
We ran a pre-analysis normalization run to determine final mixing volumes, then fractionated the multiplexed sample with high pH reverse phase (30-fractions), followed by conventional low pH reverse phase, ionized with nano-electrospray, and analyzed on a Thermo Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. We collected MS2 spectra with CID using the linear ion trap. The reporter ions were generated using HCD using the manufacturer’s recommended SPS MS3 data acquisition method.  We used the Comet and the PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline) to identify proteins and peptides. We used canonical UniProt reference human (20,960 sequences, UP000005640, release 2019.06) or rhesus monkey (21,211 sequences, UP000006718, release 2019.07) protein databases. We obtained confident peptide identifications using accurate mass conditional score histograms and the target/decoy method. We used the PAW pipeline to infer proteins, perform homologous protein grouping, establish peptide uniqueness to the inferred proteins, and sum unique PSM (peptide spectrum matches) reporter ions into protein intensity totals. We conducted differential expression testing using edgeR from Bioconductor.  Searching the data against the human protein database resulted in 93K accepted PSMs (1% FDR) and 3100 protein identifications (0.2% FDR). Using the monkey database resulted in 97K PSM identifications (1% FDR) and also 3100 proteins. Use of the human database for analyses of the monkey channels decreased intensity by only 7% compared to use of the monkey database. In contrast, use of the monkey database on the human channel decreased totals by 55% compared to the human database. Therefore, we used the search results from the human database when comparing human and monkey samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Tmt labeling, Primate, Endocervical mucus

### Affiliations
OHSU
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Leo Han
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


