### Accession
PXD040890

### Title
An electrophysiological and proteomic analysis of the effects of the superoxide dismutase mimetic, MnTMPyP, on synaptic signalling post ischemia in isolated rat hippocampal slices.

### Description
Metabolic stress and the increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) are two main contributors to neuronal damage and synaptic plasticity in acute ischemic stroke (AIS). The superoxide scavenger MnTMPyP has been previously reported to have a neuroprotective effect in organotypic hippocampal slices and to modulate synaptic transmission after in vitro hypoxia and oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD). However, the mechanisms involved in the effect of this scavenger remain elusive. In this study we evaluated the concentration dependent effect of MnTMPyP on synaptic transmission during ischemia and post-ischemic synaptic potentiation. We also investigated the complex molecular changes supporting cellular adaptation to metabolic stress and how these are modulated by MnTMPyP. Electrophysiological data showed that MnTMPyP causes a concentration dependent decrease in baseline synaptic transmission and impairment of synaptic potentiation. Proteomic analysis performed on MnTMPyP treated tissue indicated an impairment in vesicular trafficking mechanisms including alteration of Secretory Carrier Membrane Protein 3 (SCAMP3) and RAB proteins and downregulation of mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. Alterations of vesicular trafficking may lead to reduced probability of neurotransmitter release and AMPA receptor activity, resulting in the observed modulatory effect of MnTMPyP. In ischemia and glucose deprivation, protein enrichment analysis highlighted impairments in cell proliferation and differentiation, such as TGFβ1 and CDKN1B signalling, in addition to downregulation of actin signalling, cell stress and mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. Taken together our results indicate modulation of neuronal sensitivity to the ischemic insult, and a complex role for MnTMPyP on synaptic transmission and plasticity and provide molecular insights into the mechanisms mediating the effects of MnTMPyP during ischemia

### Sample Protocol
Each N sample of four pooled Hippocampal tissue slices was first lysed in 200 μl Urea buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) containing protease inhibitors (Roche, cOmplete Mini, Cat Nr 11836153001) sonicated in 3 x 10 second bursts with a hand held probe (Microson Ultra Sonic Cell Disruptor XL, Misonix Inc. NY) while ensuring samples remained on ice between bursts,  and then spun (15,000 x g for 10 min at 4 deg) to remove cell debris. Supernatants were collected and protein content was determined using a modified Bradford assay (Ramagli and Rodriguez, Electrophoresis 1985, 6, 559-563). For digestion samples were diluted to 50 μg in 50 μl with 50 mM TEAB, reduced with dithiothreitol for 1 hour (27 deg, final concentration 10 mM) and alkylated for 30 mins. with iodoacetamide (RT, final concentration 20 mM). Prior to addition of trypsin (1 μg, Pierce Trypsin Protease MS grade, Cat Nr 90057) samples were diluted with 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) to ensure the correct pH and to reduce the Urea content to < 2 M. Digestion was carried out at 37 deg with agitation on a Thermomixer (16 hours) and subsequently halted with the addition of TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) to a final concentration of 1%. The tryptic peptides were desalted using ZipTips (C18, Millipore ZTC18S096) as per manufacturer’s instruction and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry. Peptide content was measured on a DeNovix spectrometer to ensure equal loadings of samples for mass spectrometry. Desalted peptides were loaded onto EvoTips and run on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to the EvoSep One system (EvoSep BioSystems, Odense, Denmark). The peptides were separated on a reversed-phase C18 Endurance column (15cm x 150μm ID, C18, 1.9 μm) using the preset 30 SPD method. Mobile phases were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (phase A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (phase B). The peptides were separated by an increasing gradient of mobile phase B for 44 minutes using a flow rate of 0.5 uL/min.  The timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity with TIMS  (Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry) and PASEF (Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation) modes enabled.  The accumulation and ramp times for the TIMS were both set to 100 ms., with an ion mobility (1/k0) range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm.  Spectra were recorded in the mass range from 100 to 1,700 m/z.  The precursor (MS) Intensity Threshold was set to 1,000 and the precursor Target Intensity set to 20,000.  Each PASEF cycle consisted of one MS ramp for precursor detection followed by 5 PASEF MS/MS ramps, with a total cycle time of 1.17 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the timsTOF mass spectrometer was analysed with MaxQuant (v 2.0.3.0). The Uniprot Rat reference proteome (downloaded 17.06.2021) was searched against using the following parameters -  trypsin was selected as the digesting enzyme. Variable modifications were set at oxidation on methionine and N-terminal acetylation, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Two missed cleavages were allowed. The LFQ (Label Free Quantitation) option was selected, as was the ‘Match between runs’. option.  A FASTA file containing common contaminants was also selected to be searched. Subsequent statistical analysis was carried out with Perseus software (v 2.0.6.0) using the LFQ Intensity values in the proteinGroups.txt  MaxQuant output file. Data was first filtered to remove contaminants and reverse hits. The data was then log2 transformed and filtered such that proteins listed appeared in a minimum of 70% of all samples. Absent values were then replaced by imputation of values from the normal distribution. Samples were grouped according to treatment category. Two-sample Student’s t-tests were then performed to determine proteins that were statistically differentially expressed between the treatment groups (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic stress and the increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) are two main contributors to neuronal damage and synaptic plasticity in acute ischemic stroke. The superoxide scavenger MnTMPyP has been previously reported to have a neuroprotective effect in organotypic hippocampal slices and to modulate synaptic transmission after in vitro hypoxia and oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD). However, the mechanisms involved in the effect of this scavenger remain elusive. In this study, two concentrations of MnTMPyP were evaluated on synaptic transmission during ischemia and post-ischemic synaptic potentiation. The complex molecular changes supporting cellular adaptation to metabolic stress, and how these are modulated by MnTMPyP, were also investigated. Electrophysiological data showed that MnTMPyP causes a decrease in baseline synaptic transmission and impairment of synaptic potentiation. Proteomic analysis performed on MnTMPyP and hypoxia-treated tissue indicated an impairment in vesicular trafficking mechanisms, including reduced expression of Hsp90 and actin signalling. Alterations of vesicular trafficking may lead to reduced probability of neurotransmitter release and AMPA receptor activity, resulting in the observed modulatory effect of MnTMPyP. In OGD, protein enrichment analysis highlighted impairments in cell proliferation and differentiation, such as TGF&#x3b2;1 and CDKN1B signalling, in addition to downregulation of mitochondrial dysfunction and an increased expression of CAMKII. Taken together, our results may indicate modulation of neuronal sensitivity to the ischemic insult, and a complex role for MnTMPyP in synaptic transmission and plasticity, potentially providing molecular insights into the mechanisms mediating the effects of MnTMPyP during ischemia.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Ischemia reperfusion injury, Synaptic transmission, Synaptic plasticity, Mntmpyp, Superoxide dismutase, Hypoxia, Epsp, Oxygen glucose deprivation, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Caitriona Scaife

### Lab Head
Dr John O'Connor
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin


