### Accession
PXD015622

### Title
Human serum N-linked intact glycopeptides LC-MS/MS

### Description
Large-scale identification of N-linked intact glycopeptides by liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in human serum is challenging due to the wide dynamic range of serum protein abundances, the lack of a complete serum N-Glycan database and the existence of non-specifically digested peptides and numerous modifications. In this regard, a spectral library search method was presented for serum N-linked intact glycopeptides identification with target-decoy and motif-specific false discovery rate (FDR) control. Low-abundant glycoproteins were firstly separated from high-abundant proteins by acetonitrile (ACN) precipitation. After digestion, the N-linked intact glycopeptides were enriched by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) column and a portion of the enriched N-linked intact glycopeptides were processed by N-Glycosidase F (PNGase F) to generate de-glycopeptides. Both N-linked intact glycopeptides and de-glycopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. From N-linked de-glycopeptides datasets, 764 N-linked glycoproteins, 1,699 N-linked glycosites and 3,328 unique N-linked de-glycopeptides were identified. The spectra of these N-linked de-glycopeptides were utilized for N-linked de-glycopeptides library construction and identification of N-linked intact glycopeptides. Four types of N-linked glycosylation motifs (NXS/T/C/V, X≠P) were used to recognize the N-linked de-glycopeptides, and two different N-Glycan mass databases including 27 modified N-Glycan masses and 712 unmodified N-Glycan masses were combined and utilized during spectral library search for identification of N-linked intact glycopeptides. In total, from the N-linked intact glycopeptides datasets, 526 N-linked glycoproteins, 1,036 N-linked glycosites, 22,677 N-linked intact glycopeptides and 738 N-Glycan masses were identified under 1% FDR, representing the most in-depth serum N-glycoproteome identified by LC-MS/MS at N-linked intact glycopeptide level and N-linked de-glycopeptides level.

### Sample Protocol
Serum proteins and commercial glycoproteins were denatured in 8 M urea/0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8.5, adjusted by adding HCl), reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 40 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 40 min. The excess iodoacetamide was reduced by 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 30 min. After sample solutions were diluted tenfold with 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution, the sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI; protein: enzyme, 50:1, w/w) was added in and incubated at 37 °C overnight with shaking on Thermo mixer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Sample solutions were acidified with 5 µL of formic acid (FA) and then desalted using Oasis HLB cartridge (Waters, Massachusetts, USA) with 0.1% TFA. The peptides were eluted with 1 mL 20% ACN/0.1% TFA and 1 mL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluted peptide solution was concentrated to 100 l by refrigerated centrifugal vacuum concentrator. Peptide concentration was measured by spectrophotometer of nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The enrichment of N-linked intact glycopeptides was performed on a RIGOL L-3000 Series HPLC system coupling with an Ultimate® HILIC amphion column (4.6×100 mm, 5 μm, 120 Å, Welch Materials, Inc., Shanghai, China), a manual injection valve and a UV detector. The enrichment of N-linked intact glycopeptides from all kinds of samples in this study were performed using the same method as following. One aliquot of tryptic peptide solution, which contains about 400 μg lyophilized tryptic peptides was taken, and dried by refrigerated centrifugal vacuum concentrator, then re-dissolved in 20 L 0.1% TFA followed by adding 80 L ACN/0.1% TFA slowly for further HILIC separation. The amphion HILIC column was first equilibrated with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA aqueous solution for 20 min. About 100 L peptide solution was injected onto the HILIC column through a manual injection valve, and peptides were eluted with buffer A (0.1% TFA in deionized water) and buffer B (0.1% TFA in ACN) at a 38-min gradient: 80% buffer B (0.1 min)-80% buffer B (20 min)-2% buffer B (21 min)-2% buffer B (30 min)- 80% buffer B (31 min)-80% buffer B (38 min), and at a flow-rate of 0.7 mL/min. The eluate was detected at 214 nm. The N-linked intact glycopeptides containing fractions were collected from 23 to 26 min according to the chromatogram, and then dried by refrigerated centrifugal vacuum concentrator. One portion of N-linked intact glycopeptide sample was re-dissolved in 0.1% FA for further LC-MS/MS analysis. The another portion was treated with PNGase F to generate glycosite-containing peptides.For one aliquot of enriched N-linked intact glycopeptides (40 μg), 10 μL of PNGase F (500,000 units/mL, NEB, MA, USA) was added into 40 μL of N-linked intact glycopeptide solution in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated 4 h at 37 °C to release N-glycan. After PNGase F treatment, glycosite-containing peptides were desalted by ZipTip C18 with 0.1%TFA and eluted successively with 10 μL 20% ACN/0.1%TFA, 10 μL 40% ACN/0.1%TFA, 10 μL 60% ACN/0.1%TFA. Glycosite-containing peptides fractions were combined and dried by refrigerated centrifugal vacuum concentrator and re-dissolved in 20 μL 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS spectra of N-linked de-glycopeptides in UDGP, FDGP, commercial HRP, ovalbumin and transferrin as well as the sera spiked with HRP and ovalbumin were converted to .mgf file using pParse2.0 with the co-elute parameter set as ‘0’. After conversion, UDGP and FDGP spectra were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens protein database (downloaded from Uniprot website on May 20, 2018, consisting of 73,112 entries) by pFind (v2.8.8). The search parameters were set as follows: up to two missed cleavages were allowed, 10 ppm. precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Semi-tryptic digestion and 16 variable modifications were considered. To reduce the search time caused by the large number of variable modifications. The spectra were searched 7 times separately by setting the enzyme digestion and variable modifications as follows: 1) semi-tryptic digestion with deamidated (N), oxidation (M) and Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q); 2) tryptic digestion with deamidated (N), oxidation (M) and Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q); 3) tryptic digestion with deamidated (N,Q), oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q) and amidine (Any N-term); 4) tryptic digestion with deamidated (N), oxidation (M,H,W), Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q) and dioxidation (C, M, W); 5) tryptic digestion with deamidated (N), oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q) and carbamidomethyl (Any N-term, K, H); 6) tryptic digestion with deamidated (N), oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q) and carbamyl (K); 7) tryptic digestion with deamidated (N), oxidation (M), Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q), formyl (Any N-term) and sulfide (C).  UDGP and FDGP (SDGP and PDGP) were also searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens protein database (downloaded from Uniprot website on May 20, 2018, consisting of 73,112 entries) by PD1.4. The search parameters were set as follows: up to two missed cleavages were allowed, 10 ppm. precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Tryptic digestion and 3 variable modifications were as follows: deamidated (N), oxidation (M) and Gln->pyro-Glu (Any N-term Q).   All other parameters were set as default. Finally, for each search result, identified peptides that have deamidated [N] modification were filtered with 1% FDR at the peptide level by the pBuild software. Spectra file named X.spectra.txt of identified N-linked de-glycopeptides were exported for further processing. The pMatchGlyco software was used to identify N-linked intact glycopeptides. Briefly, datasets from N-linked intact glycopeptides were converted from “raw” to ‘mgf’ format using pParse 2.0 with the co-elute parameter switched on (co-elute=1) and converted files with the ‘_HCDFT’ suffix remained. A spectral library was constructed using pMatchglyco from identified N-linked de-glycopeptides. To select MS/MS spectra from glycosite-containing peptides as library spectra, it needs to find peptides with N-linked glycosites. An N-linked glycosite is located on an N-X-S/T/C/V N-glycosylation sequon (X represents for any natural amino acid residues except for proline), and PNGase F treatment will cause deamidation of this asparagine residue. A peptide is defined as glycosite-containing peptides if there is a deamidated asparagine located in a sequon (N-X-S/T/C/V, X≠P) in this peptide. A protein is defined as a glycoprotein if it generates one or more de-glycopeptides. 10 ppm. precursor mass tolerance and 20 ppm. fragment mass tolerance were used during library construction; parameter “theta” was set as 0; introduced modification was set as ‘deamidated [N]’. Relative intensities of added Y ions were set as 0.2. The oxonium ion-containing MS/MS spectra were extracted using oxonium ion 138.055 Da. For fragment ions, 0.02 Da mass tolerance was used during library construction, and 10 ppm. precursor mass tolerance and 20 ppm. fragment mass tolerance were used during searching of N-linked intact glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale identification of <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in human serum is challenging because of the wide dynamic range of serum protein abundances, the lack of a complete serum N-glycan database and the existence of proteoforms. In this regard, a spectral library search method was presented for the identification of <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides from <i>N</i>-linked glycoproteins in human serum with target-decoy and motif-specific false discovery rate (FDR) control. Serum proteins were firstly separated into low-abundance and high-abundance proteins by acetonitrile (ACN) precipitation. After digestion, the <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides were enriched by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) and a portion of the enriched <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides were processed by Peptide-N-Glycosidase F (PNGase F) to generate <i>N</i>-linked deglycopeptides. Both <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides and deglycopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. From <i>N</i>-linked deglycopeptides data sets, 764 <i>N</i>-linked glycoproteins, 1699 <i>N</i>-linked glycosites and 3328 unique <i>N</i>-linked deglycopeptides were identified. Four types of <i>N</i>-linked glycosylation motifs (NXS/T/C/V, X&#x2260;P) were used to recognize the <i>N</i>-linked deglycopeptides. The spectra of these <i>N</i>-linked deglycopeptides were utilized for <i>N</i>-linked deglycopeptides library construction and identification of <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides. A database containing 739 N-glycan masses was constructed and utilized during spectral library search for the identification of <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides. In total, 526 <i>N</i>-linked glycoproteins, 1036 <i>N</i>-linked glycosites, 22,677 <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptides and 738 N-glycan masses were identified under 1% FDR, representing the most in-depth serum N-glycoproteome identified by LC-MS/MS at <i>N</i>-linked intact glycopeptide level.

### Keywords
Co-elution, Spectral library search, Human serum, N-linked intact glycopeptide, Isotopic distribution

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics,Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lian Shu

### Lab Head
Dr Fuquan Yang
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


