### Accession
PXD017464

### Title
Quantification of proteins and oxidized proteins in wild type and CLPP deficient mouse heart mitochondria.

### Description
We studied consequences of CLPP deletion to mitochondrial proteome and redox-proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria from hearts of three wild type (+/+) and three CLPP deficient (-/-) animals (20 weeks old; males) were isolated and incubated for ten minutes with 50-fold molar excess of a N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) /cysteines ratio in buffer consisting of 100 mM sucrose, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM TES, pH 7.2 at room temperature to block free cysteine thiols. Mitochondria were again washed with NEM containing buffer. Mitochondrial pellets containing 300 µg protein were resuspended in 100 μl DTT-DB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 2 mM DTT). 100 µl BIAM-DB (8 M Urea, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris/HCL, pH 8.5, 50 x molar excess BIAM (EZ-Link™ Iodoacetyl-PEG2-Biotin, ThermoFisher Scientific) /Cysteine) was added and samples were incubated at 850 rpm for 60 min at 22°C in the dark. Protein solutions were divided into two equal parts (one for BIAM-assay and one for label-free quantitative proteomics) and were precipitated with ice-cold acetone overnight at -20°C, collected by centrifugation. BIAM samples were  resuspended in 100 μl lysis buffer (5 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 1% Triton-X-100, 1% SDS). Oxidized proteins that now contain a BIAM label on cysteines were affinity purified using agarose streptavidin beads (Thermo Scientific) overnight at 4°C on a wheel. After washing, beads (BIAM assay) and protein pellet (label-free proteome) were resuspended in 50 µl 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GdmCl), 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, respectively, and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% ACN to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) as described in Rappsilber et al. 2007. Four fractions from SCX stage tips were collected in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% ACN, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 30 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min followed by a second gradient to 60% B for additional 15 min.  MS data were recorded by data-dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant v1.6.1.0 was used (Cox et al. 2008). Proteins were identified using mouse reference proteome database UniProtKB with 52538 entries, released in 2/2018. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus, NEM (+125.05) and BIAM (+414.19) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906 (2007).  Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372 (2008).

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of the turnover of complex I (CI), the largest mitochondrial respiratory chain complex, remains enigmatic despite huge advancement in understanding its structure and the assembly. Here, we report that the NADH-oxidizing N-module of CI is turned over at a higher rate and largely independently of the rest of the complex by mitochondrial matrix protease ClpXP, which selectively removes and degrades damaged subunits. The observed mechanism seems to be a safeguard against the accumulation of dysfunctional CI arising from the inactivation of the N-module subunits due to attrition caused by its constant activity under physiological conditions. This CI salvage pathway maintains highly functional CI through a favorable mechanism that demands much lower energetic cost than de novo synthesis and reassembly of the entire CI. Our results also identify ClpXP activity as an unforeseen target for therapeutic interventions in the large group of mitochondrial diseases characterized by the CI instability.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Redox proteomics, Lc-msms, Complex i

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne,  Cologne; Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Trifunovic
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne,  Cologne; Germany


