### Accession
PXD009975

### Title
Proximity biotinylation and LC-MSMS identification of the molecular microenvironment of coronavirus replication complexes

### Description
To investigate virus-host interactions at the site of coronavirus replication, we developed a biotin-based proximity labelling approach by engineering a promiscuous biotin ligase, BirA-R118G, within the coronavirus replication and transcription complex (RTC). BirA-R118G was fused to non-structural protein 2 to generate MHV- BirA-R118G-nsp2. During the course of infection, viral and host factors in proximity of the viral RTC become covalently biotinylated, allowing affinity purification of biotin-tagged factors and mass spectrometry identification of RTC-proximal viral and host factors. Results provide a comprehensive library of RTC-associated factors which likely include crucial factors that promote, orchestrate and assist viral replication within the viral RTC microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
4*E7 cells cultured in 150 cm2 tissue culture flasks L929 cells were infected with MHV-A59 or MHV-BirA-R118G-nsp2, and for comparison MHVH277A and MHVH227A-BirA-R118G-nsp2, at an MOI=1 in medium supplemented with 67 µM biotin (Sigma B4501). At 15 h.p.i., cells were washed three times with PBS and lysed in ice-cold buffer containing 50 mM TRIS-Cl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2% (w/v) SDS, 1 mM DTT and 1x protease inhibitor (cOmplete Mini, Roche). Cells were scraped off the flask and transferred to tubes. Cells were kept on ice until the end of the procedure. Triton X-100 was added to each sample to a final concentration of 2%. Samples were sonicated for two rounds of 20 pulses with a Branson Sonifier 250 (30% constant, 30% power). Equal volumes of 50 mM TRIS-Cl were added to each sample and samples were centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min at 18000 x g. Supernatants were incubated with magnetic beads on a rotator at 4 °C overnight (800 µl Dynabeads per sample, MyOne Streptavidin C1, Life Technologies) that were previously washed with lysis buffer diluted 1:1 with 50 mM TRIS-Cl. Beads were washed twice with buffer 1 (2% (w/v) SDS), once with buffer 2 (0.1% (w/v) deoxycholic acid, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5), once with buffer 3 (0.5% w/v deoxycholic acis, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM TRIS-Cl pH 7.4) and once with 50 mM TRIS-Cl pH 7.4. Proteins were eluted from beads by the addition of 0.5 mM biotin and Laemmli SDS-sample buffer and heating at 95 °C for 10 min. Proteins were separated 1 cm into a 10% (w/v) SDS-polyacrylamide gel. A Coomassie stain was performed and 4x 2 mm bands were cut with a scalpel. Proteins on gel samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with Trypsin11. Digests were loaded onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm, 100 A, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm length) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto the analytical Nano-column (C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 150 mm, Nikkyo Technos C. Ltd., Japan) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water/acetonitrile 4,9:95) in 40 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) via a nano-spray ESI source. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.

### Data Protocol
Spectra interpretation was performed with Easyprot on a local, server run under Ubuntu against a forward + reverse Mus musculus (UniprotKB version 2016_04) and MHV (UniprotKB version 2016_07) database, using fixed modifications of carboamidomethylated on Cysteine, and variable modification of oxidation on Methionine, biotinylation on Lysine and on protein N-term, and deamidation of Glutamine and Asparagine. Parent and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.4 Da, respectively. Matches on the reversed sequence database were used to set a Z-score threshold, where 1% false discoveries (FDR) on the peptide spectrum match level had to be expected. Protein identifications were only accepted, when two unique peptides fulfilling the 1% FDR criterion were identified. MS identification of biotinylated proteins was performed in three independent biological replicates. For label-free protein quantification, LC-MS/MS data was interpreted with MaxQuant (version 1.5.4.1) using the same protein sequence databases and search parameters as for EasyProt. Match between runs was activated, however samples from different treatments were given non-consecutive fraction numbers in order to avoid over-interpretation of data. The summed and median normalized top3 peptide intensities extracted from the evidence table as a surrogate of protein abundance and LFQ values were used for statistical testing. The protein groups were first cleared from all identifications, which did not have at least two valid LFQ values. Protein LFQ levels derived from MaxQuant were log-transformed. Missing values were imputed by assuming a normal distribution between sample replicates. A two-tailed t-test was used to determine significant differences in protein expression levels between sample groups and p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg (FDR) test.

### Publication Abstract
Positive-sense RNA viruses hijack intracellular membranes that provide niches for viral RNA synthesis and a platform for interactions with host proteins. However, little is known about host factors at the interface between replicase complexes and the host cytoplasm. We engineered a biotin ligase into a coronaviral replication/transcription complex (RTC) and identified &gt;500 host proteins constituting the RTC microenvironment. siRNA-silencing of each RTC-proximal host factor demonstrated importance of vesicular trafficking pathways, ubiquitin-dependent and autophagy-related processes, and translation initiation factors. Notably, detection of translation initiation factors at the RTC was instrumental to visualize and demonstrate active translation proximal to replication complexes of several coronaviruses. Collectively, we establish a spatial link between viral RNA synthesis and diverse host factors of unprecedented breadth. Our data may serve as a paradigm for other positive-strand RNA viruses and provide a starting point for a comprehensive analysis of critical virus-host interactions that represent targets for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
L929 mouse fibroblast, Bira-r118g, Bioid, Lc-msms, Viral replication complex, Mouse hepatitis virus

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Institute of Virology and Immunology IVI, Bern, Switzerland; Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Volker Thiel
Institute of Virology and Immunology IVI, Bern, Switzerland; Department of Infectious Diseases and Pathobiology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland


