### Accession
PXD012086

### Title
ENB protein -  Multi-omic analyses of exogenous nutrient bag decomposition by the black morel Morchella importuna reveal sustained carbon acquisition and transferring

### Description
Metaproteomes of extracellular soluble protein in Exogenous nutrient bags at three sampling time-points

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested with trypsin and labeled with isotopic tags as previous described by Wiśniewski et al. (2009). Nine different tags were assigned to the 3×3 individual replicate samples. Peptide fragments were firstly separated by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an Agilent Zorbax Extend C18 column on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, US) with a flow rate at 300 μl/min, then further separated using an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, Dionex, US) with a flow rate at 300 nl/min. Detailed elution conditions were given in the supplemental materials. MS/MS was carried out on a Q Exactive system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). The eluted fragments were scanned in MS1 with resolution 70000 and m/z range 300~1800, followed by MS/MS fragmentation of 10 most intense peptide fragments detected in the MS1. The MS/MS fragmentation was scanned with resolution 17500, dynamic exclusion time 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were input to Proteome Discoverer software v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US) for protein identification and quantification, with a false-discovery rate (FDR)<1%. A total of 6030 peptide fragments were obtained in the MS/MS spectra, mapped to the user-defined reference metagenome. Identified protein must have a Sequest HT score>0 and unique peptide≥1, as the criteria previously adopted by Zhu et al. (2016) and Cai et al. (2017).

### Publication Abstract
The black morel (Morchella importuna Kuo, O'Donnell and Volk) was once an uncultivable wild mushroom, until the development of exogenous nutrient bag (ENB), making its agricultural production quite feasible and stable. To date, how the nutritional acquisition of the morel mycelium is fulfilled to trigger its fruiting remains unknown. To investigate the mechanisms involved in ENB decomposition, the genome of a cultivable morel strain (M. importuna SCYDJ1-A1) was sequenced and the genes coding for the decay apparatus were identified. Expression of the encoded carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) was then analyzed by metatranscriptomics and metaproteomics in combination with biochemical assays. The results show that a diverse set of hydrolytic and redox CAZymes secreted by the morel mycelium is the main force driving the substrate decomposition. Plant polysaccharides such as starch and cellulose present in ENB substrate (wheat grains plus rice husks) were rapidly degraded, whereas triglycerides were accumulated initially and consumed later. ENB decomposition led to a rapid increase in the organic carbon content in the surface soil of the mushroom bed, which was thereafter consumed during morel fruiting. In contrast to the high carbon consumption, no significant acquisition of nitrogen was observed. Our findings contribute to an increasingly detailed portrait of molecular features triggering morel fruiting.

### Keywords
Exogenous nutrient bag, Morchella importuna

### Affiliations
Soil and Fertilizer Institute, Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences
National-local Joint Engineering Laboratory of Breeding and Cultivation of Edible and Medicinal Fungi, Soil and Fertilizer Institute (SFI), Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Hao Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Bingcheng Gan
National-local Joint Engineering Laboratory of Breeding and Cultivation of Edible and Medicinal Fungi, Soil and Fertilizer Institute (SFI), Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences


