### Accession
PXD013097

### Title
PhAXA-MS analysis of 4EBP1, cJun, and ERK2 Kinases

### Description
Recent estimates of the human proteome suggest that there are ~20,000 protein-coding genes, the protein products of which contain >145,000 phosphorylation sites. Unfortunately, in-depth examination of the human phosphoproteome has far outpaced the ability to annotate the kinases that mediate these post-translational modifications. To obtain actionable information about phosphorylation-driven signaling cascades, it is essential to identify the kinases responsible for phosphorylating sites that differ across disease states. To fill in these knowledge gaps, we have developed an unbiased, chemoproteomic approach for identifying high confidence kinase-substrate interactions with phosphosite specificity. Using this assay, we have uncovered the role of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), a clinically validated kinase important for cell cycle progression, in regulating cap-dependent translation via phosphorylation of the tumor suppressor 4E-BP1.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were grown in 15-cm plates (x4) to 50% confluence and transfected with WT or Cys-mutant plasmid DNA (12 ug per plate) by calcium phosphate precipitation. 18 h later, the media was changed to serum-free DMEM (4E-BP1 and rnErk2 pulldowns), or growth media (c-Jun pulldown). After 24 h (20 h for nocodazole experiments), cells were stimulated as follows: 10 min with growth media containing insulin (150 nM) for 4E-BP1 pulldown, 15 min with growth media containing PMA (100 nM) for rnERK2 pulldown, or 30 min with growth media containing anisomycin (10 ug/uL) for c-Jun pulldown. Cells were then harvested in NLB buffer (2.5 mL; 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10 ug/mL aprotinin, 5 ug/mL leupeptin, 7 ug/mL pepstatin) per plate by scraping. Cells were lysed by forcefully passing through a 28.5G insulin syringe 5x consecutively on ice. Debris was pelleted at 18,000ug for 10 min at 4C. Cleared lysate was split into 500 uL aliquots in 1.5-mL tubes, and 1 or ATP was added to a final concentration of 250 uM. Lysate was incubated at 30C for 60 min under constant agitation. FLAG-BAIT complexes were then isolated by immunoprecipitation for 12-15 h at 4C with end-over-end rotation. The resin was subsequently washed 3x for 15 min under constant agitation with 1x TBS containing Triton X-100 (2% v/v), then thrice with TBS for 30 s each; 1 mL was used for each wash. complexes were eluted with elution buffer (250 uL; TBS, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mg/mL 3XFLAG peptide) per tube. Elutions were carried out for 90 min at 25 C with constant agitation on a plate shaker (120 rpm). Common eluents were pooled, tricholoracetic acid was added to a final concentration of 10% (w/v), and samples were incubated on ice for 60 min. Tubes were then centrifuged at 21,000xg for 15 min at 4C before discarding supernatants. Protein pellets were re-suspended in ice-cold acetone (1.5x eluate volume) for each wash using a water bath sonicator. After another 30 min on ice, the protein was again precipitated and the supernatant discarded. The acetone wash was repeated once more, and the protein pellets were re-suspended in 10 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.0) containing 8 M urea (50uL) and immediately frozen at -80C until processing by in-solution digestion.Protein samples were treated with ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH ~8), which was added to a final concentration of 100 mM. Cysteine residues were reduced by adding 10 mM DTT (50 µl) and incubation at 45 C for 30 min. Samples were cooled to room temperature, and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating with 2-chloroacetamide (65 mM) under darkness for 30 min at room temperature. Upon diluting the urea to a final concentration of <1 M, overnight digestion with sequencing grade, modified trypsin (1 ug) was carried out at 37C. Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were completely dried using a Vacufuge concentrator.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were converted into mzXML files and centroided using MSConvert. Spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot Human protein database (2.15.17 Download) appended with all isoforms and cRAP contaminants using the COMET search engine as part of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) (version 5.0). Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment bin tolerance to 0.02 Da, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Met oxidation (+15.9949), Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.966331) and Gln/Asn deamidation (+0.98402) were included as variable modifications; carbamidomethylated Cys (+57.021464) was set as a fixed modification. The resulting pep.xml files were analyzed for peptide probability using PeptideProphet, where a minimum peptide probability of 0.95 was required, with only the expect score used as a discriminant. Protein level validation was performed using ProteinProphet; only proteins with a probability of >0.97 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cjun, Chemoproteomics, Erk2, Activity based probes, 4e-bp1, Crosslinking, Kinases

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Michigan, United States of America

### Submitter
Dylan  Mitchell

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Lee Garner
Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Michigan, United States of America


