### Accession
PXD036350

### Title
Design and characterization of mutated variants  of the oncotoxic parvoviral protein NS1

### Description
Oncotoxic proteins such as the non-structural protein 1 (NS1), a constituent of the rodent parvovirus H1 (H1-PV), offer a novel approach for treatment of tumors that are refractory to other treatments.  In the present study, mutated NS1 variants were designed and tested with respect to their oncotoxic potential in human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines. We introduced single point mutations of previously described important residues of the wild-type NS1 protein and a deletion of 114 base pairs localized within the N-terminal domain of NS1. Cell-viability screening with HepG2 and Hep3B hepatocarcinoma cells transfected with the constructed NS1-mutants led to identification of, the single-amino acid NS1-mutant NS1-T585E, which lead to a 30% decreased in cell viability as compared to NS1 wildtype. Using proteomics analysis, we could identify new interaction partners and signaling pathways of NS1.  We could thus identify new oncotoxic NS1 variants and gain insight into the modes of action of NS1, which is exclusively toxic to human cancer cells. Our in-vitro studies provide mechanistic explanations for the observed oncolytic effects. The availability of new NS1 variants in combination with a better understanding of their modes of action offers new possibilities for the design of innovative cancer treatment strategies.

### Sample Protocol
For PO4 and total cell proteomics analysis, cells were lysed in 8 M Urea (Sigma) and 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate in presence of phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma) using ultra-sonication (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Belgium). Protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 200 μg protein was reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 60 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37°C. After dilution with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a final urea concentration of 1.6 M, proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. After acidification using 5% TFA, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform. Remaining flow-through fractions of non phosphorylated peptides were labeled with tandem mass isobaric tags (TMT 16-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3.5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. For GFP-trap and BioID experiment, proteins were eluted by on-bead digestion in 1,6 M Urea, 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 5 μg/mL trypsin, pH 8 for 30 min at 27°, followed by reduction in 1.6 M Urea, 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM TCEP, pH 8. Reduced sulfhydryl groups were alkylated using chloroacetamide (15 mM) prior to fragmentation of peptides by a second tryptic digest (12 h at 37°C). The tryptic digest was acidified (pH < 3) using TFA, desalted using C18 reversed phase spin columns (Microspin, Harvard Apparatus), and subjected to LC-MS analysis  Phosphorylated peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μL/min. The MS was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3s. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z. Precursors were isolated with the isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented with HCD with CE set to 30%. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM. Both scans were acquired using Orbitrap.  TMT fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Column parameters were as above except of length (30 cm). The MS was operated in Top10 DDA mode. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 350 to 1600 m/z. Precursors were isolated with the isolation window of 1.1 m/z and fragmented with HCD with CE set to 30%. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM.  Peptides derived from GFP-pull-down and BioID experiment were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using LTQ-Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Column parameter were as above. The MS was operated in Top20 DDA mode. MS1 scans were acquired using Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 400 m/z). 20 most abundant precursors were CID fragmented (CE 35%) and analyzed in linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw LFQ data-files (PO4 and GFP/BioID) were processed using Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited) to extract peptide precursor ion intensities. Results were searched against human proteome database (UNIPROT) using MASCOT using following criteria:mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments)/0.6 Da (fragments) for orbitrap and ion trap MS2 data respectively, full tryptic specificity, 3 missed cleveages allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) set as variable modification. The TMT raw files were searched against human proteome database (UNIPROT) using SpectroMine software (Biognosys). Standard Pulsar search settings for TMTpro were used. Raw reporters ions intensities were exported for further analysis.  Quantitative analysis results from both label-free and TMT quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package v.2.3.2. to obtain peptide relative abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Oncotoxic proteins such as the non-structural protein 1 (NS1), a constituent of the rodent parvovirus H1 (H1-PV), offer a novel approach for treatment of tumors that are refractory to other treatments. In the present study, mutated NS1 variants were designed and tested with respect to their oncotoxic potential in human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines. We introduced single point mutations of previously described important residues of the wild-type NS1 protein and a deletion of 114 base pairs localized within the N-terminal domain of NS1. Cell-viability screening with HepG2 and Hep3B hepatocarcinoma cells transfected with the constructed NS1-mutants led to identification of the single-amino acid NS1-mutant NS1-T585E, which led to a 30% decrease in cell viability as compared to NS1 wildtype. Using proteomics analysis, we could identify new interaction partners and signaling pathways of NS1. We could thus identify new oncotoxic NS1 variants and gain insight into the modes of action of NS1, which is exclusively toxic to human cancer cells. Our in-vitro studies provide mechanistic explanations for the observed oncolytic effects. Expression of NS1 variants had no effect on cell viability in NS1 unresponsive control HepG2 cells or primary mouse hepatocytes. The availability of new NS1 variants in combination with a better understanding of their modes of action offers new possibilities for the design of innovative cancer treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Parvovirus h-1, Lfq, Hcc, Tmt, Np1

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Katarzyna Buczak

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


