### Accession
PXD044574

### Title
Kv2.1 IP dataset On_BeadMK8_2018

### Description
This project aimed to identify proteins copurifying with the Kv2.1 potassium channel from lysates prepared from crosslinked mouse brain homogenates. Comparison samples were prepared from Kv2.1 knockout mouse brains.  Parallel immunopurifications were perfofmed for the unrelated Kv1.2 potassium channel.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinked mouse brain samples for immunopurification were prepared as previously described (Kirmiz et al., 2018a). Excised brains were homogenized over ice in a Dounce homogenizer contain- ing 5 mL of ice-cold homogenization and crosslinking buffer (in mM): 320 sucrose, 5 NaPO4, pH 7.4, supplemented with 100 NaF, 1 PMSF, protease inhibitors, and 1 DSP (Lomant’s reagent, Thermo- Fisher Cat# 22585). Following a 1 hr incubation on ice, DSP was quenched with 20 mM Tris, pH 7.4 (JT Baker Cat# 4109–01 [Tris base]; and 4103–01 [Tris-HCl]). 2 mL of this homogenate was then added to an equal volume of ice-cold 2x radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (final concen- trations): 1% (vol/vol) TX-100, 0.5% (wt/vol) deoxycholate, 0.1% (wt/vol) SDS, 150 NaCl, 50 Tris, pH 8.0 and incubated on a tube rotator at 4°C for 30 min. Insoluble material was then pelleted by centri- fugation at 12,000   g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was incubated overnight at 4°C with the anti-Kv2.1 rabbit polyclonal antibody KC (Trimmer, 1991). Following this incubation, we added 100 mL of magnetic protein G beads (ThermoFisher Cat# 10004D) and incubated the samples on a tube rotator at 4°C for 1 hr. Beads were then washed 6x following capture on a magnet in ice-cold 1x RIPA buffer, followed by four washes in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.4). Proteins captured on magnetic beads were digested with 1.5 mg/mL trypsin (Promega Cat# V5111) in 50 mM ammo- nium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. The eluate was then lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% tri- fluoroacetic acid in 60% acetonitrile. Proteomic profiling was performed at the University of California, Davis Proteomics Facility. Tryp- tic peptide fragments were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass spectrometer in conjunction with a Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC (Thermo Scientific) and Proxeon nanospray source. Digested peptides were loaded onto a 100 mm x 25 mm Magic C18 100 A ° 5U reverse phase trap where they were desalted online, then separated using a 75 mm x 150 mm Magic C18 200 A° 3U reverse phase column. Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL per min. An MS survey scan was obtained for the m/z range 350–1600; tandem MS spectra were acquired using a top 15 method, where the top 15 ions in the MS spectrum were subjected to HCD (High Energy Collisional Dissociation). Precursor ion selection was performed using a mass win- dow of 1.6 m/z, and normalized collision energy of 27% was used for fragmentation. A 15 s duration was used for the dynamic exclusion. MS/MS spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted by Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS samples were analyzed using X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version Alanine (2017. 2. 1.4)). X! Tandem compared acquired spectra against the UniProt Mouse database (May 2017, 103089 entries), the cRAP database of common proteomic contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap; 114 entries), the ADAR2 catalytic domain sequence, plus an equal number of reverse protein sequences assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a parent ion tol- erance of 20 ppm. Variable modifications specified in X! Tandem included deamidation of aspara- gine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, sulfone of methionine, tryptophan oxidation to formylkynurenin of tryptophan and acetylation of the N-terminus. Scaffold (version Scaf- fold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc, Portland, OR) was used to validate tandem MS-based peptide and protein identifications. X! Tandem identifications were accepted if they possessed -Log (Expect Scores) scores of greater than 2.0 with a mass accuracy of 5 ppm. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least two identified peptides. The threshold for peptide acceptance was greater than 95% probability.

### Publication Abstract
The association of plasma membrane (PM)-localized voltage-gated potassium (Kv2) channels with endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized vesicle-associated membrane protein-associated proteins VAPA and VAPB defines ER-PM junctions in mammalian brain neurons. Here, we used proteomics to identify proteins associated with Kv2/VAP-containing ER-PM junctions. We found that the VAP-interacting membrane-associated phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) transfer proteins PYK2 N-terminal domain-interacting receptor 2 (Nir2) and Nir3 specifically associate with Kv2.1 complexes. When coexpressed with Kv2.1 and VAPA in HEK293T cells, Nir2 colocalized with cell-surface-conducting and -nonconducting Kv2.1 isoforms. This was enhanced by muscarinic-mediated PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> hydrolysis, leading to dynamic recruitment of Nir2 to Kv2.1 clusters. In cultured rat hippocampal neurons, exogenously expressed Nir2 did not strongly colocalize with Kv2.1, unless exogenous VAPA was also expressed, supporting the notion that VAPA mediates the spatial association of Kv2.1 and Nir2. Immunolabeling signals of endogenous Kv2.1, Nir2, and VAP puncta were spatially correlated in cultured neurons. Fluorescence-recovery-after-photobleaching experiments revealed that Kv2.1, VAPA, and Nir2 have comparable turnover rates at ER-PM junctions, suggesting that they form complexes at these sites. Exogenous Kv2.1 expression in HEK293T cells resulted in significant differences in the kinetics of PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> recovery following repetitive muscarinic stimulation, with no apparent impact on resting PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> or PtdIns(4)P levels. Finally, the brains of Kv2.1-knockout mice had altered composition of PtdIns lipids, suggesting a crucial role for native Kv2.1-containing ER-PM junctions in regulating PtdIns lipid metabolism in brain neurons. These results suggest that ER-PM junctions formed by Kv2 channel-VAP pairing regulate PtdIns lipid homeostasis via VAP-associated PtdIns transfer proteins.

### Keywords
Brain, Immunopurified, Crosslinked

### Affiliations
University of California Davis
Department of Physiology & Membrane Biology, University of California Davis School of Medicine

### Submitter
James Trimmer

### Lab Head
Dr James S.
Department of Physiology & Membrane Biology, University of California Davis School of Medicine


