### Accession
PXD021163

### Title
PilY1 and minor pilins form a complex priming the type IVa pilus in Myxococcus xanthus

### Description
Type IVa pili are ubiquitous and versatile bacterial cell surface filaments that undergo cycles of extension, adhesion and retraction powered by the cell-envelope spanning type IVa pilus machine (T4aPM). The overall architecture of the T4aPM and the location of 10 conserved core proteins within this architecture have been elucidated. Here, using genetics, cell biology, proteomics and cryo-electron tomography, we demonstrate that the PilY1 protein and four minor pilins, which are widely conserved in T4aP systems, are essential for pilus extension in Myxococcus xanthus and form a complex that is an integral part of the T4aPM. Moreover, these proteins are part of the extended pilus. Our data support a model whereby the PilY1/minor pilin complex functions as a priming complex in T4aPM for pilus extension, a tip complex in the extended pilus for adhesion, and a cork for terminating retraction to maintain a priming complex for the next round of extension.

### Sample Protocol
To determine the proteome of M. xanthus cells growing on 1% CTT 1.5% agar plates, 35 mg of cells were washed twice in PBS containing 2× protease inhibitor (see above). The final pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen. Every pellet was suspended in 150 µl 2% SLS, 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate and heated for 60 min at 95°C. The amount of extracted protein was measured using a BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific). 70 µg protein was reduced using 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin (TCEP)) (Thermo Fischer Scientific) at 90°C for 10 min, and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at 25°C in the dark. Proteins were precipitated using 400 µl ice cold acetone followed by overnight incubation at -20°C. Protein pellets were collected by centrifugation and the remaining acetone was evaporated. Proteins were dissolved in 0.5% SLS solution using sonication. 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) was added to 50µg protein solution and digest was performed overnight at 30°C. Following digest, peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and desalted using solid-phase extraction (SPE) on C18-Microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus). SPE columns were prepared by adding acetonitrile (ACN), followed by column equilibration with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were loaded on equilibrated Microspin columns and washed twice with 5% ACN/0.1% TFA. After peptide elution using 50% ACN/0.1% TFA, peptides were dried in a rotating concentrator (Thermo Fischer Scientific), reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and subjected to LC-MS analysis. LC-MS analysis was performed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano with a Prowflow upgrade and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse-phase HPLC column (75 µm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch). The following separating gradient was used: 98% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (99.85 acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half maximum (at m/z 200) followed by MS/MS scans of the most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 seconds. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms for MS and 50 ms at 17,500 resolution for MS/MS. The automatic gain control was set to 3x106 for MS survey scans and 1x105 for MS/MS scans.  For LC-MS analysis of sheared pili fractions, the dried pellets obtained by acetone precipitations were resuspended in 100 µl sodiumdeoxycholate buffer (2% sodiumdeoxycholate, 100 mM ammoniumbicarbonate), heated for 15 min at 95°C, reduced and alkylated as described above. The detergent concentration was diluted to 0.5% and 30 µg pili digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 30°C. Further SPE processing was carried out as described before. 1µg total peptides were loaded onto the LC-MS system. Settings for LC-MS analysis were as described above.

### Data Protocol
LFQ was performed using MaxQuant53 and a M. xanthus protein database downloaded from UniProt. To calculate protein abundances and protein enrichment, intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values54 were calculated using MaxQuant. iBAQ values are calculated as the sum of all peptide intensities for a given protein divided by the number of theoretically MS observable peptides. Following MaxQuant analysis, the iBAQ values were normalized by the total iBAQ sum. The resulting MaxQuant output table was loaded into Perseus (v1.5.2.6)55. For calculation of enrichment factors in samples versus controls, only proteins with three or more peptides were considered; values for proteins not detected in the control were imputed using the imputation function from normal distribution implemented in Perseus in default settings (width, 0.3; down-shift, 1.8). Proteins with an absolute abundance difference of ≥ 2 (log2 ratio of ≥1) in the sample vs control and a p-value ≤ 0.05 using two-tailed Student’s t-test were considered as enriched. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type 4 pil, Lfqi, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology  Kar-von-Frisch Str. 10 35091 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for terrestrial Microbiology  Kar-von-Frisch Str. 10 35091 Marburg Germany


