### Accession
PXD016126

### Title
Saliva proteomic patterns in patients with and without molar incisor hypomineralization Proteins exclusively detected in MIH saliva in molar incisor hypomineralization: a proteomic profiling

### Description
Molar incisor hypomineralization (MIH) is an endemic pediatric disease with an unclear pathogenesis. Considering that saliva control remineralization of enamel and that MIH is associated with higher saliva flow rate it is reasonable to suggest that also the composition of saliva is affected by the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva proteins were precipitated using methanol/dichloromethane and digested with trypsin as described earlier. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, Vienna, Austria) dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:50. Digestion was stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and injection onto the trapping  column followed. Peptides were separated using an UltiMate nano RSLC HPLC (ThermoFisher, Germering, Germany) separation system, consisting of the autosampler, column switching unit, nano and loading pump, and the UV detector. Both, the Acclaim C18 trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm) and the Acclaim C18 nano separation column (75 μm inner diameter × 500 mm) were mounted in the column oven and operated at 60°C. Samples were loaded onto the trap column using 0.1% TFA at 30 μl/min and precooled to 3°C and the nano separation was performed in gradient mode at 300 nl/min. A user defined injection program was used for sample injection and additional injector and trap column wash. Every sample injection was followed by two blank runs with injections of 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol for removal of possible sample remains in the injector or on the trap column and prevention of carryover in the separation system. Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed using the Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the “top 20” method for MS/MS experiment; that is, the 20 most intensive ions from the MS scan were selected for tandem MS (MS/MS), single-charged ions were excluded from fragmentation, and detected ions were excluded for further fragmentation for 2 min after initial MS/MS fragmentation had been performed. Mass resolution of 70000 was selected for MS at AGC set to 3E6, MS/MS resolution was set to 35000 and AGC set to 1E5 scans. Fragmentation was performed using the HCD approach at normalized collision energy of 30eV. Additionally, prior to the MS, UV peptide detection at 214 nm was also performed, which also served as quality control for HPLC separation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis (database search and label-free quantitation) was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) with following parameters: Database searched was the Human UniProt, version of September 2018, MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm, deamidation on N and Q, N-term acetylation and oxidation on M were selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Molar incisor hypomineralization (MIH) is an endemic pediatric disease with an unclear pathogenesis. Considering that saliva controls enamel remineralization and that MIH is associated with higher saliva flow rate, we hypothesized that the protein composition of saliva is linked to disease. To test this, we enrolled 5 children aged 6-14 years with MIH showing at least one hypersensitive molar and 5 caries-free children without hypomineralization. Saliva samples were subjected to proteomic analysis followed by protein classification in to biological pathways. Among 618 salivary proteins identified with high confidence, 88 proteins were identified exclusively in MIH patients and 16 proteins in healthy controls only. Biological pathway analysis classified these 88 patient-only proteins to neutrophil-mediated adaptive immunity, the activation of the classical pathway of complement activation, extracellular matrix degradation, heme scavenging as well as glutathione -and drug metabolism. The 16 controls-only proteins were associated with adaptive immunity related to platelet degranulation and the lysosome. This report suggests that the proteaneous composition of saliva is affected in MIH patients, reflecting a catabolic environment which is linked to inflammation.

### Keywords
Hypomineralization, Proteomics, Saliva

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine and Proteomics Core Facility. 1090 Wien, Austria
Medizinische Universität Wien

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulović
Medical University of Vienna, Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine and Proteomics Core Facility. 1090 Wien, Austria


