### Accession
PXD033811

### Title
GT-stabiligase N-terminomics technology for capturing proteolytic modifications on human cell surfaces

### Description
Here we introduce a stabiligase technology that directly identifies neo-proteolytic epitopeson the cell surface of human cells using a glycan-tethered, engineered peptide ligase.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated human cells are treated with sodium periodate conditions to enable an aminooxy-stabiligase to become directly tethered to extracellular glycans after a brief incubation. Tethered cells are then treated with a biotinylated peptide ester substrate which stabiligase uses to label cell surface N-termini.

### Data Protocol
All acquired data was searched using PEAKS online Xpro 1.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.; Ontario, Canada)7. Spectral searches were performed using a custom FASTA-formatted dataset containing Swissprot-reviewed human proteome file with gene ontology localized the plasma membrane (downloaded from Uniprot knowledge database, #entries)8. A precursor mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance was set at 0.03 ppm. Peptides, ranging from 6 to 45 amino acids in length, were searched in semi-specific tryptic digest mode with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) on cysteines was set as a static modification and methionine oxidation (+15.994) was set as a variable modification. N-terminal specific peptides were identified by the N-terminal amino-butyric mass tag (+85.052764). Lastly, peptides were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.   SILAC-labeled datasets were also analyzed in PEAKS online Xpro 1.6 with the following alterations. Two additional variable modifications were set to account for the isotopic-labels: 13C(6)15N(2) and 13C(6) 15N(4), quantified peptides were matched between experimental replicates and enrichments were normalized based on total ion chromatograph (TIC). Output PEAKS files contained peptide ratios. If peptides overlapped with the same N-terminal site (i.e., tryptic C-termini, different oxidation), the peptides were grouped together and the average ratio was reported for a given experimental dataset. Across replicates, peptides were removed if observed with high variation (coefficient of variation>0.7) and peptides were quantified if present in two biological replicates. The final N-terminal peptide ratio was then reported as the median log2 fold-change value alongside the shortest N-terminal tryptic peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Proteolytic cleavage of cell surface proteins triggers critical processes including cell-cell interactions, receptor activation, and shedding of signaling proteins. Consequently, dysregulated extracellular proteases contribute to malignant cell phenotypes including most cancers. To understand these effects, methods are needed that identify proteolyzed membrane proteins within diverse cellular contexts. Herein we report a proteomic approach, called cell surface N-terminomics, to broadly identify precise cleavage sites (neo-N-termini) on the surface of living cells. First, we functionalized the engineered peptide ligase, called stabiligase, with an N-terminal nucleophile that enables covalent attachment to naturally occurring glycans. Upon the addition of a biotinylated peptide ester, glycan-tethered stabiligase efficiently tags extracellular neo-N-termini for proteomic analysis. To demonstrate the versatility of this approach, we identified and characterized 1532 extracellular neo-N-termini across a panel of different cell types including primary immune cells. The vast majority of cleavages were not identified by previous proteomic studies. Lastly, we demonstrated that single oncogenes, <i>KRAS(G12V)</i> and <i>HER2</i>, induce extracellular proteolytic remodeling of proteins involved in cancerous cell growth, invasion, and migration. Cell surface N-terminomics is a generalizable platform that can reveal proteolyzed, neoepitopes to target using immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Subtiligase protein engineering, Proteolysis, N-terminomics

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, Dr. James Wells Laboratory, University of California,San Francisco
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Kaitlin Schaefer

### Lab Head
Dr Kaitlin Schaefer
Department of Pharmacology, Dr. James Wells Laboratory, University of California,San Francisco


