### Accession
PXD009925

### Title
HLA-I peptidomics od Meningioma tissues - Peptide length distribution and multiple specificity in naturally presented HLA-I ligands

### Description
HLA-I molecules bind short peptides and present them to CD8+ T cells for TCR recognition. The length of HLA-I ligands typically ranges from 8 to 12 amino acids, but high variability is observed between different alleles. Here we used recent HLA peptidomics data to analyze in an unbiased way peptide length distributions over 85 different HLA-I alleles. Our results revealed clear clustering of HLA-I alleles with distinct peptide length distributions, which enabled us to unravel some of the molecular basis of peptide length distributions and predict peptide length distributions based on HLA-I sequences only. We further took advantage of our collection of curated HLA peptidomics studies to investigate multiple specificity in HLA-I molecules and validated these observations with binding assays. Explicitly modeling peptide length distributions and multiple specificity significantly improved predictions of naturally presented HLA-I ligands, as demonstrated in an independent benchmarking based on ten newly generated HLA peptidomics datasets from meningioma samples.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen meningioma tissues from patients were obtained from the Centre hospitalier universitaire vaudois (CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland). HLA-I typing was performed for all samples (see Table S1). Informed consent of the participants was obtained following requirements of the institutional review board (Ethics Commission, CHUV). Protocol F-25/99 has been approved by the local Ethics committee and the biobank of the Lab of Brain Tumor Biology and Genetics.   We extracted HLA-I peptides from the meningioma samples as previously described (ref MCP). Briefly, snap-frozen meningioma tissue samples were placed in tubes containing ice cold PBS lysis buffer comprising of 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), 1% octyl-beta-D glucopyranoside (Sigma-Alrich) and homogenized on ice in 3-5 short intervals of 5 seconds each using an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA, Staufen, Germany) at maximum speed. Cell lysis was performed at 4°C for 1 hour. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm in a high speed centrifuge (Beckman Coulter, JSS15314, Nyon, Switzerland) at 4°C for 50 minutes. The lysates were loaded on stacked 96-well single-use micro-plates (3µm glass fiber, 10µm polypropylene membranes; ref number 360063, Seahorse Bioscience, North Billerica, Massachusetts). The first plate contained protein-A sepharose 4B (Pro-A) beads (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) for depletion of antibodies, and the second plate contained same beads cross-linked to W6/32 anti HLA monoclonal antibodies as previously described (ref MCP). We then employed the Waters Positive Pressure-96 Processor (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts). We washed the second plate with 4 times 2 mL of 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl) (Carlo-Erba, Val de Reuil, France) in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 4 times 2 mL of 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 and again with 4 times 2 mL of 150 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Finally, we washed the beads twice with 2 mL of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. We stacked the affinity plate on top of a Sep-Pak tC18 100 mg Sorbent 96-well plate (ref number: 186002321, Waters) already equilibrated with 1 mL of 80% ACN in 0.1 % TFA and with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. We eluted the HLA and peptides with 500 µL 1% TFA into the Sep-Pak plate and then we washed this plate with 2 mL of 0.1 % TFA. Thereafter, we eluted the HLA-I peptides with 500 µL of 28% ACN in 0.1% TFA into a collection plate. Recovered HLA-I peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator plus Eppendorf) and stored at -20°C.  Prior to MS analysis HLA-I peptide samples were re-suspended in 10 µL of 2% ACN in 0.1 % FA  and aliquots of 3 ul  for each MS run were placed in the Ultra HPLC autosampler. All samples were acquired using the nanoflow Ultra-HPLC Easy nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, LC140) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation, PRSO-V1,  Baden-Württemberg, Germany) as previously described (ref MCP). We packed the uncoated PicoTip 8µm tip opening with 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm long analytical columns with ReproSil-Pur C18 (1.9 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Mounted analytical columns were kept at 50°C using a column oven. Data was acquired with data-dependent “top10” method. The MS scan range was set to 300 to 1,650 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (200 m/z) and an AGC target value of 3e6 ions. For MS/MS, AGC target values of 1e5 were used with a maximum injection time of 120 ms at set resolution of 15,000 (200 m/z). In case of assigned precursor ion charge states of four and above, no fragmentation was performed.

### Data Protocol
We employed the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.5.5.1 (32) to search the peak lists against the UniProt databases (Human 42,148 entries, March 2017) and a file containing 247 frequently observed contaminants. We used default settings unless otherwise mentioned. Methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021463 Da) and cysteinylation (119.004099) were set as variable modifications. The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and no protein FDR was set. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific and the ‘match between runs’ option was enabled across different replicates of the same biological sample in a time window of 0.5 min and an initial alignment time window of 20 min. We used the ‘peptides’ MaxQuant output table from which peptides matching to reverse and contaminants were filtered out (See Table S2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hla class i peptides, Meningioma, Hla binding motifs

### Affiliations
Group leader Laboratory Hi-TIDe: Immunopeptidomics Head of clinical Mass spectrometry unit Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Biopôle 3 Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Lausanne
UNIL/CHUV

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Group leader Laboratory Hi-TIDe: Immunopeptidomics Head of clinical Mass spectrometry unit Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Biopôle 3 Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Lausanne


