### Accession
PXD007979

### Title
Comparative Qualitative Phosphoproteomics Analysis Identifies Shared Phosphorylation Motifs and Associated Biological Processes in Flowering Plants

### Description
In this work we carried out a comparative bioinformatics analysis of pre-existing phosphoproteomics data in the public domain: PXD000033 and PXD000421 (Arabidopsis. thaliana) and PXD002222 and PXD000923 (O. sativa; rice).  The aim of the analysis was to profile two model species representing the largest subclasses in flowering plants the dicot Arabidopsis thaliana and the monocot Oryza sativa, to understand the extent to which phosphorylation signaling and function is conserved across evolutionary divergent plants. From data set re-analysis, we identified 6,537 phosphopeptides from 3,189 phosphoproteins in Arabidopsis and 2,307 phosphopeptides from 1,613 phosphoproteins in rice. The relative abundance ratio of serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation sites in rice and Arabidopsis were highly similar: 88.3: 11.4: 0.4 and 86.7: 12.8: 0.5, respectively. In addition, tyrosine phosphorylation shows features different from those of the serine and threonine phosphopeptides and was found to be more frequent in doubly-phosphorylated peptides in Arabidopsis. We identified protein sequence motifs in the two species to explore the similarities, finding nineteen pS motifs and two pT motifs that are shared in rice and Arabidopsis; among them are five novel motifs that have not previously been described in both species. The majority of shared motif-containing proteins were mapped to the same biological processes with similar patterns of fold enrichment, indicating high conservation of these pathways. We also identified shared patterns of crosstalk between phosphoserines with motifs pSXpS, pSXXpS and pSXXXpS, where X is any amino acid, in both species indicating this is an evolutionary conserved signaling mechanism in flowering plants.

### Sample Protocol
See details in PXD000033, PXD000421, PXD002222 and PXD000923

### Data Protocol
PEAKS software version 7.5 was used to search the spectra obtained from datasets PXD000033 and PXD000421 against the A. thaliana protein database and spectra obtained from datasets PXD002222 and PXD000923 against O. sativa indica database. Databases were downloaded from UniProt version 59 including canonical and isoform protein sequences. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme of choice, with one non-specific cleavage and three maximum variable PTM per peptide for all data sets. Other search parameters were selected to match as closely as possible the parameters from the original analysis, as follows.  PXD000033: ±5.0 ppm  ±0.5 Da  three  Beta-methylthiolation (+45.99 Da), iTRAQ 4plex (K, N-term) (+144.10 Da) Oxidation (M) (+15.99 Da), Phosphorylation (STY) (+79.97 Da), Acetylation (N-term) (+42.01 Da), Deamidation (NQ) (+0.98 Da), iTRAQ 4plex (Y) (+144.10 Da)  PXD000421: ±7.0 ppm ±0.8 Da two Carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) Oxidation (M) (+15.99 Da), Phosphorylation (STY) (+79.97 Da), Acetylation (N-term) (+42.01 Da), Deamidation (NQ) (+0.98 Da)  PXD002222: ±20.0 ppm ±0.05 Da one Carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) Oxidation (M) (+15.99 Da), Phosphorylation (STY) (+79.97 Da), Acetylation (N-term) (+42.01 Da)  PXD000923: ±15 ppm  ±0.05 Da one Carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) Oxidation (M) (+15.99 Da), Phosphorylation (STY) (+79.97 Da)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Arabidopsis, Plants, Quanlitative, Rice

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institue of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Da Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew R Jones
Institue of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool


