### Accession
PXD010955

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis of Takifugu fasciatus liver in response to low temperature stress

### Description
The effects of temperature on teleosts have been of strong interest for a long time, particularly because low temperature profoundly influences the physiological and behavioral processes of ectotherms, especially teleosts. However, the cold-tolerance characteristics of fish at a protein level remains unclear. Therefore, in order to shed further light on the molecular mechanisms of low temperature adaptation in fish, we conducted quantitative proteomics on T. fasciatus liver using iTRAQ. Comparing the proteomic profiles of the T. fasciatus liver at 12℃ and 26℃, a total of 3741 proteins were identified, and 160 were differentially expressed. Among the differentially expressed proteins, the most significant changes were noted in those involved in oxidative stress (nine proteins), mitochondrial enzymes (eleven proteins) and signal transduction (thirteen proteins). The KEGG enrichment analysis indicated significant enhancement of D-arginine and D-ornithine metabolism, MAPK signaling, Wnt signaling and Gap junction pathway. Subsequently, three significantly up-regulated (CIRB, HSP90 and GST) and two significantly down-regulated proteins (FLNB and A2ML1) were validated by the parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assays. Furthermore, the changes in expression of proteins involved in the oxidative stress, mitochondrial enzymes and signal transduction were validated at the transcriptional level using qPCR. These verification results show that the experimental data of iTRAQ are reliable. Our results not only deepen an understanding of the mechanisms underlying low temperature tolerance in fish, but also may contribute to its breeding for enhancement of cold tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
The water temperature of the control groups (CG) was maintained at 26 ± 1 °C until the sampling was completed. The water temperature of three tanks (experimental group, EG) decreased from 26 °C to 19 °C at a rate of 0.85 °C /1 h, and then maintained at 19°C for 12h, before decreasing from 19°C to 12°C at the same rate. After the EG was maintained at 12°C for 24 h, both the experimental and control fish were quickly removed for liver dissection. Samples of EG and CG were done in three biological replicates, each containing liver tissue from six different individuals, and were used to conduct proteomic analysis by iTRAQ technique.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched using a MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.) against the Uniprot (uniprot_Takifugu_49865_20171224). For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, enzyme=trypsin, missed cleavage=2, fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8plex(K), iTRAQ 8plex(N-term), variable modification：Oxidation (M), FDR≤0.01. Within each iTRAQ reaction, differentially expressed proteins were determined based on the ratios of differently labeled proteins provided by Proteome Discoverer 1.4. For multiple comparisons between CG and EG, the program Isobaric Labeling Multiple File Distiller and Identified Protein iTRAQ Statistic Builder were used to calculate the ratios of protein, in which Sample REF was used as reference, based on the weighted average of the intensity of report ions in each identified peptide. The final ratios of protein were then normalized by the median average protein ratio. The regulation cut-offs to identify differentially expressed proteins between EG and CG were established based on the protein ratios, with the ratio threshold at >1.2 for protein upregulation and <0.83 (1/1.2) for protein downregulation. Proteins with a fold change larger than 1.2 and a p-value less than 0.05 were considered to be significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Low temperatures profoundly influence the physiological and behavioural processes of ectotherms, especially teleosts, which have made them the subjects of strong interest over time. However, the characteristics of fish cold-tolerance at the protein level remain unclear. Therefore, to shed further light on the molecular mechanisms of low temperature adaptation in fish, we conducted quantitative proteomics on the T. fasciatus liver using iTRAQ. Comparing the proteomic profiles of the T. fasciatus liver at 12&#x202f;&#xb0;C and 26&#x202f;&#xb0;C, a total of 3741 proteins were identified, and 160 were differentially abundant proteins (DAPs). Among the DAPs, the most significant changes were noted in proteins involved in oxidative stress (nine proteins), mitochondrial enzymes (eleven proteins) and signal transduction (thirteen proteins). The KEGG enrichment analysis indicated significant enhancement of D-arginine and D-ornithine metabolism, MAPK signalling, Wnt signalling and Gap junction pathway. Subsequently, three significantly up-regulated proteins (CIRB, HSP90 and GST) and two significantly down-regulated proteins (FLNB and A2ML1) were validated with parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assays. Furthermore, the changes in abundance of proteins that are involved in oxidative stress, mitochondrial enzymes and signal transduction were validated at the transcriptional level with qPCR. These verification results show that the experimental data of iTRAQ are reliable. Our results not only deepen the understanding of the mechanisms underlying low-temperature tolerance in fish, but they also may contribute to the enhancement of cold tolerance during its breeding process. SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY: The study focused on a comparative quantitative proteomics analysis of the T. fasciatus liver in response to low temperatures using iTRAQ, which has not yet been reported in the literatures. The results showed that the effect of low temperature on T. fasciatus is significant, including a detoxification of metabolic by-products and oxidative stress, an activation of the mitochondrial enzyme to strengthen energy metabolism, and a negative effect on signal transduction, which result in dysfunction or suboptimal performance. These low-temperature-related changes in the liver proteome of T. fasciatus can facilitate the understanding of the low temperature-related response that takes place in similar conditions in the liver and may contribute to the breeding of cold-resistant strains.

### Keywords
Environmental stress; proteomics; low temperature; itraq; prm; takifugu fasciatus

### Affiliations
Hainan university
College of Marine Science and Engineering, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, China

### Submitter
Xin Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Shaowu Yin
College of Marine Science and Engineering, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, China


