### Accession
PXD019879

### Title
Absolute quantification of TNF-RSC members from isolated TNF-RSC from A549 cells

### Description
Determination of absolute abundance of TNF-RSC members in the isolated TNF-RSC.

### Sample Protocol
6x15cm dishes of confluent A549/replicate were stimulated (pulsed stimulation) with ~800 ng/ml purified flag-tagged TNFa; cells were washed 2x with ice-cold PBS and ~1 ml lysis buffer (HN Buffer supplemented with 10% Glycerol, 2mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40/IGEPAL, 400 mM Sodium Orthovanadate, protease inhibitors, 10 mM PR619 (Abcam)) was added to each dish before cell collection with a cell scraper. Lysis was carried out for 20’ at 4°C on an orbital rotor, and debris was removed by centrifugation at 14000g on a tabletop centrifuge at 4°C. Supernatants were incubated o/n with AntiFlag M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich). Beads were subsequently washed 2x with lysis buffer and 3x with HN Buffer (50 mM Hepes 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4), before elution with Urea (8M). Samples were were reduced with 5mM TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37°C on a thermomixer (Eppendorf) and subsequently alkylated with 10mM IAA (Sigma) at RT in the dark. Urea was first diluted to a concentration of 5.5 M and LysC (Wako) at a 1:100 w/w ratio was added for 2.5-3hrs at 37°C. Subsequently, Urea was diluted to 1M and samples were further digested by addition of trypsin (Promega) at 1:50 w/w ratio o/n at 37°C. Digested samples were acidified by addition of formic acid (FA) and purified using microspin columns (The Nest Group). Eluates were evaporated, resuspended in ACN5%, FA 0.1%, H20, with addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys), sonicated and centrifuged for 5-10 minutes at 10000g before MS injection. Reference Heavy AQUA peptides were added to the sample before injection.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition. Targeted analysis for the AQUA experiments were carried out on a QExactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-Class System (Waters). Peptides were separated on a Acquity UPLC M-Class column (15 cm length; 75 uM diameter) with a 90 minutes gradient from ACN 5% to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Isolation was performed with a quadrupole and the isolation window was set at 1.2Da. Peptides were fragmented with a collision energy at 28% (HCD) and detected in an Orbitrap. Pulldowns were injected three times with two different methods depending on the intensity of the monitored peptides, with Orbitrap fill time and resolution set at 54/118 ms and 30000/60000, respectively.     Data analysis. Representative peptides for the ~30 TNF-RSC proteins were selected based on the following criteria: proteotypic; few or no known posttranslational modifications; tryptic (one exception); good response factor and linearity, as measured by targeted/untargeted MS, and/or reported in peptide atlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/). All targeted data were analyzed and quantified using Skyline (version: daily(beta); MacLean et al. 2010).  Generally, manual peak-picking from PRM data was carried out using the following criteria: m/z>200; ppm<5; of multiple available charged states, the one with the best features was chosen; identification was based on co-elution of light and heavy peptides and matching peak shape. Quantified peaks were exported and downstream analyses carried out in R using customized scripts. Absolute concentration of isolated proteins was estimated using spike-in reference AQUA peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) represent the main mode of the proteome organization in the cell. In the last decade, several large-scale representations of PPI networks have captured generic aspects of the functional organization of network components but mostly lack the context of cellular states. However, the generation of context-dependent PPI networks is essential for structural and systems-level modeling of biological processes-a goal that remains an unsolved challenge. Here we describe an experimental/computational strategy to achieve a modeling of PPIs that considers contextual information. This strategy defines the composition, stoichiometry, temporal organization, and cellular requirements for the formation of target assemblies. We used this approach to generate an integrated model of the formation principles and architecture of a large signalosome, the TNF-receptor signaling complex (TNF-RSC). Overall, we show that the integration of systems- and structure-level information provides a generic, largely unexplored link between the modular proteome and cellular function.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Aqua, Tnf-rsc, Prm

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


