### Accession
PXD005211

### Title
Tetrasphaera elongata prospers in dynamic oxic/anoxic systems by metabolic pre-adaptation and dismissal of the hierarchical control of anaerobic gene expression

### Description
The physiological adaptations of the WWTP isolate T. elongata str. LP2 during an oxic/anoxic shift experiment were analyzed by HRMS-proteomics. E. coli was used as reference organism as it shares several metabolic capabilities and is regularly introduced to wastewater treatment plants, but without succeeding there.   In contrast to E. coli, T. elongata was able to steadily grow and did not need to activate additional metabolic pathways for anaerobic energy harvest. At the same time, given substrates were exploited far more efficient than by E. coli. Based on the acquired data, we hypothesize that T. elongata shows high metabolic robustness when encountering the WWTP which enables continuous growth to successfully compete in this environment.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, cells were lysed using the FastPrep-96 Instrument (MP Biomedicals) for 1 min at 1600 rpm and the All FastDNA-96 (MP Biomedicals) lysis matrix. Protein concentrations were assessed by BCA method in triplicates and approximately 20 µg of protein were subjected to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane-based proteomic sample preparation (Berger et al., 2015). The protocol was adjusted for 20 µg of protein and the membranes were washed twice with 66% acetonitrile before equilibration with an 8M urea solution. Tryptic peptides were measured by LC-MS/MS (Ultimate3000 - Q Exactive).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed by MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.30) (Cox and Mann, 2008) as previously described (Herbst et al., 2015), but with up to 4 allowed missed cleavages. Protein databases were obtained from UniProt (Uniprot Consortium, 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polyphosphate, Tetrasphaera elongata, Wastewater treatment, Poly-p, Anoxic, Pao, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
Head of Center for Microbial Communities  Department of Chemistry and Bioscience  Aalborg University Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H 9220 Aalborg Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Florian-Alexander Herbst

### Lab Head
Dr Per Halkjær Nielsen
Head of Center for Microbial Communities  Department of Chemistry and Bioscience  Aalborg University Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H 9220 Aalborg Denmark


