### Accession
PXD008438

### Title
lysosome proteomics in Niemann-Pick Type C disease model cells (CHOwt and NPC1-null cells)

### Description
Increasing evidence implicates lysosomal dysfunction in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, including the rare inherited lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) and the most common neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease (AD and PD). The goal of this work was to analyze whether there are changes in the lysosomal glycocalyx in a cellular model of a LSD Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPC). Using the ferrofluid nanoparticles we isolated lysosomal organelles from NPC1-null and CHOwt cells. Mass spectrometry identification of lysosomal proteins was performed in order to determine the enrichment efficiency for N-glycome profiling of the lysosomal glycocalyx in NPC disease cellular model.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomes from CHOwt and NPC1-null cells were purified according the Walker and Lloyde Evans protocol(Walker, M. W., and Lloyd-Evans, E. Methods Cell Biol. 2015, 126: 21–43) in triplicate. Briefly, the cells were grown in T75 flasks, they were incubated with 10% ferrofluid solution (superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles, 10 mg/mL of 40 kDa dextran-stabilized magnetite, Liquids Research Ltd, UK.) and 10 mM HEPES pH 7.2 in growth medium for 24 hours. After washing and the chase period in the regular medium for 24 hours, cells were trypsinized, harvested and resuspended in 2 mL of hypotonic buffer (15 mM KCL, 1.5 mM MgAc, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM HEPES and proteinase inhibitor (Roche)). After homogenization in dounce homogenizer (30 times) and passing through 23G needle (10 times), 0.5 mL of hypertonic buffer was added (220 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 0.1 mM sucrose, 375 mM KCl, 22.5 mM MgAc, 1 mM DTT, 50 mL of DNase 1 (Roche Applied Science)). Following incubation for 5 min, the cellular homogenate was centrifuged and the same amount of proteins in the supernatant of CHOwt and NPC1-null cells was subjected to MS column (MACS Miltenyi Biotec) activated with 0.5% BSA in PBS and attached to QuadroMACS magnetic separator. Flow-through is was collected, and column is was washed with DNAse solution and Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) supplemented with 0.1 mM sucrose. The column is was removed from magnetic separator and lysosomes were eluted with 0.5 mL of PBS supplemented with 0.1 mM sucrose and proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science). All collected fractions were stored at -80 °C prior analysis.       Easc sample was processed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. In short, 8 μg of total protein from lysosomal fraction were mixed with the FASP-urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.5) to final volume of 150 µL. SDS (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to final concentration of 1% (v/v). Before FASP, samples were sonicated for 10 minutes using ultrasonic bath, reduced (10 mM DTT, 30 min, 55 °C) and mixed with 100 µL of FASP-urea buffer. After transferring to the 10-kDa membrane filter units (Microcon YM-10, Merck Millipore), samples were centrifuged (13 000 x g, 45 min, 22 °C) and washed subsequently with 200 µL of FASP-urea buffer followed by centrifugation. Before digestion, proteins were alkylated (50 mM IAA, 20 min at room temperature in the dark), washed twice with FASP-urea buffer and then twice with ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.6) followed by centrifugation (13 000 x g, 30 min). Protein digestion was achieved by adding trypsin (Promega) (enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:30, v/v) and by incubation at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic peptides were collected from filter units by centrifugation (13 000 x g, 30 min), washing with 50 µL of ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.6) and subsequent centrifugation, followed by vacuum drying.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using processed by Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.0.0.802., Thermo Fisher Scientific) and SEQUEST search against Homo sapienes FASTA files (42116 sequences from Swiss-Prot database, downloaded 5/11/20162016-05-11 from SwissProt database, TaxID=9609 and subtaxonomies). Static peptide modification included carbamidomethylation (C), and dynamic oxidation (M) and deamidation (N,Q). Maximum two trypsin missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance and ion fragment tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Percolator confidence levels were set at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (high) and 5% FDR (middle), for both peptide and protein levels. FDR is determined automatically by Percolator node based on targeted-decoy strategy . For peptide confidence, validation was based on q-value (minimal FDR at which the identification is considered correct ) which was set at 0.01 (high). At least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were required for reporting validlyconfidently  identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence implicates lysosomal dysfunction in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, including the rare inherited lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs) and the most common neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease (AD and PD). Although the triggers of the lysosomal impairment may involve the accumulated macromolecules or dysfunction of the lysosomal enzymes, the role of the lysosomal glycocalyx in the lysosomal (dys)function has not been studied. The goal of this work was to analyze whether there are changes in the lysosomal glycocalyx in a cellular model of a LSD Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPC). Using the ferrofluid nanoparticles we isolated lysosomal organelles from <i>NPC1</i>-null and CHOwt cells. The magnetically isolated lysosomal fractions were enriched with the lysosomal marker protein LAMP1 and showed the key features of NPC disease: 3-fold higher cholesterol content and 4-5 fold enlarged size of the particles compared with the lysosomal fractions of wt cells. These lysosomal fractions were further processed to isolate lysosomal membrane proteins using Triton X-114 and their N-glycome was analyzed by HILIC-UPLC. N-glycans presented in each chromatographic peak were elucidated using MALDI-TOF/TOF-MS. We detected changes in the N-glycosylation pattern of the lysosomal glycocalyx of <i>NPC1</i>-null <i>versus</i> wt cells which involved high-mannose and sialylated N-glycans. To the best of our knowledge this study is the first to report N-glycome profiling of the lysosomal glycocalyx in NPC disease cellular model and the first to report the specific changes in the lysosomal glycocalyx in <i>NPC1</i>-null cells. We speculate that changes in the lysosomal glycocalyx may contribute to lysosomal (dys)function. Further glycome profiling of the lysosomal glycocalyx in other LSDs as well as the most common neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD and PD, is necessary to better understand the role of the lysosomal glycocalyx and to reveal its potential contribution in lysosomal dysfunction leading to neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Npc1-null cells, Chowt cells, Lysosome, Lc-ms/ms, Magnetic nanoparticles lysosome enrichment

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Disease Research Division of Molecular Medicine Rudjer Boskovic Institute Bijenicka 54, 10000 Zagreb - Croatia

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Silva Katusic Hecimovic
Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Disease Research Division of Molecular Medicine Rudjer Boskovic Institute Bijenicka 54, 10000 Zagreb - Croatia


