### Accession
PXD030671

### Title
Spatial Proteomic Analysis of Isogenic Metastatic Colorectal Cancer Cells Reveals Key Dysregulated Proteins Associated with Lymph Node, Liver and Lung Metastasis

### Description
Liver, lung and lymph nodes are the most common metatastic sites of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Here, we aimed to analyze by quantitative spatial proteomics the isogenic KM12 cell system (non-metastatic KM12C cells, liver metastatic KM12SM cells and liver and lung metastatic KM12L4a cells), and the isogenic non-metastatic SW480 and lymph nodes metastatic SW620 cells to study CRC metastasis. Cells were fractionated to study by proteomics five subcellular fractions corresponding to cytoplasm (CEB), membrane (MEB), nucleus (NEB), chromatin-bound proteins (NEB-CBP), and cytoskeletal proteins (PEB), and the secretome. Protein extracts were trypsin digested, labeled with TMT 11-plex and fractionated prior to proteomics analysis on a Q Exactive. We provide data on protein abundance and localization of 4031 proteins in their different subcellular fractions, depicting dysregulation of proteins in abundance and/or localization in the most common sites of CRC metastasis. Alterations in abundance and localization for selected proteins were validated via WB, IF, IHC and ELISA using CRC cells and patients’ tissue and plasma samples. These results supported the relevance of the proteomics results in a real-life scenario of CRC metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
CRC cells were lysed and protein extracts from five subcellular localizations were obtained according to manufacturer’s instructions (Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Cultured Cells, Thermo Scientific). Cell secretomes were collected and proteins were methanol-chloroform precipitated and re-suspended in lysis buffer (RIPA, Sigma Aldrich) prior to use. For the TMT 11-Plex based quantitative proteomics, 20 μg of each protein extract in a final volume of 100 μl of RIPA were reduced with 10 μl 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Sigma Aldrich) during 45 min at 37ºC and 600 rpm and alkylated with 11 μL of 0.4 M chloroacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) during 30 min at room temperature (RT) and 600 rpm in darkness. SeraMag magnetic beads mix (50% hydrophilic beads - 50% hydrophobic beads, GE Healthcare) were used to improve protein digestion. Samples were incubated with 100 µL of SeraMag magnetic beads mix and 200 μL of acetonitrile 100% during 35 min at RT (room temperature) and 600 rpm to allow protein binding to the beads. Then, supernatants were discarded, and magnetic beads were washed twice with ethanol 70% and acetonitrile 100%. Finally, supernatants were discarded, and proteins joined to magnetic beads digested overnight at 37ºC and 600 rpm with 1 μg of porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 80 μl 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The next day, samples were sonicated, and supernatants collected. All peptides from the 11 samples were separately labeled with 11 different Tandem Mass Tags (Thermo Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA, Lot. UG288073), according to manufacturer's instructions. Finally, the content of the 11 tubes was pooled together, and dried under vacuum prior to separation using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce). Desiccated samples were reconstituted in 300 μl H2O, TFA 0.1% and digested peptides were separated into 12 fractions with the High pH Reversed-Phase columns according to their hydrophobicity. Finally, fractions were dried under vacuum and stored at -80ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In this study 3 different 11-Plex TMT experiments were performed to comprise the 6 subcellular fractions from the 5 different CRC cell lines employed. In addition, a pool of 20 μg of the CEB content of each CRC cell line (4 μg per CRC cell line) was included in the 3 TMT experiments. Peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, samples were loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Scientific) and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18, 15 cm long, 50 μm inner diameter and 2 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nl/min using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 0%-35% solvent B for 90 min, 35%-100% solvent B for 4 min, 100% solvent B for 8 min. Four microliters of each sample were injected. For ionization, 2000 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature were used. The full scan method employed a m/z 400-1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e3, isolation window of 2 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and greater than or equal to seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2019 database (20962 protein entries, downloaded: May 2019) using Reporter ion MS2 type. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme, allowing a mass tolerance of 20 ppm (Orbitrap). Precursor and reporter mass tolerance were set to 4.5 ppm and 0.003 Da, respectively, allowing 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, acetylation N-terminal and Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. Reporter ion intensities were bias corrected for the overlapping isotope contributions from the TMT tags according to manufacturer’s certificate. Unique and Razor peptides were considered for quantification. Minimal peptide length and maximal peptide mass were fixed to 7 amino acids and 4600 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction (PIF) with an FDR threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified with at least one peptide and an ion score above 99% were considered for evaluation, whereas proteins identified as potential contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The protein sequence coverage was estimated for specific proteins by the percentage of matching amino acids from the identified peptides having confidence greater than or equal to 95% divided by the total number of amino acids in the sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is the primary cause of colorectal cancer (CRC) death. The liver and lung, besides adjacent lymph nodes, are the most common sites of metastasis. Here, we aimed to study the lymph nodes, liver, and lung CRC metastasis by quantitative spatial proteomics analysis using CRC cell-based models that recapitulate these metastases. The isogenic KM12 cell system composed of the non-metastatic KM12C cells, liver metastatic KM12SM cells, and liver and lung metastatic KM12L4a cells, and the isogenic non-metastatic SW480 and lymph nodes metastatic SW620 cells, were used. Cells were fractionated to study by proteomics five subcellular fractions corresponding to cytoplasm, membrane, nucleus, chromatin-bound proteins, and cytoskeletal proteins, and the secretome. Trypsin digested extracts were labeled with TMT 11-plex and fractionated prior to proteomics analysis on a Q Exactive. We provide data on protein abundance and localization of 4710 proteins in their different subcellular fractions, depicting dysregulation of proteins in abundance and/or localization in the most common sites of CRC metastasis. After bioinformatics, alterations in abundance and localization for selected proteins from diverse subcellular localizations were validated via WB, IF, IHC, and ELISA using CRC cells, patient tissues, and plasma samples. Results supported the relevance of the proteomics results in an actual CRC scenario. It was particularly relevant that the measurement of GLG1 in plasma showed diagnostic ability of advanced stages of the disease, and that the mislocalization of MUC5AC and BAIAP2 in the nucleus and membrane, respectively, was significantly associated with poor prognosis of CRC patients. Our results demonstrate that the analysis of cell extracts dilutes protein alterations in abundance in specific localizations that might only be observed studying specific subcellular fractions, as here observed for BAIAP2, GLG1, PHYHIPL, TNFRSF10A, or CDKN2AIP, which are interesting proteins that should be further analyzed in CRC metastasis.

### Keywords
Tmt 11-plex, Spatial proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Cells

### Affiliations
Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Chronic Disease Programme, UFIEC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Ana Montero Calle

### Lab Head
Dr Rodrigo Barderas
Chronic Disease Programme, UFIEC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28220 Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.


