### Accession
PXD000778

### Title
Mouse SCN in LC-MSMS - The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) acts as the central clock to coordinate circadian oscillations in mammalian behavior, physiology and gene expression. Despite our knowledge of the circadian transcriptome of the SCN, how it impacts genome-wide protein expression is not well understood. Here, we interrogated the murine SCN proteome across the circadian cycle using SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Description
The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) acts as the central clock to coordinate circadian oscillations in mammalian behavior, physiology and gene expression. Despite our knowledge of the circadian transcriptome of the SCN, how it impacts genome-wide protein expression is not well understood. Here, we interrogated the murine SCN proteome across the circadian cycle using SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Male C57Bl/6J mice were entrained to a 12 h light:12 h dark (LD) cycle, and transferred them to constant darkness (DD) for two days. Starting at circadian time (CT) 2 on the third day of DD, we collected SCN tissues from four mice at 4 h intervals for a full circadian cycle. SCN samples were processed individually to yield four independent biological replicates for each time point (4 mice per Ct, n=24 total mice). SCN protein lysates (30 ug) were mixed with equal quantities of lysates prepared from Neuro2A cells that had previously been cultured for >10 passages in heavy SILAC medium. In this report, we performed an unbiased interrogation of the SCN proteome over a 24 h cycle using an alternative MS approach: a centrifugal proteomic reactor (CPR) coupled with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitation. The CPR, with its superior recovery of hydrophobic membrane proteins compared with other approaches (Zhou et al., 2011), was used for rapid protein preconcentration, derivatization, enzymatic digestion, and fractionation of the samples. Peptides were eluted from the CPR in ten fractions and analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography-electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) in a total of 240 runs.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed and analyzed by MaxQuant, Version 1.3.0.5 against the mouse International Protein Index protein sequence database (IPI Mouse, version 3.75), including commonly observed contaminants. The following parameters were used: cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; and the methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Up to two missing cleavages of trypsin were allowed. SILAC double labeling (light: K0R0; heavy: K8R10) was set as the search parameter in order to assess the conversion efficiency. The precursor ion mass tolerances were 6 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.8 Da for MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein was set at 1% and a minimum length of six amino acids was used for peptide identification. The proteingroup file was imported into Perseus (version 1.3.0.4) for statistical analysis of the data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Suprachiasmatic nucleus, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Circadian rhythm

### Affiliations
university of ottawa
Ottawa Institute of systems Biology, University of Ottawa

### Submitter
kerwin chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Ottawa Institute of systems Biology, University of Ottawa


