### Accession
PXD042270

### Title
Tectonic Complex Impedes Diffusion through the Ciliary Transition Zone to Ensure Proper Sorting of Membrane Proteins

### Description
The primary cilium is a signaling organelle with a unique membrane composition maintained by a diffusional barrier residing at the transition zone. Many transition zone proteins, such as the tectonic complex, are linked to preserving ciliary composition; however, whether these proteins regulate active transport or physically impede membrane diffusion remains unknown. To understand tectonic’s role, we generated a photoreceptor specific Tctn1 knockout mouse. Loss of Tctn1 resulted in an absence of the entire tectonic complex yet had minimal effects on transition zone structure. Interestingly, we found that protein composition of the photoreceptor cilium was disrupted as non-resident membrane proteins accumulated in the cilium over time, ultimately resulting in photoreceptor degeneration. We further show that membrane proteins moved faster through the transition zone illustrating that the tectonic complex acts as a physical barrier to slow diffusion of membrane proteins so they can be properly sorted by ciliary transport carriers.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Protein Digestion and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labeling: Purified outer segment samples (24.3 μg/condition) were proteolyzed and labeled with TMT 6-plex essentially by following manufacturer’s protocol (P190062, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, upon reduction (5 mM DTT, for 30 minutes at 45oC) and alkylation (15 mM 2-chloroacetamide, for 30 minutes at room temperature) of cysteines, the proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone followed by overnight incubation at -20ºC. The precipitate was spun down, and the pellet was allowed to air dry. The pellet was resuspended in 0.1 M TEAB and overnight (~16 hours) digestion with trypsin/Lys-C mix (1:25 protease:protein; Promega) at 37ºC was performed with constant mixing using a thermomixer. The TMT 6-plex reagents were dissolved in 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile and labeling was performed by transferring the entire digest to TMT reagent vial and incubating at room temperature for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 μL of 5% hydroxyl amine incubating for 15 minutes. Labeled samples were mixed together, and dried using a vacufuge. An offline fractionation of the combined sample (~200 μg) into 8 fractions was performed using high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (84868, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 9 μL of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile in preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples with TMT Mass tag were as follows: C57Bl6/J-1 (126), C57Bl6/J-2 (127), iCre/Tctn1het-1 (128), iCre/Tctn1het-2 (129), iCre/Tctn1flox-1 (130), iCre/Tctn1flox-2 (131). Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-multinotch MS3): In order to obtain superior quantitation accuracy, we employed multinotch-MS3 which minimizes the precursor ion interference that occurs from fragmentation of co-isolated peptides during MS analysis61. Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC (Dionex) was used to acquire the data.  2 μL of the sample was resolved on a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75μm i.d. x 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the flow-rate of 300 nl/min using 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile gradient system (2-22% acetonitrile in 150 min;22-32% acetonitrile in 40 min; 20 min wash at 90% followed by 50 min re-equilibration) and directly spray onto the mass spectrometer using EasySpray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Mass spectrometer was set to collect one MS1 scan (Orbitrap; 120K resolution; AGC target 2x105; max IT 100 ms) followed by data-dependent, “Top Speed” (3 seconds) MS2 scans (collision induced dissociation; ion trap; NCE 35; AGC 5x103; max IT 100 ms). For multinotch-MS3, top 10 precursors from each MS2 were fragmented by HCD followed by Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55; 60K resolution; AGC 5x104; max IT 120 ms, 100-500 m/z scan range). Since the TMT modification is used as a “fixed modification”, unlabeled peptides are not identified or used.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.4; Thermo Fisher) was used for data analysis.  MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt mouse protein database (Mus muscular ALL_UniProtKB 2021_03) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤1% FDR threshold. Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 6 and <50% isolation interference). A Welch’s t test and Benjamin Hochberg correction method was used to generated adjusted p-values.

### Publication Abstract
The primary cilium is a signaling organelle with a unique membrane composition maintained by a diffusional barrier residing at the transition zone. Many transition zone proteins, such as the tectonic complex, are linked to preserving ciliary composition but the mechanism remains unknown. To understand tectonic's role, we generate a photoreceptor-specific Tctn1 knockout mouse. Loss of Tctn1 results in the absence of the entire tectonic complex and associated MKS proteins yet has minimal effects on the transition zone structure of rod photoreceptors. We find that the protein composition of the photoreceptor cilium is disrupted as non-resident membrane proteins accumulate in the cilium over time, ultimately resulting in photoreceptor degeneration. We further show that fluorescent rhodopsin moves faster through the transition zone in photoreceptors lacking tectonic, which suggests that the tectonic complex acts as a physical barrier to slow down membrane protein diffusion in the photoreceptor transition zone to ensure proper removal of non-resident membrane proteins.

### Keywords
Tectonic, Photoreceptor, Cilia

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA  Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

### Submitter
Jillian Pearring

### Lab Head
Dr Jillian N. Pearring
Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA  Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA


