### Accession
PXD042236

### Title
Monitoring SUMO-2 proteome changes during adenovirus infection using WT and an E1B-55k mutant.

### Description
The human adenovirus type 5 (HAdV-C5) early region 1B 55-kDa protein (E1B-55K) is a multifunctional protein that promotes viral replication and adenovirus-mediated cell transformation through various mechanisms that primarily counteract host intrinsic and innate immunity. These include post-translational activities that exploit the host cell ubiquitin- and SUMO-conjugation machineries to regulate antiviral cellular restriction factors. However, despite significant advancements in this field, several underlying mechanisms governing these processes remain unidentified to date. Here, we performed SILAC-based quantitative SUMO proteomics to better understand cellular consequences of E1B-55K-mediated host cell modulation and adenovirus infection in general. We assessed cellular proteins for abundance changes and SUMO2 conjugate proteome changes during infection with wild type HAdV-C5 or E1B-55K deletion mutants. We provide evidence that changes in the SUMOylated proteome have the potential to regulate the DNA damage response, cell cycle control, chromatin assembly, and gene transcription. Strikingly, we identified a SUMO-dependent ubiquitin-mediated degradation mechanism for some SUMO substrates, suggesting that E1B-55K may use multiple mechanisms to alter the activity of restrictive cellular pathways.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and viral infections HeLa cells overexpressing 6His-SUMO2 were cultured in SILAC DMEM medium lacking L-lysine and L-arginine. These amino acids were replaced by either light (L) or heavy (H) stable isotope-labeled forms. Mock-infected cells were cultured in heavy DMEM SILAC medium, containing 13C6 15N2-lysine, Lys8 and 13C6 15N4 arginine, Arg10, whereas cells either infected with the WT or ΔE1B-55K virus were cultured in light DMEM SILAC medium containing isotopically normal lysine and arginine (Lys0, Arg0) (Fig. 1). DMEM SILAC cell culture medium was supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin and 2 µM puromycin. The cells were cultured in their corresponding medium for a period of six cell divisions (7 days) prior to being seeded into 40 x 150 mm cell culture dishes for each condition. The cells were infected with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20 with either the WT or ΔE1B-55K mutant virus, or mock-infected. Cells were harvested at 48 h p.i.  Enrichment of putative SUMO conjugates by nickel affinity purification  Cells were washed with PBS before lysis in guanidinium hydrochloride buffer (denaturing GuHCl Ni2+ sample buffer) and stored at -80°C until further use. Equal amounts of heavy (mock-infected) and light (WT or ΔE1B-55K) labeled protein lysates were mixed and sonicated. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation and sterile filtration (0.45 µm). 50 µl of pre-equilibrated Ni2+-nitrilotriacetic (NTA) agarose beads were added to filtered lysates and were incubated at 4°C for 24 h. Afterwards, agarose beads were pelleted by centrifugation and washed once with denaturing Ni2+ sample buffer, followed by subsequent washes with buffers at decreasing pH. Proteins that bound to the beads were eluted in 40 µl of Ni2+ resin elution buffer and stored at -20°C.  Proteomic analysis Prior to Ni2+ purification, crude cell extract samples were prepared by adding 400 µl of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to 35 µl of mixed protein lysates and incubation on ice for 20 min. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C and washed in 4ºC 100% ethanol. After another centrifugation step, supernatants were discarded and pellets were dried in a gyrovap centrifuge and then resuspended in 80 µl of LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, CA, USA). 35 µl of the Ni2+-NTA purified proteins, 30 µg of crude samples, and 20 µl of crude mixtures were resolved on a 10% SDS gel and Coomassie-stained. Lanes were sliced into sections 1-12 and peptides were extracted by tryptic digestion including alkylation with iodoacetamide and resuspended in 35 µl acidic solution. Peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system via an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running a 75 μm x 500 mm EASY-Spray column at 45°C. Data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. Full scan spectra (m/z 300–1,800) were acquired with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target value of 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms). The 10 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and measured with a resolution of R = 17,500 at m/z 200 (target value of 500,000, maximum injection time of 60 ms) and intensity threshold of 2.1x104. Peptide match was set to ‘preferred’ and a 40-second dynamic exclusion list was applied. For each experiment, two runs were performed with elution gradients of 90 min and 240 min.

### Data Protocol
All 96 raw mass spectrometry (MS) data files were processed together using MaxQuant (v 1.3.0.5) with the built-in Andromeda peptide search engine. The human UniProt proteome was searched along with proteins encoded by HAdV-C5. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin-P. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification with methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The initial maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 20 parts per million (ppm) for peptide masses and 0.5 Da for MS/MS peaks. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required at both the protein and peptide levels. ‘Requantify’ was applied and the ‘match between runs’ option was selected with a time window of two minutes. The experimental design template was set such that gel slices from the Ni2+-NTA purifications were numbered 1 to 12 for both experiments and 101 to 112 for the crude extracts so matching only occurred between adjacent slices of the same fraction type across both experiments. Outliers in the data were selected based on significance B (SigB) <0.01 and log2 L/H ratio >1.

### Publication Abstract
Human adenoviruses (HAdVs) generally cause mild and self-limiting diseases of the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts but pose a serious risk to immunocompromised patients and children. Moreover, they are widely used as vectors for vaccines and vector-based gene therapy approaches. It is therefore vital to thoroughly characterize HAdV gene products and especially HAdV virulence factors. Early region 1B 55 kDa protein (E1B-55K) is a multifunctional HAdV-encoded oncoprotein involved in various viral and cellular pathways that promote viral replication and cell transformation. We analyzed the E1B-55K dependency of SUMOylation, a post-translational protein modification, in infected cells using quantitative proteomics. We found that HAdV increases overall cellular SUMOylation and that this increased SUMOylation can target antiviral cellular pathways that impact HAdV replication. Moreover, we showed that E1B-55K orchestrates the SUMO-dependent degradation of certain cellular antiviral factors. These results once more emphasize the key role of E1B-55K in the regulation of viral and cellular proteins in productive HAdV infections.

### Keywords
Sumo adenovirus e1b-55k

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Division of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee,

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Thomas
Division of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee,


