### Accession
PXD022382

### Title
Memo1 promotes FGF23-driven signaling by oxidative modulation of small Rho-GTPases and protein tyrosine phosphatase activity

### Description
Memo is a copper-dependent redox enzyme modulating receptor tyrosine kinase signaling by unknown mechanisms (Meira et al., Nat Cell Biol 2004; MacDonald et al., Science Signal 2014). Memo1 deletion causes a phenotype partially resembling Klotho and Fgf23-deficient mice (Haenzi et al., FASEB J 2014; Moor et al., JBMR Plus 2018) and increases renal abundance of Rho-GTPase RhoA but prevents FGF23-dependent renal ERK phosphorylation and Rho-GTPase Rac1 activation (unpublished).  To delineate potential effects of Memo’s redox function on FGF23-driven cellular signaling processes, we performed a redox proteomics screen which identified differently oxidized Rho-GTPase chaperone protein ARHGDIA/Rho-GDP dissociation inhibitor 1 (RhoGDI) as an interaction partner of Memo. RhoGDI is regulated by cysteine oxidation and phosphorylation. Here, we investigated the potential interaction between MEMO and RhoGDI by co-incubation of recombinant proteins MEMO and RhoGDI in cell-free environment to assess the Cys79 oxidation state of RhoGDI.

### Sample Protocol
We treated Recombinant human RhoGDI protein (Novusbio) with Hydrogen peroxide solution (Sigma), with Memo protein (Antibodies-online) or with Memo protein and CuCL2. First 2µg Memo was incubated with RCM buffer with or without 10µM CuCL2. After 30 minutes incubation on 4°C the excess CuCl2 was removed by Slide-A-Lyzer™ MINI Dialysis Device, 3.5K MWCO (Thermo Scientific) against RCM buffer for 30 minutes on 4°C. We prepared the following samples: 1000ng RhoGDI; 1000ng RhoGDI with 250ng Memo; 1000ng RhoGDI with 250ng CuCl2 treated Memo; and 1000ng RhoGDI with 100µM. All samples were prepared in duplicates to label the total cysteine and the oxidized cysteine content of RhoGDI. The samples were incubated for 15 minutes on room temperature, then RCM buffer was added to the samples to reach nine times dilution of RhoGDI and the mixtures were incubated for 30 minutes on room temperature.  The samples for total cysteine content labeling were reduced with 5mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma) for 1 hour on 50°C. The total cysteine content of the samples was labeled with iodoTMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagents (Thermo Scientific) for 1 hour on 37°C, followed by quenching with 20mM 1,4-Dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 15 minutes on 37°C.  The samples for oxidized cysteine content labeling were treated with 500mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 minutes on 37°C followed by quenching with 20mM 1,4-Dithiothreitol for 5 minutes on room temperature and reducing with 5mM TCEP for 1 hour on 50°C. The oxidized cysteine content of the samples was labeled with iodoTMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagents for 1 hour on 37°C. Samples were precipitated with SDS-PAGE Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) following the manufacturer’s protocol. We ran the samples on 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained the gel with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G 250 staining. The bands were cut out of the gel. The gel pieces were digested by chymotrypsin at 50°C for 5hours. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with two injections of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) by applying a 20-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 1.6 m/z, first mass 100m/z, collision energy 28, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Spectra interpretation was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 against a homo sapiens fasta database downloaded from SwissProt version 2017/10/25 complemented with a fasta db with commonly found contaminants, like proteases, keratins and molecular weight standards and its reversed decoy sequences. The settings were by default except the digestion with chymotrypsin rule allowing until 8 missed cleavages, the variable modification of carboamidomethylation (+57.021Da), dioxidation (+31.990Da), trioxydation (+47.985Da) and iodoTMT labelling (+324.216Da) on Cys, and variable modification of oxidation (+15.99Da) on Met, and acetylation (+42.011Da) on protein N-Term. Parent and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10ppm and 0.02Da, respectively. A false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches was set to 0.01 using the matches on the decoy database. Protein identifications were only accepted when two unique peptides fulfilling the 1% FDR criterium were identified.  Results were exported at peptides and PSM level into excel file for the Recombinant human RhoGDI protein. Peptides were reported by intensities and spectrum counting. Results are displayed as PSM counts for each cysteine oxidation state normalized for total PSM counts.

### Publication Abstract
Memo1 deletion in mice causes premature aging and an unbalanced metabolism partially resembling Fgf23 and Klotho loss-of-function animals. We report a role for Memo's redox function in renal FGF23-Klotho signaling using mice with postnatally induced Memo deficiency in the whole body (cKO). Memo cKO mice showed impaired FGF23-driven renal ERK phosphorylation and transcriptional responses. FGF23 actions involved activation of oxidation-sensitive protein phosphotyrosyl phosphatases in the kidney. Redox proteomics revealed excessive thiols of Rho-GDP dissociation inhibitor 1 (Rho-GDI1) in Memo cKO, and we detected a functional interaction between Memo's redox function and oxidation at Rho-GDI1 Cys79. In isolated cellular systems, Rho-GDI1 did not directly affect FGF23-driven cell signaling, but we detected disturbed Rho-GDI1 dependent small Rho-GTPase protein abundance and activity in the kidney of Memo cKO mice. Collectively, this study reveals previously unknown layers in the regulation of renal FGF23 signaling and connects Memo with the network of small Rho-GTPases.

### Keywords
Cysteine oxidation, Arhgdia, Memo1, Rhogdi1, Redox signaling

### Affiliations
University Hospital Bern
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Moor
University Hospital Bern


