### Accession
PXD015082

### Title
identification of the endogenous insoluble host targets of the Salmonella effectors SSeK3

### Description
Strains of Salmonella utilise two distinct type three secretion systems to deliver effector proteins directly into host cells. The Salmonella effector SseK3 is a arginine glycosyltransferase that modify mammalian proteins with N-acetyl glucosamine (GlcNAc). Here, we used Arg-GlcNAc glycopeptide immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry appraoch to identify host proteins GlcNAcylated by endogenous levels of SseK3 during Salmonella infection. Focusing on the insoluble proteome we demostrate multiple typically insoluble proteins are targetted by SseK3 during infections. Surpisingly unlike SseK1 and the EPEC homologue NleB1 which target death domain contain proteins SseK3 appears to modify a number of proteins lacking death domains. These results demostrate that under endogenous infection non-death domain containing proteins can be modified by Salmonella.

### Sample Protocol
Insoluble membrane pellets from Infection samples were solubilised in 6M guanidinium chloride buffer by boiling and preciated overnight with ice-cold acetone. Samples were reduction and alykation with TCEP and CAA then Digested with Trypsin. Samples were cleaned up with tC18 Seppak columns and dried. Arg-glycosylated glycopeptide were affinity purified and then subjected to MS analsysis.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant based identificiation and LFQ based quantification of Arginine-glycopeptides

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Salmonella, Proteomics, Glycosylation, Ssek3, Arg-glcnac

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, HudsonInstitute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth L Hartland
Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, HudsonInstitute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia


