### Accession
PXD024286

### Title
Distinct sub-cellular autophagy impairments occur independently of protein aggregation in aged induced neurons from patients with Huntington’s disease

### Description
Huntington’s disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative disorder that is caused by CAG expansions in the huntingtin (HTT) gene. Modelling HD in the lab has proven challenging as rodent models poorly reproduce the disease process and cellular models fail to include age-dependent processes crucial to the expression of the disease clinically. Here we generated induced neurons (iNs) through direct reprogramming of skin fibroblasts from HD-patients. This resulted in the generation of patient-derived HD neurons that retained age-dependent epigentic characteristics of the donors. Using these cells, we then undertook a proteomic analysis and demonstrated there was an alteration in the CAMKK-AMPK pathway and autophagy in these HD-iNs, compared to healthy control iN cells. In line with this, HD-iNs displayed a distinct subcellular alteration in autophagy, specifically in the neurites, characterized by a reduction in the transport of late autophagic structures between neurites and the soma and subsequent cargo degradation. In addition to which the HD-iNs displayed shorter, smaller and fewer neurites. CRISPRi-mediated silencing of HTT (both wt and mutant) did not rescue the morphology nor could this rescue the autophagic defect in HD-iNs and indeed resulted in additional autophagy alterations when done using ctrl-iNs, highlighting the importance of wild type HTT in neuronal autophagy. In summary, our results have identified a distinct subcellular autophagy impairment in aged patient derived HD-neurons. In addition, we have shown a role for normal wt Htt in autophagy. Together this work provides a new rational for future development of autophagy activation therapies while also highlighting problems that may arise using non allele specific htt silencing approaches, some of which are now in clinical trials.

### Sample Protocol
Samples C1-C7 and HD1-2, HD5-7, and HD9-10 were used for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Fibroblasts (500,000 cells) and iNs converted in T75 flasks (600,000 fibroblasts cells plated for conversion per sample) were dissociated as previously described and prepared for quantitative proteomic analysis as follows. The cells were carefully washed off and collected in a tube with either trypsin or accutase and spun at 400 x g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellets were washed three times with DPBS. After the final wash, the supernatant was aspirated, and the pellets were frozen on dry ice and stored at -80 °C until use. The cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL lysis buffer (50 mM DTT, 2 %SDS, 100 mM Tris pH = 8.6), rested for 1 min on ice and sonicated (20 cycles: 15 seconds on/off; Bioruptor plus model UCD-300, Diagenode). Reduction and alkylation of disulfide bridges was performed by incubating the samples at 95 °C for 5 min, followed the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubation for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were processed using S-Trap Mini Spin Columns (ProtiFi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were acidified by adding phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2%, 7 volumes of binding buffer (90% MeOH, 100 mM TEAB, pH = 7.1) was added to the samples, which were then transferred to the S-Traps, and spun at 4000 x g for 30 seconds. The trapped proteins were washed three times with the binding buffer. Protein digestion was performed by adding trypsin (Promega Biotech AB) 1:50 (enzyme:protein ratio) in 125 µL of 50 mM TEAB and incubating for 16 hours at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted with 0.2% of aqueous formic acid and 0.2% of formic acid in 50:50 water : acetonitrile. Following speed vacuum concentration peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, quantified with the Pierce Quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 1 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system. Peptides were analyzed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UPLC system in line-coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were first trapped on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. × 2 cm, nanoViper) trap column and separated following a non-linear 120-minute gradient on an EASY-spray RSLC C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. × 25 cm) analytical column. The flow rate was 300 nL/min and the temperature was set to 45 °C. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method was applied, where MS1 scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 (@ 200 m/z) using a mass range of 375-1500 m/z, the target AGC value was set to 3E+06, and the maximum injection time (IT) was 100 milliseconds. The 20 most intense peaks were fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000, a target AGC value of 1E+05, and a maximum IT of 50 milliseconds. The ion selection threshold was set to 8E+03 and the dynamic exclusion was 40 seconds, while single charged ions were excluded from the analysis. The precursor isolation window was set to 1.2 Th. Each sample was analyzed in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative label-free quantification was performed by means of the Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using SEQUEST HT as the search engine and a human protein database download from UniProt on 2019-01-15. For the search trypsin was selected as the protease, two missed cleavages were allowed, the tolerance was fixed at 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.02 Da for MS2, carbamidomethyl-cysteine was set as static modification while methionine oxidation, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as dynamic modifications. Peptides and corresponding proteins were identified with 1% of FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by CAG expansions in the huntingtin (HTT) gene. Modelling Huntington's disease is challenging, as rodent and cellular models poorly recapitulate the disease as seen in ageing humans. To address this, we generated induced neurons through direct reprogramming of human skin fibroblasts, which retain age-dependent epigenetic characteristics. Huntington's disease induced neurons (HD-iNs) displayed profound deficits in autophagy, characterized by reduced transport of late autophagic structures from the neurites to the soma. These neurite-specific alterations in autophagy resulted in shorter, thinner and fewer neurites specifically in HD-iNs. CRISPRi-mediated silencing of HTT did not rescue this phenotype but rather resulted in additional autophagy alterations in control induced neurons, highlighting the importance of wild-type HTT in normal neuronal autophagy. In summary, our work identifies a distinct subcellular autophagy impairment in adult patient derived Huntington's disease neurons and provides a new rationale for future development of autophagy activation therapies.

### Keywords
Lentiviral vector, Proteogenomics, Direct neural reprogramming, Huntington disease, Crispr interference, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Lund University
Dept of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Lund University, Sweden

### Submitter
Jeovanis Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Jakobsson
Dept of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Lund University, Sweden


