### Accession
PXD005923

### Title
Analysis of the Gulf toadfish intestinal proteome response to chronic hypersalinity exposure

### Description
The marine teleost intestine plays a vital role in whole body salt and water homeostasis. Marine fish must drink seawater in order to rehydrate, and processing of that seawater throughout the gastrointestinal tract allows for the extraction of water from this highly hyperosmotic source. Although the molecular mechanisms of this process have been the subject of much investigation, numerous questions remain. Here, Gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta) were acclimated to normal seawater (35 ppt) of hypersaline seawater (60 ppt) and changes in the anterior intestine, posterior intestine, and intestinal fluid proteomes were investigated using a shotgun proteomics approach employing isobaric TMT tags.

### Sample Protocol
Gulf toadfish (n=12) were acclimated to normal seawater (35 ppt) or hypersaline seawater (60 ppt) for 10 days (n=6 per salinity). After which, anterior intestinal epithelium, posterior intestinal epithelium and intestinal fluid was collected and samples from two fish were pooled, resulting in n=3 control samples, and n=3 hypersaline samples. Epithelial samples were cryogenically ground, and sonicated in a homogenization buffer containing 1% octylglucoside, where intestinal fluid samples were analyzed directly. Proteins were trypsin digested and labeled with isobaric TMT 6plex tags (control: 126, 127, 130; hypersalinity: 128, 129, 131) and then combined. Samples derived from the different tissues were analyzed separately. Combined samples were offline, high-pH reverse phase fractionated and then subjected to online low-pH reverse phase fractionation and eluted into an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent acquisition mode with HCD activation.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped using MSConvert (ProteoWizard). MS/MS data was searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.01) against a reverse concatenated database (~346k sequences, excluding reverse sequences) derived from Opsanus beta transcriptomic sequencing that was translated into all 6 possible reading frames. Trypsin digestion was assumed allowing for a maximum of one missed cleavage per peptide. Parent ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance to 0.8 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and TMT 6plex labeling of lysine residues and peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. Raw search data was loaded into Scaffold (version 4.7.3; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) and filtered to only include peptides with greater than 50% identification probability (as determined via the methods embed in Scaffold) and proteins with greater that 95% identification confidence and a minimum of two assigned peptides. MudPIT analysis was enabled so data from all 12 fractions per sample type were combined. Filtered data was then exported and loaded into the isobar R package for quantification and statistical analysis. The isobar package was used to correct for TMT tag impurities (as given by the manufacturer), and data was normalized by imposing equal median intensities for each of the six channels. The built-in tools in isobar were then used to create noise models for spectra, calculate individual protein ratio estimators to inform on ratio accuracy, and model biological sample variability to identify differentially regulated proteins. The resulting output consists of a signal p-value (a measure of reporter ion quality) as well as a sample p-value (summarizing biological variability) for each protein identified in the analysis. Proteins with both a signal and sample p-value of <0.05 were considered to be significantly differentially regulated between the two acclimation salinities.

### Publication Abstract
Marine bony fish live in a hyperosmotic environment and maintain osmotic homeostasis by drinking seawater, and absorbing salt and water across their gastrointestinal tract. Although the ion and water transport mechanisms in the intestine have been the subject of much study, numerous questions remain unanswered. To address some of these questions, a shotgun proteomics methodology employing isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) was used to interrogate the anterior intestine, posterior intestine, and intestinal fluid proteomes of Gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta) acclimated to normal (35&#x202f;ppt) or hypersaline (60&#x202f;ppt) seawater. Relative protein abundance between tissues was also investigated using label free quantitation. Protein products from nearly 3000 unique toadfish loci were identified and quantified between the tissues, and pathway analysis was performed to gain insight into biological significance. Numerous proteins potentially involved in ion transport, digestion, nutrient absorption, and intestinal CaCO<sub>3</sub> precipitation were found to respond to changing salinity, providing additional insight into the molecular mechanisms behind these processes. Intestinal protein heterogeneity was also observed with proteins involved in ion transport responding to hypersalinity exposure primarily in the anterior intestine, and proteins involved in digestion and nutrient absorption showing higher abundance in the anterior intestine, regardless of salinity.

### Keywords
Teleost, Marine, Intestine, Intestinal fluid, Opsanus beta, Gulf toadfish, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Hypersalinity

### Affiliations
Department of Marine Biology and Ecology, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science, University of Miami

### Submitter
Kevin Schauer

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Grosell
Department of Marine Biology and Ecology, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA


