### Accession
PXD014274

### Title
Proteomic and unbiased post-translational modification profiling of amyloid plaques and surrounding tissue in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Amyloid plaques (Aβ plaques) are one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The main constituent of Aβ plaques is beta-amyloid peptides but a complex interplay of other infiltrating proteins also co-localizes. We focused on proteomic differences between Aβ plaques and adjacent control tissue in the transgenic mouse model of AD (APPPS1-21) and in similar regions from non-transgenic littermates. A microproteomic strategy included isolation of regions of interest by laser capture microdissection and analyzed by label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. An in-solution digest protocol with a buffer containing an acid-labile surfactant was used to increase protein solubilization and protease efficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were anesthetized with avertin (i.p. administration of 2% solution; 1ml/100g) and perfused in KPBS/heparin. Brains were fresh frozen on dry ice and stored at -80°C until further use. Tissue sectioning The mouse brains were embedded with Tissue-Tek OCT (Sakura) and left for temperature adaption at -16°C for 30 minutes. The samples were cut into 25-µm thick sagittal sections using a cryostat microtome (Leica CM3050 S) and mounted on polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) membrane glass slides (Thermo Fisher, Denmark). Three sections from each hemisphere were applied to a PEN membrane glass slide and fixed with 70% EtOH and 99% EtOH for one minutes in each solution. Next, they were dried at RT and stored at -80°C until further us  LCM of mouse brain tissue sections      The PEN membrane glass slides containing tissue sections were defrosted by RT adjustment and a dip wash in ddH2O prior to staining with a 1% thioflavin-T solution for 10 minutes in darkness. The thioflavin-t solution was removed by rinsing the slides in ddH2O three times for three minutes each. The tissue was then air dried at RT for 45 minutes.  Three types of regions (Aβ plaques and adjacent control regions from the APPPS1-21 mice, and similar control areas from the non-tg littermates) were microdissected and collected into CapSureTM Macro LCM caps (Thermo Fisher, Denmark) using the Arcturus Veritas LCM system. A 20X magnification was utilized and 50 regions were extracted from each section with an average area of 5791.2 µm2 per extracted plaque, 6449.4 µm2 per extracted adjacent control area and 5560.7 µm2 per extracted WT littermate. Both diffuse and neuritic plaques were included in the microdissection. The caps containing the microdissected material were incubated in 50 µl digestion buffer (0.01% ProteaseMaxTM in 50 mM TEAB buffer, pH 8.5) O/N at 37°C. 10 µl of fresh digestion buffer was manually resuspended 5 times on the cap surface to ensure release of potential remaining material (total volume = 100 µl) and collected in 1.5 ml Eppendorf LoBind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). An in-solution digest protocol was utilized for each tube. In brief, the tubes were sonicated for 2 minutes, heat treated at 95°C for 5 minutes and allowed to cool to RT. The samples were reduced and alkylated in 1:50 TCEP (0.5M) and 1:10 CAA (0.5M) and incubated in darkness for 30 minutes at 37°C. One µl trypsin (0.1 µg/µl) was added and incubated O/N at 37°C. TFA (final concentration = 1%) was added and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C to stop the reaction of ProteaseMaxTM and trypsin. Finally, the tubes were inserted into a SpeedVac (miVac, GeneVac), dried for 6 hours and stored at -80°C until further use. The dried material was reconstituted in 12 µl loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 0.1% FA) prior to MS analysis.  Data acquisition by LC-MS/MS A pooled sample was created for each subregional group by adding 2 µl from each reconstituted sample into one 0.5 ml tube (Eppendorf). These samples were utilized to create two spectral libraries per subregion in the data analysis. Nine µl sample material was added to 96-well plate with a random order. Samples were analyzed on quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF Plus, Thermo Scientific) connected to an RSLC UHPLC nanopump system (Dionex).  Runs of each sample were loaded onto the C18 reversed phase column (Dionex; Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm precolumn and 75 cm Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, 75 μm ID main column, Thermo Scientific) and eluted with a linear gradient of 96% solvent A (1% formic acid) and 4% solvent B (ACN) (Bennike et al. 2015), increasing solvent B to 35% on a 30-min ramp gradient. The MS was operated in DDA, selecting the 10 precursor-ions with the highest intensity for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Full MS settings were as follows: resolutions = 60 000; AGC target = 60 ms; scan range 375 to 1500 m/z. The following dd-MS2 settings were used: resolution = 30 000; AGC target = 1e5; loop count = 10; isolation window = 1.5 m/z; scan range 200 – 2000 m/z. The maximum IT was set to 120 ms for all samples except the two spectral library samples which were acquired at 250 ms and 500 ms, respectively. The following dd settings were used: underfill ratio = 30.0%; charge exclusion unassigned, 1, 7, 8, >8; peptide match = preferred; exclude isotopes = on. Intensity threshold was set to 2.5e5 for all samples except the two spectral libraries which were acquired at 1.2e5 or 6.0e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10.0 s for all samples except the two spectral libraries which were either excluded or set 5.0 s, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Datafiles were processed in MaxQuant (v1.6.5.0) (Cox and Mann 2008). The fasta file, containing the UniProt mus musculus database (UP_000000589), was downloaded the 4th of September 2017 and contained 16.911 entries. The human amyloid beta A4 protein/amyloid precursor protein and presenilin 1 (Ps1) sequences were added due to the co-expression of these proteins in the APPPS1-21 mouse model while the mouse amyloid beta A4 protein/amyloid precursor protein was removed. Bioinformatic and statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (v1.6.5.0) (Tyanova et al. 2016). Potential contaminants and reverse sequences were removed followed by filtering the dataset by minimum 50% valid values and presence of >1 unique peptides. Hierarchical clustering was applied together with Pearson correlation analysis to identify potential outliers. A sample was considered as an outlier if the average Pearson correlation coefficients were <0.8 compared to the corresponding samples in the group (Aβ plaque vs Aβ plaque, adjacent control vs adjacent control and non-tg vs non-tg). The normal distributed data (histograms not shown) was analyzed with two-sampled test (two-sided student’s t-test; minimum valid value filter = 70%; Permutation-based FDR = 0.05).  The same MaxQuant settings, except the match between run function, were used to elucidate the consequence of excluding this feature. The filtering was used as previously described in the Perseus software.  STRING (v11.0) enrichment analysis was used for pathway analysis (Szklarczyk et al. 2015). The five Biological Process (GO)-associations with lowest FDR were selected for both up- and downregulated proteins.  The subsequent data analysis was performed in BSI PEAKS Studio X (v8.5; Bioinformatics Solution). Data was imported, analyzed with PEAKS Denovo, PEAKS DB search, PEAKS PTM and PEAKS SPIDER. The following settings were used: parent mass error tolerance 10.00 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance = 0.02 Da; fragment mass search type monoisotopic; trypsin with [D, P]; max missed cleavages 3; semi specific digestion mode; fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (57.02); Variable modification: citrullination (0.98), oxidation (M; 15.99), phosphorylation (STY; 79.97); max variable PTM per peptide = 3. The database that was used for the MaxQuant previously was similarly used for the PEAKS analysis. The following settings were applied for visualization: FDR = 0.1%; PTM ion intensity ≥ 1%; Proteins = 10logP ≥ 20; unique peptides ≥ 1; De novo ALC ≥ 50%; -10logP ≤ 18.4. Similar settings were applied to PEAKS PTM analysis although the variable modifications now included 312 different PTMs.  The quantification analysis of Aβ plaques and adjacent control was performed by using the PEAKS DB and PEAKS PTM searches as references. The FDR was set to 0.1%. The following settings were used for visualization: Significance ≥ 20; fold change ≥ 1; significance method = PEAKSQ; At least 1 unique peptide. Proteins of interest were selected and the PTM profile was acquired by using minimal Ascore = 20.0.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloid plaques are one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD). The main constituent of amyloid plaques is amyloid-&#x3b2; peptides, but a complex interplay of other infiltrating proteins also co-localizes. We hypothesized that proteomic analysis could reveal differences between amyloid plaques and adjacent control tissue in the transgenic mouse model of AD (APPPS1-21) and in similar regions from non-transgenic littermates. Our microproteomic strategy included isolation of regions of interest by laser capture microdissection and analysis by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry-based label-free relative quantification. We consistently identified 183, 224, and 307 proteins from amyloid plaques, adjacent control and non-tg samples, respectively. Pathway analysis revealed 27 proteins that were significantly regulated when comparing amyloid plaques and corresponding adjacent control regions. We further elucidated that co-localized proteins were subjected to post-translational modifications and are the first to report 193 and 117 unique modifications associated to amyloid plaques and adjacent control extracts, respectively. The three most common modifications detected in proteins from the amyloid plaques were oxidation, deamidation, and pyroglutamylation. Together, our data provide novel information about the biological processes occurring within and around amyloid plaques in the APPPS1-21 mouse model of AD.

### Keywords
Amyloid plaque, Alzheimer’s disease, Laser capture microdissection, Mass spectrometry, Post transcriptional modifications

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry; Aalgorg University
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry; Aalgorg University


