### Accession
PXD016087

### Title
Trans-Zeatin-N-Glucosides have biological activity in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Cytokinin is an indispensable phytohormone responsible for a number of physiological processes ranging from root development to leaf senescence. The term “cytokinin” refers to several dozen adenine-derived compounds which occur naturally in plants, including the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Cytokinins (CKs) can be divided up into various classes and forms; the base forms are generally considered to be active while highly abundant cytokinin-N-glucosides (CKNGs), which are composed of a CK base irreversibly conjugated to a glucose molecule, are considered inactive. However, results from early CK studies suggest CKNGs do not always lack activity despite the perpetuation in the literature that they are inactive. Here we show that exogenous application of CKNGs to Arabidopsis tissue results in a CK response comparable to the application of an active CK base. These results are most apparent in senescence assays in which both a CK base (tZ) and CKNGs (tZ7G, tZ9G) delay senescence in cotyledons. Further physiological experiments involving root growth and shoot regeneration revealed CKNGs do not always have the same effects as CK bases, and these compounds have largely distinct effects on the transcriptome, as well as the proteome. These data are in direct contradiction to previous reports of CKNGs being inactive and raise questions about the function of these compounds as well as their mechanism of action. Because CKNGs make up the majority of CKs in Arabidopsis and other Angiosperms, it is especially important to understand their physiological effects in order to have a more holistic understanding of this essential phytohormone.

### Sample Protocol
Totalprotein extracts were prepared as described previously (Cerna et al., 2017) with some modifications. Briefly, 100 mg of homogenized tissue was precipitated with 1 ml of methanol/methyl tert-butyl ether/water (1:3:1), pellets were solubilized [2% (w/v) SDS, 30% (w/v) sucrose, 5% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0], proteins were extracted with phenol, precipitated, and the resulting pellets were solubilized. Next, aliquots corresponding to 100 µg of protein were reduced, alkylated with iodoacetamide, digested with trypsin (1:100, Promega) and desalted by C18 SPE. Finally, aliquots corresponding to 2.5 μg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a 15 cm column (Zorbax, Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo) and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. Peptides were eluted with up to a 120-min, 4% to 40% acetonitrile gradient. Spectra were acquired using the default settings for peptide identification, employing HCD activation, resolution 60000 (MS) and 15000 (MS2), and 60 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against database of 2,119 previously identified proteins and Araport 11 Arabidopsis  protein database by Proteome Discoverer 2.3, employing Sequest HT, Mascot 2.4 and MS Amanda 2.0 with the following parameters: Enzyme - trypsin, max two missed cleavage sites; MS1 tolerance - 5 ppm; MS2 tolerance - 15 ppm (MS Amanda), 0.1 Da (Sequest, Mascot); Modifications - carbamidomethyl (Cys) and up to three dynamic modifications including Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation, N-terminal acetylation. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered for the quantitative analysis. The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and background based t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Cytokinin is an indispensable phytohormone responsible for physiological processes ranging from root development to leaf senescence. The term "cytokinin" refers to several dozen adenine-derived compounds occurring naturally in plants. Cytokinins (CKs) can be divided into various classes and forms; base forms are generally considered to be active while highly abundant cytokinin-N-glucosides (CKNGs), composed of a CK base irreversibly conjugated to a glucose molecule, are considered inactive. However, results from early CK studies suggest CKNGs do not always lack activity despite the perpetuation over several decades in the literature that they are inactive. Here we show that exogenous application of trans-Zeatin-N-glucosides (tZNGs, a specific class of CKNGs) to Arabidopsis results in CK response comparable to the application of an active CK base. These results are most apparent in senescence assays where both a CK base (tZ) and tZNGs (tZ7G, tZ9G) delay senescence in cotyledons. Further experiments involving root growth and shoot regeneration revealed tZNGs do not always have the same effects as tZ, and have largely distinct effects on the transcriptome and proteome. These data are in contrast to previous reports of CKNGs being inactive and raise questions about the function of these compounds as well as their mechanism of action.

### Keywords
Trans-zeatin, Senescence, Transcriptome, Cytokinin glucoside, Proteome, Conjugation, Ytokinin

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Dept. of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology Mendel University in Brno Zemedelska 1 613 00 Brno Czech Republic

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Dept. of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology Mendel University in Brno Zemedelska 1 613 00 Brno Czech Republic


