### Accession
PXD018066

### Title
On-chip sample preparation using a ChipFilter coupled to NanoLC-MS/MS for bottom-up proteomics

### Description
Sample preparation is a crucial step in bottom-up proteomics. Analytical performances of bottom-up proteomics can be improved by the miniaturization of sample preparation steps. Many microfluidic devices are proposed in the field of proteomics. But many of them are not capable of handling complex sample and do not integrate the processing and digestion steps. We propose a ChipFilter Proteolysis (CFP) microfluidic device derived from the Filter Aided Sample Preparation FASP method for the miniaturization of protein processing and digestion steps in bottom-up proteomics. The microchip has two reaction chambers of 0.6 µL volume separated by a protein filtration membrane in regenerated cellulose. Cell lysis, protein concentration and rapid chemical and enzymatic treatment can be performed in our microfluidic device. Complex proteomic samples like yeast protein extract have already been analyzed with our microchip. Compared to the traditional FASP method, our microfluidic device offers a better proteome coverage with ten times less starting material and eight times quicker protocol.

### Sample Protocol
In the present work, we developed a straightforward microfluidic device integrating a molecular filtration membrane called a ChipFilter. Our system takes advantages from FASP methods for easy pre-concentration, purification and detergent removal steps and from microfluidic systems for fast reaction kinetics, capacity to integrate multiple processes, minute sample processing and automation. The PDMS microfluidic device is composed of two superimposed reaction-chambers (inner diameter 4 mm, height 50 µm, volume 0,6 µL each) assembled under a microscope. They are separated by a filtration membrane (diameter 4.3 mm) slightly larger than the reaction chamber. 150 µm diameter pillars inside the two chambers maintain the filtration membrane. Briefly, sample (protein extract or cells) is loaded in the microchip by pressure driven flow. Proteins are retained on the membrane while small molecules and salts are washed off, which allows a pre-concentration and desalting of the sample. Protein extraction can be realized in the microfluidic device because it holds up to 150 °C and acidic solutions. Moreover, protein reduction, alkylation and labeling can be done by adding the corresponding reagents. Because the reagents are smaller than 10 kDa, the cut-off of the filtration membrane, the excess of reagents will be eliminated through the membrane. After each reaction, it is possible to remove completely the remaining reagents by rinsing the proteins with a washing buffer. Proteolytic digestion is realized by flowing the trypsin solution into the reaction chamber. Like proteins, intact trypsin molecules will be retained on the membrane so the digestion can be performed in a small volume (0.6 µL). Purified sample and trypsin confined in that small volume will allow a rapid and efficient digestion

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed with MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 software on Uniprot Yeast database, with a first search peptide tolerance at 20 ppm and a main search peptide tolerance at 4.5 ppm, using trypsin specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages and 3 variable modifications: carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ).

### Publication Abstract
Sample preparation is a crucial step in bottom-up proteomics. Analytical performances of bottom-up proteomics can be improved by the miniaturization of sample preparation. Many microfluidic devices have been designed in the field of proteomics, but many of them are not capable of handling complex samples and do not integrate the processing and digestion steps. We propose a ChipFilter Proteolysis (CFP) microfluidic device as a proteomics reactor for the miniaturization of protein sample processing and digestion steps, whose design is closely related to the experimental setup of filter-aided sample processing, even if no denaturing surfactant is required. The microchip has two reaction chambers of 0.6 &#x3bc;L volume separated by a protein filtration membrane in regenerated cellulose (10kD cutoff) that will concentrate or retain large polypeptides and will release small molecules. Cell lysis, protein concentration, and rapid chemical or enzymatic treatment can be performed in the ChipFilter. Complex proteomic samples like yeast protein extract or whole human cells proteome have been successfully analyzed with our microchip. Compared with the membrane-based commercial ultracentrifugation cartridge, our microfluidic device offered a better proteome coverage with 10 times less starting material and 8 times faster protocol duration.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Miniaturization

### Affiliations
PSL
SMBP lab, CNRS, ESPCI PSL Paris, France (lab head)

### Submitter
Massamba Ndiaye

### Lab Head
Dr Joëlle Vinh
SMBP lab, CNRS, ESPCI PSL Paris, France (lab head)


