### Accession
PXD038909

### Title
Spatial lipidomic profiling of mouse joint tissue demonstrates the essential role of PHOSPHO1 in growth plate homeostasis

### Description
Lipids play a crucial role in signalling and metabolism, regulating the development and maintenance of the skeleton. Membrane lipids have been hypothesised to act as intermediates upstream of orphan phosphatase 1 (PHOSPHO1), a major contributor to phosphate generation required for bone mineralisation. Here, we spatially resolve the lipid atlas of the healthy mouse knee and demonstrate the effects of PHOSPHO1 ablation on the growth plate lipidome. Lipids spanning 17 subclasses were mapped across the knee joints of healthy juvenile and adult mice using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionisation imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI-IMS), with annotation supported by shotgun lipidomics. Multivariate analysis identified 96 and 80 lipid ions with differential abundances across joint tissues in juvenile and adult mice respectively. In both ages, marrow was enriched in phospholipid platelet activating factors (PAFs) and related metabolites, cortical bone had a low lipid content, while lysophospholipids were strikingly enriched in the growth plate, an active site of mineralisation and PHOSPHO1 activity. Spatially-resolved profiling of PHOSPHO1-knockout (KO) mice across the resting, proliferating, and hypertrophic growth plate zones revealed 272, 306, and 296 significantly upregulated, and 155, 220 and 190 significantly downregulated features, respectively, relative to wild type (WT) controls. Of note, phosphatidylcholine, lysophosphatidylcholine, sphingomyelin, lysophosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylethanolamine derived lipid ions were upregulated in PHOSPHO1-KO versus WT. Our imaging pipeline has established a spatially-resolved lipid signature of joint tissues and has demonstrated that PHOSPHO1 ablation significantly alters the growth plate lipidome, highlighting an essential role of the PHOSPHO1-mediated membrane phospholipid metabolism in lipid and bone homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Handling Whole mouse knee joints were obtained from juvenile (3 to 4 weeks old) (n=3) and adult (12 weeks old) (n =3) male C57BL/6 mice, and male juvenile PHOSPHO1-KO mice (n=4) and wild-type (WT) control mice on the same genetic background as the PHOSPHO1-KO mice (n=4). Upon harvesting the mouse limbs, the skin was removed and tissues were immediately fixed and decalcified in 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solution at 4 °C for 24 h. Tissues were subsequently rinsed in 1x PBS and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose/1x PBS with shaking.  Finally, tissues were embedded in 3% carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) in a plastic mould using a dry ice/ ethanol (EtOH) slurry and stored at -70 °C prior to sectioning. Cryosectioning The embedded tissue blocks were mounted on brass chucks using 3% CMC. Knee joints were sectioned at specimen temperature -20 °C and chamber temperature -22 °C using a cryostat (model OTF5000, Bright Instruments Ltd, Bedfordshire, England) equipped with a tungsten carbide blade. Serial tissue sections of 12 μm thickness were collected on Thermo ScientificTM SuperFrost adhesion slides and left to dry at room temperature for 3 h to facilitate adhesion. The sections were inspected for morphological integrity under a microscope, the highest quality representative sections were selected for MALDI-IMS data acquisition and optically scanned at 4800 dpi, equivalent to 5.29x5.29 µm raster pixels using a high-resolution scanner. Tissue sections were then stored at -70 °C in a glass holder box with desiccant prior to matrix application. LC-MS/MS Data acquisition Juvenile mouse joint tissues were fixed and decalcified as described above, but the muscle tissues were removed. The whole joints were ground to fine powder by wrapping them in aluminium foil, flash-freezing in liquid nitrogen and mechanically grinding to a powder. Of the resulting powder, 150-200 mg from each sample was transferred to a glass vial for lipid extraction. HPLC-grade dichloromethane/methanol solvent was prepared at 2:1 v/v ratio and 2 mL was added to each glass vial. Samples were sonicated in a water bath and subsequently centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new glass vial. The extraction process was repeated 3 times, and the pooled supernatant was subsequently lyophilised in a vacuum drier until a dry lipid pellet was formed, which was stored at -70 °C. The lipid pellet was re-solubilised in 70:30 MeCN:iPrOH and LC- MS/MS was performed  using 2 µl injection volume in separate positive and negative mode acquisitions using an Orbitrap mass spectrometer, as previously  described(66). MALDI-IMS Matrix Application In all experiments 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) matrix solution was freshly prepared at 20 mg/mL in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC grade MeOH/H2O (50/50, v/v). For PHOSPHO1-KO vs WT data acquisition, an internal standard of SPLASH LipidoMixTM purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids was added to fresh matrix solution at a 1:50 dilution. This standard was selected due to its coverage of a wide variety of lipid classes. The matrix was subsequently applied evenly across the tissue section slides using an HTX automated sprayer system. The following settings were used: 80 ºC spray nozzle temperature, 12 criss-cross passes and offset, 50 µL/min flow rate, 1250 mm/min spray nozzle velocity, 3 mm track spacing, 10 psi Nitrogen pressure, 3 L/min gas flow rate, 10 s drying time and nozzle height 40 mm. Data Acquisition MALDI-IMS data was acquired in positive ionisation mode on a Waters Synapt-G2-Si mass spectrometer. The instrument was calibrated using red phosphorus, with regularly spaced cluster ions across the mass range to achieve an RMS mass error of <10 ppm. MS1 spectra were acquired in sensitivity mode over the entire cross-section of the joint, with the acquisition area defined by WatersTM High Definition Imaging (HDI) version 1.5 software. Ablation pixel size was set to 50x50 μm. Scan time was 0.5s, laser rate – 1kHz, and the m/z range was 100-2000. Ion mobility separation was enabled for the separation of isobaric molecules during pipeline development and in the adult versus juvenile data acquisition, but disabled in the PHOSPHO1-KO vs WT data acquisition to improve sensitivity. WatersTM MajorMix was used for CCS calibrations for ion mobility.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Data processing and downstream analysis were performed in R, using Bioconductor package XCMS(67) and processed as previously described(66). MS1 spectra were matched against the LipidMaps Structural Database(68), and associated MS2 spectra were searched against the Lipid Match(69) and Lipid Blast databases(70). To generate consensus m/z-only values for MALDI-MSI m/z annotation, retention time data was removed and xcms-derived LCMS MS1 m/z values binned into 0.2 m/z width bins, as previously described(71). MALDI-IMS For Pipeline development: The acquired data was initially processed in HDI to include the top 3000 most intense ion peaks with intensity > 100 for noise removal. The HDI target list building function was used on the resulting processed files to generate a list of detected ions, with the m/z bin window set to 0.04 and drift time bin window set to 100, resulting in a list of 4350 targets. This target list was used to re-process all raw files, splitting the ion intensity data into bins with the same labels across all samples and allowing for subsequent comparison between samples. For PHOSPHO1-KO vs WT Analysis: The acquired data was initially processed in HDI to include the top 3000 most intense ion peaks with intensity > 100. To ensure ppm mass error was minimised across samples, lock mass correction was enabled during this step using the most intense internal standard ion detected at m/z 753.6134, which was the [M+H]+ ion for deuterated PC (15:0-18:1(d7)), added from the SPLASH LipidoMixTM. To enable between-groups comparison, the generated files were further processed through the BASIS normalisation pipeline for peak alignment, intra-sample normalisation, inter-sample normalisation, and variance scaling(72). The BASIS pipeline aligns and normalises image data arrays, but retains the original m/z and drift time values in its outputs.  These output files were therefore reprocessed using an in-house R script to calculate mean m/z and drift time values, which were used to update these values in each .txt file used by HDI for subsequent data visualization and ROI export(73). Lipid ion annotation The LC-MS/MS processed lipid annotations and their respective theoretical MALDI-generated ions were used as a library for MALDI-IMS ion annotation. Features detected in the MALDI-IMS experiments were matched to the theoretical m/z of lipids identified in the LC-MS/MS experiment using an in-house R script. Matches were retained within an m/z tolerance of 100 ppm. The matching algorithm accounted for the possibility of the MALDI ions being protonated, sodiated, potassiated, and dehydrated adduct forms, as well as C13 isotope peaks.  Positive ion mode LC-MS/MS features were matched to negative mode features based on retention time, and the MS2 spectra were manually inspected for presence of diagnostic peaks and annotated as described in Supplementary Data 3. For putative annotation ID hits were subsequently scored as follows: 1) manually annotated lipid ID; 2) putative ID of LipidMatch and LipidBlast database overlaps; 3) a highly scored LipidMatch ID but no LipidBlast ID; 4) Low confidence ID to be excluded based on one or multiple of the following indicators: low LipidMatch score; uneven number of carbon atoms present in FA chain;both LC-MS/MS and MALDI-IMS peaks identified as an adduct other than protonated, e.g. because the hit matches the mass of a doubly sodiated ion in MALDI, but only singly charged ions are expected. Lipid nomenclature and notation LIPID MAPS® nomenclature and notation was used in this publication(74,75). Briefly, the notation follows the following structure: HeadGroup(Sn1AcylGroup/Sn2AcylGroup). For example, PC (18:0/18:3) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC) with an 18-carbon long acyl group in both the Sn1 (left of the ‘/’) and Sn2 (right of the ‘/’) positions. The Sn1 acyl group is saturated (no double bonds as indicated by the 0 after ‘:’), while the Sn2 acyl group is unsaturated with 3 double bonds. Where the specific Sn1 and Sn2 acyl groups could not be established, the shorthand notation is used, which follows the structure HeadGroup(TotalNumberOfCarbonAtomsAcrossAllAcylGroups:TotalNumberOfDoubleBondsAcrossAllAcylGroups).

### Publication Abstract
Lipids play a crucial role in signaling and metabolism, regulating the development and maintenance of the skeleton. Membrane lipids have been hypothesized to act as intermediates upstream of orphan phosphatase 1 (PHOSPHO1), a major contributor to phosphate generation required for bone mineralization. Here, we spatially resolve the lipid atlas of the healthy mouse knee and demonstrate the effects of PHOSPHO1 ablation on the growth plate lipidome. Lipids spanning 17 subclasses were mapped across the knee joints of healthy juvenile and adult mice using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization imaging mass spectrometry (MALDI-IMS), with annotation supported by shotgun lipidomics. Multivariate analysis identified 96 and 80 lipid ions with differential abundances across joint tissues in juvenile and adult mice, respectively. In both ages, marrow was enriched in phospholipid platelet activating factors (PAFs) and related metabolites, cortical bone had a low lipid content, whereas lysophospholipids were strikingly enriched in the growth plate, an active site of mineralization and PHOSPHO1 activity. Spatially-resolved profiling of PHOSPHO1-knockout (KO) mice across the resting, proliferating, and hypertrophic growth plate zones revealed 272, 306, and 296 significantly upregulated, and 155, 220, and 190 significantly downregulated features, respectively, relative to wild-type (WT) controls. Of note, phosphatidylcholine, lysophosphatidylcholine, sphingomyelin, lysophosphatidylethanolamine, and phosphatidylethanolamine derived lipid ions were upregulated in PHOSPHO1-KO versus WT. Our imaging pipeline has established a spatially-resolved lipid signature of joint tissues and has demonstrated that PHOSPHO1 ablation significantly alters the growth plate lipidome, highlighting an essential role of the PHOSPHO1-mediated membrane phospholipid metabolism in lipid and bone homeostasis. &#xa9; 2023 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

### Keywords
Disorders of calcium or phosphate metabolism, Knee joint, Growth plate, Mouse, Maldi-ims, Lipids, Bone modelling and remodelling, Matrix mineralisation, Phospho1

### Affiliations
Professor Department of Biology University of York York United Kingdom
University of York

### Submitter
Jordan Tzetkov

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Gilbert Genever
Professor Department of Biology University of York York United Kingdom


