### Accession
PXD015571

### Title
ECE2 regulates Neurogenesis and Neuronal Migration during Cortical Development.

### Description
During embryonic development, the cerebral cortex is equipped with excitatory projection and inhibitory interneurons that migrate in organized layers. Periventricular heterotopia (PH) is a rare and heterogeneous disorder in which a subpopulation of new-born projection neurons fails to initiate their radial migration to the cortex, ultimately resulting in bands or nodules of grey matter lining the lateral ventricles underneath a normal cortex. For many years, few genes had been identified that cause this disorder upon disruption, but recently it was shown that PH is genetically a very heterogeneous disease. Here, we study the neurodevelopmental role of endothelin converting enzyme 2 (ECE2), biallelic mutations in which have been identified in two patients with PH. Our results show that manipulation of ECE2 levels or activity in human cerebral organoids and in the developing mouse cortex leads to ectopic localization of neural progenitors and neurons. We uncover the role of ECE2 in neurogenesis and, mechanistically, we identify its involvement in generation and secretion of extracellular matrix and in protein phosphorylation. This strongly suggests ECE2 as a novel candidate gene for PH.

### Sample Protocol
COs were washed twice with PBS and homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer (1% (v/v) NP40, 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate and 1 tablet protease inhibitor (cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) in 10 mL PBS) using ultrasonication at 40 % intensity for 10 s. Lysis was done for 30 min at 4 °C while rotating. Insoluble fraction was pelletized (10 min, 14,000 g, 4 °C) and protein concentration was determined by bicinchoniic acid assay (BCA, Carl Roth GmbH + Co.). For next analysis 200 μg of the total protein was used. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 900 μL acetone and incubation overnight at -20 °C. The protein pellet was harvested by centrifugation at 9,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C and washed once with 0.5 mL of ice cold methanol. Proteins were reconstituted in 200 μL digestion buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea), reduced (0.2 μL 1 M DTT, 45 min, 25 °C) and alkylated (2 μL, 30 min, 25 °C, in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of 0.8 μL 1M DTT and incubation for 30 min at 25 °C. Proteins were pre-digested with 1 μL LysC (Wako) at 25 °C for 4 h. 600 μL 50 mM TEAB buffer was added and the proteins were digested overnight with 1.5 μL sequencing grade trypsin (0.5 mg/mL, Promega) at 37 °C. The following day the samples were  acidified with 10 μL formic acid to a pH of 2 – 3. Peptides were desalted on 50 mg SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters Corp.) on a vacuum manifold. The cartridges were equilibrated with 1 mL acetonitrile, 1 mL 80% acetonitrile and 3 mL 0.5% formic acid. The samples were loaded on the cartridges and subsequently washed with 5 mL 0.5% formic acid. The peptides were eluted with two times 250 μL 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid. Samples were combined and dried by lyophilization. Peptides were reconstituted in 30 μL 1% (v/v) formic acid, prepared for mass spectrometry by filtering through a membrane filter (Ultrafree-MC and –LC, Durapore PVDF-0.22 μm, Merck Millipore) and transferred into mass vials.  Secretome analysis from COs. Secretome samples were prepared in similar fashion as the whole proteome samples with following difference. Proteins were precipitated from the 2 mL of COs grow media by addition of 8 mL acetone. Mass Spectrometry. MS analysis was performed on Q Exactive Plus instrument coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% TFA and separated on a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) constantly heated at 50 °C. The gradient was run from 5-32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid during a 152 min method (7 min 5%, 105 min to 22%, 10 min to 32%, 10 min to 90%, 10 min wash at 90%, 10 min equilibration at 5%) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For measurements of chemical-proteomic samples on the Q Exactive Plus instrument survey scans (m/z 300-1,500) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and the maximum injection time set to 80 ms (target value 3e6). Data dependent HCD fragmentation scans of the 12 most intense ions of the survey scans were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500, maximum injection time of 50 ms as well as minimum and maximum AGC targets of 5e3 and 5e4, respectively. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z. Unassigned and singly charged ions were excluded for measurement and the dynamic exclusion of peptides enabled for 60 s. The lock-mass ion 445.12002 from ambient air was used for real-time mass calibration on the Q Exactive Plus. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software version 3.1sp3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software (1.6.2.10). Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, 21st December 2018, including isoforms). At least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1 % FDR both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels. Phosphosites were identified by MaxQuant default settings for pSTY and quantified by LFQ. Average protein occupancy of the phosphosites were compared between CTRL and KO COs.   Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant result table proteinGroups.txt was done with Perseus 1.5.1.6. Putative contaminants and reverse hits were removed. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, hits with less than 3 valid values in each group were removed and -log10(p-values) were obtained by a two-sided one sample Student's t-test over replicates with the initial significance level of p = 0.05 adjustment by the multiple testing correction method of Benjamini and Hochberg (FDR = 0.05), the -log10 of p-values were plotted by volcano plot function.

### Publication Abstract
During embryonic development, excitatory projection neurons migrate in the cerebral cortex giving rise to organised layers. Periventricular heterotopia (PH) is a group of aetiologically heterogeneous disorders in which a subpopulation of newborn projection neurons fails to initiate their radial migration to the cortex, ultimately resulting in bands or nodules of grey matter lining the lateral ventricles. Although a number of genes have been implicated in its cause, currently they only satisfactorily explain the pathogenesis of the condition for 50% of patients. Novel gene discovery is complicated by the extreme genetic heterogeneity recently described to underlie its cause. Here, we study the neurodevelopmental role of endothelin-converting enzyme-2 (ECE2) for which two biallelic variants have been identified in two separate patients with PH. Our results show that manipulation of ECE2 levels in human cerebral organoids and in the developing mouse cortex leads to ectopic localisation of neural progenitors and neurons. We uncover the role of ECE2 in neurogenesis, and mechanistically, we identify its involvement in the generation and secretion of extracellular matrix proteins in addition to cytoskeleton and adhesion.

### Keywords
Ce2, Embryonic development, Periventricular heterotopia, Cerebral organoids

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry
LMU Munich

### Submitter
Pavel Kielkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Cappello
Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry


