### Accession
PXD011923

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics of SPPL2c overexpressing HEK cells

### Description
Signal peptide peptidase-like 2c (SPPL2c) is the only member of the GxGD type intramembrane-cleaving aspartyl proteases that so far has not been assigned any substrates and thus its capability of proteolysis and its physiological function remain enigmatic. Based on a surprisingly high expression of SPPL2c in elongated spermatids we applied proteomics on a cellular model system with ectopic expression of SPPL2c and identified a variety of candidate substrates. The majority of these candidate substrates clusters to the biological process of vesicular trafficking. Analysis of selected SNARE proteins reveals proteolytic processing by SPPL2c that impairs vesicular transport and causes retention of cargo proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. As a consequence, the integrity of subcellular compartments, in particular the Golgi, is disturbed. This may be the trigger for the compartmental reorganization observed during spermatogenesis, which finally results in loss of the majority of endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi and parts of the cytosol in the mature sperm.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and centrifuged 400g for 10 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were resuspended in STE-Buffer (250mM sucrose, 5mM Tris pH 7, 1mM EGTA, PI mix 1:500) and lysed with a 27-gauge needle. Samples were centrifuged 10 min at 800g to remove nuclei, then 10 min at 15.000g to remove mitochondria and finally 1 hour 100.000g. The resulting pellets were washed twice with 100mM Na2CO3 and centrifuged 30 min at 100000g after each wash. Pellets from membrane preparations were dissolved in lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100). The protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce 660nm protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). A protein amount of 15 µg was subjected to proteolytic digestion with trypsin and LysC (Promega, Germany) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with Vivacon centrifugal concentrators (30 kDa cut-off, Sartorius, Germany) according to a standard protocol. Peptides were enriched and desalted using stop and go extraction with self-packed C18 Tips (3M Empore, US). Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed on an Easy nLC 1000 nanoHPLC (Thermo Sientific, US) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific, US) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation, Germany) to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Sientific, US). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. A data dependent acquisition method was used. Full mass spectrometric MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z range: 300-1400, AGC target: 3E+6). The ten most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were chosen for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 17,500, isolation width: 2.0 m/z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 25%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.5.5.1. The MS data was searched against a reviewed fasta database of Homo sapiens from UniProt including isoforms (download: August 8th 2017, 42219 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of razor peptides. Only razor and unique peptides were used for quantification. The software Perseus (version 1.5.8.5) was used for further data analysis. The protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and a two-sided Student’s t-Test was applied to evaluate the significance of proteins with changed abundance. Additionally, a permutation based false discovery rate estimation was used.

### Publication Abstract
Members of the GxGD-type intramembrane aspartyl proteases have emerged as key players not only in fundamental cellular processes such as B-cell development or protein glycosylation, but also in development of pathologies, such as Alzheimer's disease or hepatitis virus infections. However, one member of this protease family, signal peptide peptidase-like 2c (SPPL2c), remains orphan and its capability of proteolysis as well as its physiological function is still enigmatic. Here, we demonstrate that SPPL2c is catalytically active and identify a variety of SPPL2c candidate substrates using proteomics. The majority of the SPPL2c candidate substrates cluster to the biological process of vesicular trafficking. Analysis of selected SNARE proteins reveals proteolytic processing by SPPL2c that impairs vesicular transport and causes retention of cargo proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. As a consequence, the integrity of subcellular compartments, in particular the Golgi, is disturbed. Together with a strikingly high physiological SPPL2c expression in testis, our data suggest involvement of SPPL2c in acrosome formation during spermatogenesis.

### Keywords
Hek cells, Sppl2c

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
Biomedical Center Institute for Metabolic Biochemistry Ludwig-Maximilians-University Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17 81377 Munich Germany & German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Regina Fluhrer
Biomedical Center Institute for Metabolic Biochemistry Ludwig-Maximilians-University Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17 81377 Munich Germany & German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Feodor-Lynen Strasse 17 81377 Munich Germany


