### Accession
PXD009433

### Title
MET-dependent modulation of cellular responses to ionizing radiation by quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Description
Increasing evidence suggests that inhibiting growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) signaling may modulate cellular responses to DNA-damaging agents widely used in cancer treatment. In that respect, the MET RTK is deregulated in abundance and/or activity in a variety of human tumors. Using two proteomic techniques, we explored how the MET inhibitor tepotinib modulates global cellular phosphorylation response to ionizing radiation (IR). Following an immunoaffinity-based phosphoproteomic discovery survey we selected candidate phosphorylation sites for extensive characterization by targeted proteomics focusing on phosphosites that consist of the SQ motif recognized by the PIKK-related kinases ATM, ATR and PRKDC. Several substrates of the DNA damage response (DDR) were confirmed to be modulated by sequential MET inhibition and IR, or MET inhibition alone.

### Sample Protocol
Two motif-directed immunoaffinity enrichments were performed sequentially as previously described by Cell Signaling Technology (PTMScan Discovery Proteomics Services) from EBC-1 cells. LC-MS/MS Acquisition was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.  To enable targeted quantification of selected phosphopeptides across a larger set of samples, we chose to perform phosphoproteome enrichment by titanium dioxide rather than immunoaffinity-based enrichment. Peptide samples were analyzed on a 5500QTRAP hybrid triple quadrupole/ion trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
In each immunoaffinity experiment, the four samples were acquired twice as technical replicates. The MS data files were provided by Cell Signaling Technology. The files were processed for identification and quantification using Maxquant and Andromeda version 1.5.2, with the human UniProt FASTA dataset UP000005640 as background proteome. Skyline was used for targeted data analysis (version 3.5). SRM peak integration was manually confirmed, and interfered transitions were removed. The reference synthetic standards were used to validate peptide identity by analogy of chromatographic and fragmentation properties to the reference.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence suggests that interference with growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling can affect DNA damage response (DDR) networks, with a consequent impact on cellular responses to DNA-damaging agents widely used in cancer treatment. In that respect, the MET RTK is deregulated in abundance and/or activity in a variety of human tumors. Using two proteomic techniques, we explored how disrupting MET signaling modulates global cellular phosphorylation response to ionizing radiation (IR). Following an immunoaffinity-based phosphoproteomic discovery survey, we selected candidate phosphorylation sites for extensive characterization by targeted proteomics focusing on phosphorylation sites in both signaling networks. Several substrates of the DDR were confirmed to be modulated by sequential MET inhibition and IR, or MET inhibition alone. Upon combined treatment, for two substrates, NUMA1 S395 and CHEK1 S345, the gain and loss of phosphorylation, respectively, were recapitulated using invivo tumor models by immunohistochemistry, with possible utility in future translational research. Overall, we have corroborated phosphorylation sites at the intersection between MET and the DDR signaling networks, and suggest that these represent a class of proteins at the interface between oncogene-driven proliferation and genomic stability.

### Keywords
Selected reaction monitoring (srm), Phosphoproteomics, Targeted proteomics, Immunoaffinity

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Department of Biology ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ariel Bensimon

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology Department of Biology ETH Zurich


