### Accession
PXD031245

### Title
Proximity labelling and cryomill affinity purification compared for Trypanosoma brucei proteins with unconfined, semi-confined and confined localisation

### Description
Identification of protein-protein interactions is a major contributor for understanding protein function and elucidating molecular and cellular mechanisms. Two strategies are currently popular for identification of protein interaction partners directly from the cellular environment. Affinity purification (pulldown) isolates the protein of interest with the aid of a matrix that specifically captures the target and potential partners. In BioID, the protein of interest is fused to biotin ligase facilitating proximity biotinylation and biotinylated proteins are isolated under stringent conditions with streptavidin. Whilst clear that these two methods can provide insight, it is also apparent that they can reveal distinct interactomes, but the basis for these differences is less obvious. We compare these methods using four different trypanosome proteins as baits: the cytoplasmic poly(A) binding proteins PABP1 and PABP2, mRNA export receptor MEX67, that shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm with predominant localisation at the nuclear pores, and the nucleoporin NUP158.

### Sample Protocol
(1) BioID: Procyclic form (PCF) cells were always maintained at a density of 1×106 to 1×107 cells per ml (5-8x10e5 cells for bloodstream-form (BSF) cells) and harvesting was done at a cell density of about 5x10e6 cells per ml (5x105 cells for BSF cells).  A total 5x108 cells were used for procyclic and 8x10e8 cells for bloodstream-form T. brucei in each replicate. Cells were harvested at 1,400 g, washed once with serum-free medium and pellets rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  For isolation of biotinylated proteins, each cell pellet was resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (0.5% octylphenoxypolyethoxyethanol (IGEPAL), 0.1 M piperazine-N,N′-bis(2-ethanesulfonic acid) (PIPES)-NaOH pH 6.9, 2 mM ethylene glycol-bis(β-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid, 1 mM MgSO4, 0.1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  (EDTA), cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and incubated for 15 min at room temperature in an orbital mixer. The soluble and non-soluble fractions were separated by centrifugation (14,000 g, 5 min, 4°C) and the soluble fraction incubated with 100 μl streptavidin-linked Dynabeads (MyOne Streptavidin C1, Thermofisher) for 1 hour at 4°C under gentle mixing.  Beads were washed twice in 1 ml buffer 1 (2% (w/v) SDS in water) once in 1 ml buffer 2 (0.1% (w/v) deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 500 mM NaCl), once in 1ml buffer 3 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% IGEPAL, 0.5% (w/v) deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1) and once in 1 ml buffer 4 (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl); each washing step was 8 minutes at room temperature (RT) under orbital shaking. Beads were then prepared for tryptic digestion by washing three times in 500 µl ice-cold 50 mM NH4HCO3, resuspension in 40 µl of the same buffer supplemented with 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubation in a thermomixer at RT for 1h. Iodoacetamide was added to a concentration of 20 mM, followed by incubation in the dark at RT for 30 min. Finally, 5 μg/ml proteomics-grade trypsin (SOLu-Trypsin, SigmaAldrich) was added to the beads. The digest was done overnight at 30°C in a thermomixer (1000 rpm). After removal of the first eulate, beads were resuspended in 50 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 5 μg/ml mass spectrometry (MS) grade trypsin and incubated in a thermomixer at 37°C for 1h. The eulate was combined with the first eluate and both were dried in a speed-vac. LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) were used throughout. BioID eluted peptides were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and passed over C18 stage tip columns as described (PMID: 17703201), then analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) on an Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). (2) Cryomill affinity purification: For affinity purification of PABP1, PABP2 we used data from our previous studies (PMID: 30040867), which is deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008839. Mex67 data (PMID: 26891179) were re-analysed for three different extraction conditions (Higher stringency buffer 1: 20mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 250mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton, plus protease inhibitors (Roche); and two low stringency stabilizing buffers: 2A - 20mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 250mM sodium citrate, 0.5% Tween-20, plus protease inhibitors (Roche), and buffer 2B - 20mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 20mM NaCl, 50mM sodium citrate, 0.5% Tween-20, plus protease inhibitors (Roche))  and compared to a control, omitting the GFP tag. Potential interactors were assigned to two confidence intervals termed Confidence A (ConfA), for proteins enriched >2 fold under all three conditions and Confidence B (ConfB) for proteins enriched >2 fold in at least one conditions. The NUP158 cryomill affinity enrichment purification analysis was repeated essentially as described in (PMID: 26891179) but subjecting the entire elution to LC-MSMS -analysis and triplicates were used. In brief, NUP158, endogenously tagged with eYFP at the C-terminus, was extracted in buffer 3 (20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)), captured on magnetic anti-GFP nanobody beads (GFP-Trap Magnetic Agarose, Chromotek, Germany) and washed 4 times with buffer 3. Proteins were eluted by on-bead tryptic digest and analysed by LC-MSMS on an Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant version 1.6.16 (PMID: 19029910; PMID: 24942700) searching the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database (release 42) from TriTrypDB (PMID:19843604). False discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. Sample layout: (1) BioID procyclic-form T. brucei (result files: BioID_PCF_PabP1&PabP2_txt.zip; BioID_PCF_MEX67&NUP158_txt) (1.1) Wild type control: (BioID_PCF_wtcontrol_1.raw, BioID_PCF_ wtcontrol _2.raw, BioID_PCF_ wtcontrol _3.raw) (1.2) GFP control: (BioID_PCF_GFPcontrol_1.raw, BioID_PCF_ GFPcontrol _2.raw, BioID_PCF_ GFPcontrol _3.raw) (1.3) PabP1: (BioID_PCF_PabP1_1.raw, BioID_PCF_PabP1_2.raw, BioID_PCF_PabP1_3.raw) (1.4) PabP2: (BioID_PCF_PabP2_1.raw, BioID_PCF_PabP2_2.raw, BioID_PCF_PabP2_3.raw) (1.5) MEX67: (BioID_PCF_MEX67_1.raw, BioID_PCF_MEX67_2.raw, BioID_PCF_MEX67_3.raw) (1.6) NUP158: (BioID_PCF_NUP158_1.raw, BioID_PCF_NUP158_2.raw, BioID_PCF_NUP158_3.raw)  (2) BioID bloodstream-form T. brucei (result files: BioID_BSF_PabP1&PabP2_txt.zip) (2.1) PabP1: (BioID_BSF_PabP1_1.raw, BioID_BSF_PabP1_2.raw, BioID_BSF_PabP1_3.raw) (2.2) PabP2: (BioID_BSF_PabP2_1.raw, BioID_BSF_PabP2_2.raw, BioID_BSF_PabP2_3.raw) (2.3) Wild type control: (BioID_BSF_wtcontrol_1.raw, BioID_BSF_ wtcontrol _2.raw, BioID_BSF_ wtcontrol _3.raw) (3) Pulldown procyclic-form T. brucei (result files: Pulldown_PCF_MEX67_txt.zip, Pulldown_PCF_NUP158_txt.zip) (3.1) PabP1 and PabP2: raw data deposited in PXD008839 (3.2) MEX67 (Pulldown_PCF_MEX67_1.raw, Pulldown_PCF_MEX67_2.mzXML, Pulldown_PCF_MEX67_2.mzXML, Pulldown_PCF_wtcontrol_MEX67_1) (3.3) NUP158 (Pulldown_PCF_wtcontrol_NUP158_1, Pulldown_PCF_wtcontrol_NUP158_2, Pulldown_PCF_wtcontrol_NUP158_3, Pulldown_PCF_NUP158_1, Pulldown_PCF_NUP158_2, Pulldown_PCF_NUP158_3)

### Publication Abstract
The characterization of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) is of high value for understanding protein function. Two strategies are popular for identification of PPIs direct from the cellular environment: affinity capture (pulldown) isolates the protein of interest with an immobilized matrix that specifically captures the target and potential partners, whereas in BioID, genetic fusion of biotin ligase facilitates proximity biotinylation, and labeled proteins are isolated with streptavidin. Whilst both methods provide valuable insights, they can reveal distinct PPIs, but the basis for these differences is less obvious. Here, we compare both methods using four different trypanosome proteins as baits: poly(A)-binding proteins PABP1 and PABP2, mRNA export receptor MEX67, and the nucleoporin NUP158. With BioID, we found that the population of candidate interacting proteins decreases with more confined bait protein localization, but the candidate population is less variable with affinity capture. BioID returned more likely false positives, in particular for proteins with less confined localization, and identified low molecular weight proteins less efficiently. Surprisingly, BioID for MEX67 identified exclusively proteins lining the inner channel of the nuclear pore complex (NPC), consistent with the function of MEX67, whereas the entire NPC was isolated by pulldown. Similarly, for NUP158, BioID returned surprisingly few PPIs within NPC outer rings that were by contrast detected with pulldown but instead returned a larger cohort of nuclear proteins. These rather significant differences highlight a clear issue with reliance on a single method to identify PPIs and suggest that BioID and affinity capture are complementary rather than alternative approaches.

### Keywords
Bioid, Cryomilling, Interactome, Proteome, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic phone: +420 325 873 966
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Zoltner
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic phone: +420 325 873 966


