### Accession
PXD008905

### Title
Characterization of ESX-1 components EccA1, EspG1 and EspH reveal pivotal role of Esp substrates in the Mycobacterium marinum infection cycle

### Description
The pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis employs a range of ESX-1 substrates to manipulate the host and build a successful infection. Although the importance of ESX-1 secretion in virulence is well established, the characterization of its individual components and the role of individual substrates is far from complete. Here, we describe the functional characterization of the accessory ESX-1 proteins EccA1, EspG1 and EspH, i.e. proteins that are not present in all five ESX system of mycobacteria. Proteomic analysis revealed that EspG1 is crucial for ESX-1 secretion, since all detectable ESX-1 substrates were absent from the cell surface and culture supernatant in an espG1 mutant. Deletion of eccA1 resulted in minor secretion defects, but interestingly, the severity of these secretion defects was dependent on the culture conditions. Finally, espH deletion showed a partial secretion defect, only secretion of EspE, EspF and EsxA/EsxB was blocked.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture To investigate the cell-surface attached proteome, samples for LC-MS/MS analysis were prepared using the mild detergent Genapol X-080 as previously (Ates et al, 2015. PLoS Genet. 11, 1–30). To prepare the secreted materials, the M. marinum MUSA wild-type and the studied ESX-1 mutant and complemented strains were grown to stationary phase in 7H9 supplemented with ADC, 0.2% glycerol and 0.05% Tween 80. The supernatant fractions containing secreted proteins were collected and spun at 2500 × g for an additional 20 min at 4°C and subsequently filtered through a 0.2 μm pore size membrane to remove residual cells and cell debris. The filtered supernatants were 20 times concentrated using 3 kDa molecular weight cut off tubing at 4°C. Then, the retained proteins were TCA precipitated, pelleted, washed in acetone, dried and resuspended in SDS sample buffer. All samples were analyzed with SDS-PAGE and CBB staining. Total protein lanes of cell surface and culture supernatant proteins were excised in 3 or 1 fragment(s) per lane, respectively, and each band was cut into ~1 mm3 cubes. The gel cubes from one band were transferred into an eppendorf tube, reduced and alkylated dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively, and incubated with trypsin o/n. The peptides from each gel band were extracted in 5% TFA/50%ACN and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject) at 35˚C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the uniprot Mycobacterium_marinum (ATCC BAA-535M reference proteome FASTA file (release march 2013, 5418 entries) using MaxQuant 1.5.4.1. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting, i.e. the number of identified MS/MS spectra for a given protein. Raw counts were normalized on the sum of spectral counts for all identified proteins in a particular sample, relative to the average sample sum determined with all samples. To find statistically significant differences in normalized counts between sample groups, we applied the beta-binomial test, which takes into account within-sample and between-sample variation using an alpha level of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretion, Label-free quantitation, Esx-1, Ecca1; espg1; esph; esxa, Mycobactrium marinum

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


