### Accession
PXD000944

### Title
BRCA protein subtype -  Molecular Portrait of Breast-Cancer-Derived Cell Lines Reveals Poor Similarity with Tumors

### Description
Shotgun MSMS data of breast tumor intrinsic subtypes

### Sample Protocol
Will be added. This text is only added to make the entry at least 50 characters long.

### Data Protocol
Will be added. This text is only added to make the entry at least 50 characters long.

### Publication Abstract
Breast-cancer-derived cell lines are an important sample source for cancer proteomics and can be classified on the basis of transcriptomic analysis into subgroups corresponding to the molecular subtypes observed in mammary tumors. This study describes a tridimensional fractionation method that allows high sequence coverage and proteome-wide estimation of protein expression levels. This workflow has been used to conduct an in-depth quantitative proteomic survey of five breast cancer cell lines matching all major cancer subgroups and shows that despite their different classification, these cell lines display a very high level of similarity. A proteome-wide comparison with the RNA levels observed in the same samples showed very little to no correlation. Finally, we demonstrate that the proteomes of in vitro models of breast cancer display surprisingly little overlap with those of clinical samples.

### Keywords
Breast tumor, Shotgun, Intrinsic subtypes, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Lund University,
Department of Immunotechnology
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University

### Submitter
Fredrik Levander

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University


