### Accession
PXD021877

### Title
Quantitative Tyr Phosphoproteomic Analyses of Tumor Adaptive Response to MAPK Inhibition

### Description
Although targeted inhibition of the MAPK pathway has achieved remarkable patient responses in many cancers with MAPK hyperactivation, the development of resistance has remained a critical challenge. Besides genomic resistance mechanisms, adaptive tumor response also underlies the resistance to targeted MAPK inhibitors. It is being increasingly appreciated that such bypass mechanisms often lead to the activation of many pro-survival kinases, which complicates the rational design of combination therapies. Here we performed global tyrosine phosphoproteomic (pTyr) analyses and demonstrated that targeted inhibition of MAPK signaling in melanoma cells leads to a profound remodeling of the pTyr proteome. Intriguingly, many of these kinases contain a cholesterol binding motif, suggesting that altered cholesterol metabolism might drive, in a coordinated fashion, the activation of these kinases. Indeed, we found a dramatic accumulation of intracellular cholesterol in melanoma cells (with BRAFV600E mutations) and non-small cell lung cancer cells (with KRasG12C mutations) treated with MAPK and KrasG12C inhibitors, respectively. Importantly, depletion of cholesterol not only prevents the MAPK inhibition-induced feedback activation of pTyr singling but also enhances the cytotoxic effects of MAPK inhibitors, both in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, our findings provide the evidence suggesting that cholesterol functions as a master regulator of the tumor adaptive response to targeted MAPK inhibitors. These results also suggest that MAPK inhibitors could be combined with cholesterol-lowering agents to achieve a more complete and durable response in tumors with hyperactive MAPK signaling.

### Sample Protocol
A375 and Mel-Juso cells were grown in light ([12C614N2]Lys, [12C614N4]Arg) and heavy ([13C615N2]Lys, [13C615N4]Arg) RPMI (Cambridge Isotope Labs), respectively. Both light and heavy RPMI were supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Invitrogen). For drug treatment, cells cultured in heavy media were treated with 1 µM PLX4032 or 1 µM AZD6244 for 48 hours, while the light cells were treated with DMSO for the same durations. The heavy and light cells were lysed in urea buffer (8M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 75 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 1 mM DTT and 1.5 mM EGTA) and the lysates were combined at a 1:1 ratio. Lysates were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 3 mM, followed by incubation at room temperature for 20 min. Cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 20 min. The lysates were diluted to a final concentration of 2 M urea by addition of 100 mM NH4OAC (pH 6.8) and were digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme:substrate) ratio. Digestion was quenched by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 30 min. Peptides were desalted on SepPak C18 columns (Waters) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Phospho-tyrosine peptides were enriched by PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) Kit (CST). Briefly, lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1.4 mL Immunoaffinity Purification (IAP) buffer and incubated with the antibody-bead slurry for 2 hr at 4°C. Then the beads were washed with 1mM IAP buffer for two times, and 1mL chilled HPLC water for three times. After elution with 0.15% TFA, the p-Tyr modified peptides were desalted/concentrated with home packed C18 StageTips for LC-MS Analysis.

### Data Protocol
The p-Tyr modified peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA) using a top-20 CID (collision-induced dissociation) method. MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of the human IPI protein database (Version 3.60) and its reversed complement using the Sequest algorithm (Ver28) embedded in an in-house-developed software suite. Search parameters allowed for a static modification of 57.02146 Da for Cys and a dynamic modification of phosphorylation (79.96633 Da) on Ser, Thr and Tyr, oxidation (15.99491 Da) on Met, stable isotope (10.00827 Da) and (8.01420 Da) on Arg and Lys, respectively. Search results were filtered to include <1% matches to the reverse data base by the linear discriminator function using parameters including Xcorr, dCN, missed cleavage, charge state (exclude 1+ peptides), mass accuracy, all heavy or light Lys and Arg, peptide length and fraction of ions matched to MS/MS spectra. Phosphorylation site localization was assessed by the Ascore algorithm based on the observation of phosphorylation-specific fragment ions and peptide quantification was performed by using the CoreQuant algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomic, Tumor adaptive response

### Affiliations
UT Southwestern Medical Center
Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 75390, TX, USA

### Submitter
Xu-Dong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 75390, TX, USA


