### Accession
PXD005640

### Title
Podophyllum Hexandrum Royle MALDI-TOF-MS/MS

### Description
With the aim of reveal the mechanism of Podophyllum Hexandrum Royle adaption to high altitude, MALDI-TOF-MS/MS in combination with 2-DE was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins in leaves of Podophyllum Hexandrum Royle between low altitude (2200m) and high altitude (3100m), 65 differentially expressed proteins was identifed and 44 was up-regulated in high altitude  compared tolow altitude.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction——Briefly, leaves (1.0 g) were placed in liquid nitrogen, and ground to powder using a mortar and pestle. Then, 2 mL ice-cold phenol was added and samples were incubated at 4oC for 20 min, before 2 ml extraction buffer (pH 8.0) [250 mM sucrose, 25 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT] was added. The samples were then centrifuged at 12 000 rpm at 4 oC for 30 min. The phenol phase was then transferred to a 10-mL tube and proteins were precipitated by the addition of an equal volume of extraction buffer, and the centrifugation and precipitation steps were repeated two more times. Finally, phenol was combined with 3 mL of cold 100 mM acetamide in methanol, and the mixtures were placed at -20oC for at least 2 h. Then, the mixtures were centrifuged at 12 000 rpm at 4oC for 30 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was rinsed 3 times with cold acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol and lyophilized at -20oC overnight. Then, the pellet was dissolved in sample buffer [2 M thiourea, 7 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 0.4% IPG buffer (pH 4–7), 1% DTT (w/w)] at 22 oC and kept at 4°C until IEF analysis. The protein concentration was measured as described (Bradford, 1976). 2-DE analysis—— Briefly, 200 μL of protein extract was loaded onto IPG strips (17 cm, pH 4–7, Bio-Rad). The IEF tray was placed into the PROTEAN IEF Cell Unit (Bio-Rad), and active rehydration was performed. After IPG, IEF strips were removed from the focusing tray, incubated in SDS buffer [375 M Tris–HCl, 6 M urea, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) SDS] for 15 min with 2% (w/v) dithiothreitol followed by another 15 min with 2.5% (w/v) of iodoacetamide. SDS–PAGE in the second dimension was conducted using homogenous 10% polyacrylamide gels for 7 h to separate proteins. Proteins in the 2-D gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, and the gels were fixed overnight in 50% ethanol and 3% phosphoric acid, and washed three times in distilled water over a 30-min period. Then the 2-DE gels were prestained for 1 h in 34% methanol, 17% ammonium sulfate, and 3% phosphoric acid, and scanned and analyzed using PDQuest software Protein spot intensities of samples derived from plants subjected to various temperature treatments were determined from digitized images obtained using a high-resolution scanner.

### Data Protocol
The extracted peptides were analyzed using a Voyager-DE STR MALDI-TOF-MS/MS. All obtained peptide mass fingerprints (PMFs) were analyzed using Protein Prospector.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Sinopodophyllum hexandrum</i> is a perennial alpine herb producing the anti-cancer metabolite podophyllotoxin (PPT). Although the adaptation of <i>S. hexandrum</i> to high altitudes has been demonstrated and the effects of temperature, precipitation, and UV-B light on plant growth and metabolite accumulation have been studied, knowledge on the role of flavonoid biosynthesis in adapting to high altitudes is limited. In this study, light intensity, amount and type of flavonoids, and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and genes (DEGs) at 2300 and 3300 m were analyzed by HPLC, proteomic, transcriptomic, and qRT-PCR analysis. We found that higher light intensity correlated with greater flavonoid, flavonol, and anthocyanin content as well as higher anthocyanin to total flavonoid and flavonol ratios observed at the higher altitude. Based on proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, nine DEPs and 41 DEGs were identified to be involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and light response at 3300 m. The relative expression of nine genes (<i>PAL</i>, <i>CHS1</i>, <i>IFRL</i>, <i>ANS</i>, <i>MYB4</i>, <i>BHLH137</i>, <i>CYP6</i>, <i>PPO1</i>, and <i>ABCB19</i>) involved in flavonoid biosynthesis and seven genes (<i>HSP18.1</i>, <i>HSP70</i>, <i>UBC4</i>, <i>ERF5</i>, <i>ERF9</i>, <i>APX3</i>, and <i>EX2</i>) involved in light stress were observed to be up-regulated at 3300 m compared with 2300 m. These findings indicate that light intensity may play a regulatory role in enhancing flavonoid accumulation that allows <i>S. hexandrum</i> to adapt to elevated-altitude coupled with high light intensity.

### Keywords
Maldi-tof-ms/ms, Podophyllum hexandrum royle, Altitude

### Affiliations
Gansu Agricultural University
Gansu Provincial Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science / College of Life Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, P.R. China

### Submitter
Meng-Fei LI

### Lab Head
Dr Meng Fei Li
Gansu Provincial Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science / College of Life Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, P.R. China


