### Accession
PXD006907

### Title
S-nitrosylation in Shank3 mutated mice

### Description
We tested the hypothesis that a mutated gene associated with human ASD would generate downstream effects in critical proteins that lead to modification of synaptic functions.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cortex and whole striatum were dissected from 6 week-old and 4 month-old WT and InsG3680(+/+) mice (n=6 for each adult group and n=8 for each 6 weeks group), removed  and homogonized in lysis buffer.

### Data Protocol
Agilent Spectrum Mill MS proteomics Workbench B.05 was used for peak list generation, database searching, and FDR estimation. Parameters for data extractions were: cysteine carbamidomethylation for fixed modification, precursor MH+ 300 – 8000 Da, scan time range 0-200 min, sequence tag length > 1, merge scans with same precursor m/z +/-30s +/- 0.05 m/z, default for precursor charge, true for find 12C precursor, MS noise threshold 100 counts. MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse SwissProt protein database (downloaded on 11/01/2016, 16813 items) with +/-20 ppm precursor ion tolerance and +/-50 ppm fragment ion tolerance. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. For both peptide identification and protein polishing, FDR was set to 1.2%.

### Publication Abstract
Mutation in the SHANK3 human gene leads to different neuropsychiatric diseases including Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), intellectual disabilities and Phelan-McDermid syndrome. Shank3 disruption in mice leads to dysfunction of synaptic transmission, behavior, and development. Protein S-nitrosylation, the nitric oxide (NO<sup>&#x2022;</sup>)-mediated posttranslational modification (PTM) of cysteine thiols (SNO), modulates the activity of proteins that regulate key signaling pathways. We tested the hypothesis that Shank3 mutation would generate downstream effects on PTM of critical proteins that lead to modification of synaptic functions. SNO-proteins in two ASD-related brain regions, cortex and striatum of young and adult InsG3680(+/+) mice (a human mutation-based Shank3 mouse model), were identified by an innovative mass spectrometric method, SNOTRAP. We found changes of the SNO-proteome in the mutant compared to WT in both ages. Pathway analysis showed enrichment of processes affected in ASD. SNO-Calcineurin in mutant led to a significant increase of phosphorylated Synapsin1 and CREB, which affect synaptic vesicle mobilization and gene transcription, respectively. A significant increase of 3-nitrotyrosine was found in the cortical regions of the adult mutant, signaling both oxidative and nitrosative stress. Neuronal NO<sup>&#x2022;</sup> Synthase (nNOS) was examined for levels and localization in neurons and no significant difference was found in WT vs. mutant. S-nitrosoglutathione concentrations were higher in mutant mice compared to WT. This is the first study on NO<sup>&#x2022;</sup>-related molecular changes and SNO-signaling in the brain of an ASD mouse model that allows the characterization and identification of key proteins, cellular pathways, and neurobiological mechanisms that might be affected in ASD.

### Keywords
Autism, Asd, Nitric oxide, S-nitrosylation, Neurotransmission

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Departments of Biological Engineering and Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

### Submitter
Haitham Amal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Steven R. Tannenbaum
Departments of Biological Engineering and Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.


