### Accession
PXD019410

### Title
A multidimensional proteomic strategy for the characterization of the human amnion proteome

### Description
The loss of fetal membrane (FM) integrity and function in early pregnancy can have devastating consequences for the fetus and the newborn. However, the current fragmentary knowledge of FM biology has largely hampered the development of preventive FM sealing and healing strategies. Here, by an optimized protein sample preparation and offline fractionation before LC-MS/MS analysis we present an exhaustive human term amnion proteome characterization. The more than 5000 identified proteins greatly outnumbered previous reports. A Gene-Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) depicted ‘extracellular matrix’ and ‘cell-substrate junction‘ as two significantly enriched categories. Therefore, protein-protein interaction plots using these categories enabled the establishment of novel potential amniotic membrane cell-to-ECM interactions. Together, this thorough human amnion proteome, additionally to providing a basis for the study of compromised and preterm ruptured fetal membranes, could be a stepping-stone for the development of novel healing-inducing biomaterials.

### Sample Protocol
The amnion membrane was collected immediately after delivery and was rinsed 3x with PBS containing protease inhibitors at 37 °C. Then it was snap/frozen and ground under in liquid nitrogen in a frozen mortar and pestle into a fine powder. Protein extraction, digestion, and peptide purification Urea-based sample preparation. 100 mg of pulverized tissue was incubated with 500 µl urea buffer (UA; 8M urea in 0.1M Tris buffer pH 8.2 (TBS) with protease inhibitors for 30 min and centrifuged at 16000 g, 4 °C for 20 min. Samples were diluted with TBS to 6 M urea and 20 µg protein was prepared: DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 min at RT. Then, IAA was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and Lys was added in a 1:20 protease to protein ratio (w/w) for 1h at RT in the dark. After dilution to 1 M urea with TBS, sequencing grade trypsin was added in a 1:50 protease to protein ratio (w/w) and incubated overnight in the dark at RT. Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA and then centrifuged for 20 min at 16000 g. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). 100 mg of pulverized tissue was incubated with 500 µl SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS (w/v) in TBS containing 0.1 M DTT) and protease inhibitors for 5 min at 95 °C and centrifuged at 16000 g for 10 min at RT. Protein concentration was measured and the previously published FASP protocol (Wisniewski, J.R., et al., Nat Methods, 2009) was followed with 20 µg of protein. For the fractionation experiment, the same FASP protocol was followed with 300 µg protein.  StageTip clean-up. Peptides were then cleaned in C18 stage tips. Stage tips were wetted with 100% MeOH and cleaned with 150 µl 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA. They were then equilibrated with 150 µl 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Sample volume was raised to 150 µl 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA and peptides were loaded and washed twice with 150 µl with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA before elution with 150 µl 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Samples were then dried to completeness. For the fractionation experiment, peptide cleanup was done following the same protocol on C18 SPE cartridges with 800 µl volumes. LC-MS/MS.  FASP vs urea-based. Dried peptides were resuspended in 20 µl MS buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water) and sonicated for 5 min. 1 µl of peptides containing iRT peptides was injected on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a QExactive instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by UPLC on a C18 Trap column (Acquity UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters, 186007496) at 50 °C and were separated with a mixture of solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) over a 5%-32% B linear gradient for 90 min. Full scan MS spectra were acquired from 200 to 2000 m/z with an AGC target of 3e6, an Orbitrap resolution of 70000 and a max injection time of 100 ms. Internal mass calibration was performed using the two-lock masses 371.101 m/z and 445.120 m/z. From the MS scan, the top 12 most abundant ions were selected for HCD with a NCE of 30, an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 spectra were recorded from 200 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 17500 with an AGC target of 1e5 and a max injection time of 50 ms.  Offline high pH reversed phase chromatography sample fractionation. Dried peptides (100 µg) were dissolved in buffer A (4.5 mM ammonium formate pH 10 in 2% ACN) and separated using a C18 column (XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column, 130 Å, 3.5 µm, 1 mm x 100 mm, Waters, 186003561). Buffer B was 4.5 mM ammonium formate pH 10 in 90% ACN. The 90 min gradient used was as follows: 0% B (0-10 min), 0%-40% B (10-70 min), 40%-100% B (70-72 min), 100% B (72-80 min) 100-0% B (80-82 min), and 0% B (82-90 min). Fractions were collected every 3.33 min since the beginning of the gradient and the 27 fractions were pooled into 9 noncontiguous fractions, dried to completeness and re-dissolved in 20 µl MS buffer. Peptides (2 µl) containing iRT peptides were injected on a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a QExactiveHF instrument and separated as follows: 5%-40% B (0-90 min), 95%B (90-95min), 5%B (95-105min) by UPLC on a C18 column at 50 ºC. Full scan MS spectra were acquired from 350 to 1500 m/z with an AGC target of 3e6, an Orbitrap resolution of 120000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Internal mass calibration was performed using the two-lock masses 371.101 m/z and 445.120 m/z. From the MS scan, the top 24 most abundant ions were selected for HCD with a normalized collision energy of 28, an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and a max injection time of 50 ms. MS2 spectra were recorded from 200 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 30000 with an AGC target of 1e5 and a max injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mascot searches and Scaffold analysis. Protein identification was carried out by searching the raw spectral data files in Mascot (Matrix Science) against the reference human proteome from Uniprot database of only reviewed human concatenated to its decoyed (reversed) entries and 496 known mass spectrometry contaminants (reviewed and canonical sequences only, downloaded July 2019). The database contains a total of 41329 entries of which 20416 are forward and 20913 are reverse entries. A 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and a 15 ppm MS/MS tolerance were selected as parameters. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. For the method optimization, the Mascot generated files were imported in Scaffold (v4.8.8) and the datasets combined and filtered for a 1% protein FDR, minimum 2 unique peptides and 0.5% peptide FDR. The total spectrum counts view was exported and further processed in Excel. For the fractionation experiment, the two Mascot searches (one for fractionated, one for single-shot injection) were separately loaded in Scaffold and singly exported at a 1% protein FDR, minimum 2 unique peptides and 0.5% peptide FDR and combined and processed in Excel.  ProgenesisQI analysis. For the generation of quantitative data, the 9 fractionated raw files were individually loaded in ProgenesisQI (v.25.34.1713). Peptide ions with charges +2 +3 and +4 were selected and all non-matching ions deleted. From each ProgenesisQI peptide ion, the 5 highest ranked MS/MS spectra were exported using charge deconvolution and deisotoping at a maximum of 200 peaks per MS/MS. The files were searched in Mascot and imported into scaffold and filtered for protein FDR of 1%, minimum 1 peptide, and 1% peptide FDR. The spectrum reports were reimported in ProgenesisQI and the individual files were combined with the fractionation experiment option of the software. The set of iRT proteins was used for normalization. For protein quantification the Hi3 method was used [36]. With the Hi3 method only the three best flying (most intense) peptides are considered for protein quantification and thereby it provides a protein value that allows to compare different proteins with each other. The list of proteins was filtered for 2 unique peptides and exported as an Excel file. The Hi3-normalized abundance values were used to rank the proteins and create a ranked dataset that was used for the GSEA. The single-shot file was treated in ProgenesisQI as a single file and the list of proteins was filtered for 2 unique peptides and exported as an Excel file. Two lists of ‘quantifiable proteins’ were obtained from ProgenesisQI for Proteomics – one for the fractionated and one for the not fractionated experiment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Fetal membranes, Amnion, Extracellular matrix, Human proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics, University and University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
1. Department of Obstetrics, University and University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 
2. Institute for Biomechanics, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Eva Avilla-Royo

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. sc. nat. Martin Ehrbar
Department of Obstetrics, University and University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


