### Accession
PXD032320

### Title
Cell autonomous immune dysfunction driven by disrupted autophagy in C9orf72-ALS microglia contributes to neurodegeneration

### Description
The most common genetic mutation found in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), as well as fronto-temporal dementia (FTD), is a repeat expansion in the C9orf72 gene. C9orf72 is highly expressed in human myeloid cells, and although neuroinflammation and microglial pathology are widely found in ALS/FTD, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, using human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived microglia-like cells (hiPSC-MG) harbouring C9orf72 mutation (mC9-MG) together with gene-corrected isogenic controls (isoC9-MG) and C9ORF72 knock-out hiPSC-MG (C9KO-MG), we show that reduced C9ORF72 protein is associated with impaired phagocytosis and an exaggerated inflammatory response upon stimulation with lipopolysaccharide, driven by sustained activation of NLRP3 inflammasome and NF-kB signalling. Analysis of the hiPSC-MG C9ORF72 interactome revealed an association of C9ORF72 with key regulators of autophagy, a process involved in the homeostatic regulation of the innate immune response. We found impaired initiation of autophagy in C9KO-MG and mC9-MG. Furthermore, through motor neuron-microglial (MN-MG) co-culture studies, we identified that autophagy deficit in mC9-MG led to increased vulnerability of C9 MNs to excitotoxic stimulus. Pharmacological activation of autophagy ameliorated the sustained activation of NLRP3 inflammasome and NF-B signalling, reversed the phagocytic deficit found in mC9-MG and also reduced MN death in  MN-MG co-cultures. We validated these findings in blood-derived macrophages from people with C9orf72 mutation. Our results reveal an important role for C9ORF72 in regulating microglial immune homeostasis and identify dysregulation in human myeloid cells as a contributor to neurodegeneration in ALS/FTD

### Sample Protocol
EGFP-C9ORF72 hiPSC-MGs were grown on 10-cm dish and were lysed using a 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP-40, 10 mM sodium glycerophosphate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 0.1 M microcystin-LR, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 100 nM GTPgS, Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. 350 µg of protein from ctrl-MG and EGFP-C9ORF72 -MG (two biological replicates, 4 technical replicates) were subjected to immunoprecipitation using 10 µl of Chromotek GFP-Trap beads. Samples were incubated on an end-to-end rotator in cold room (4oC) for 90 minutes followed by the washes with lysis buffer. On-bead tryptic digestion followed by 8-plex TMT labelling was performed andsamples were pooled and vacuum dried.  To increase the depth, the pooled TMT labelled sample was fractionated using mini high-pH RPLC strategy on homemade C18 stage-tips, eluted peptides were vacuum dried until LC-MS/MS analysis.  The basic reverse-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) fractions were reconstituted in 15 l of 0.1% formic acid and 3% ACN buffer and subjected to LC-MS/MS/MS analysis on Orbitrap Exploris 480 hybrid mass spectrometer that is interfaced with 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system. Sample was loaded on to a 2 cm trapping column (PepMap C18 100A – 300µm. Part number: 160454. Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 5 ul/min flow rate using loading pump and analyzed on a 50cm analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 μm ID, Part number: ES803) at 300 nl/min flow rate that is interfaced to the mass spectrometer using Easy nLC source and electro sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. LC gradient was applied from a 3% to 25% of solvent-B at 300 nl/min flow rate (Solvent-B: 80% CAN) for 100 minutes and increased to 45% solvent-B for 10 minutes and 40% to 99% Solvent-B for 5 minutes which is maintained at 90% B for 10 minutes and washed the column at 3% solvent-B for another 10 minutes comprising a total of 145 min run with a 120-minute gradient in a data dependent MS2 mode. The full scan MS1 was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 between 350-1200 m/z and measured using ultra-high filed Orbitrap mass analyzer. Precursor fit threshold of 70% at 0.7 Da Ioslation width filter was enable for accurate isolation of precursor isotope envelope for the MS2 fragmentation. The top 10 precursor ions were targeted which are isolated using Quadrupole mass filter at 0.7 Da isolation width for the MS2 and fragmented using 36% higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) analyzed using Ultra high-filed Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200. AGC target for MS1 and MS2 were set at 300% and 100% respectively with a maximum ion injection times of 28 ms for MS1 and 110 ms for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software suite version 1.6.10.0 was used for database search with the following parameter. Reporter ion MS2 type: 8plex TMT with PIF (Precursor intensity factor) of 0.7 to have accurate reporter ion intensities. The TMT isotopic reporter ion correction factors were manually entered as provided by the manufacturer. The following group specific parameters were used, A built-in Andromeda search engine was used by specifying Trypsin/P as a specific enzyme by allowing 2 missed cleavages, minimum length of 7 amino acids, Oxidation of (M), Acetyl (Protein-N-terminal), Deamidation N and Q were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation Cys was selected as fixed modification. First search tolerance of 20 ppm and main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm were selected. Global Parameters: Uniprot Human protein database (release 2017-02; 42,101 sequences) was used for the database search and 1% peptide and protein level FDR was applied. For protein quantification, min ratio count was set at 2 for accurate reporter ion quantification. The MaxQuant output protein group text files were processed using Perseus software suite version 1.6.10.45 was used. The data was filtered for any proteins that are flagged as common contaminants and reverse hits. In addition a common background binders from Crapome database were filtered and finally minimum two unique peptide were retained for the downstream analysis. The TMT reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed and subsequently the TMT reporter tags of Control and GFP-C9orf72 conditions were categorized to perform statistical analysis. Two sample Welch’s T-test was performed by applying 1% and 5% permutation-based FDR to identify the differentially enriched and significant protein groups between GFP-C9orf72 and control groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
, C9orf72 interactome, C9orf72 mutation, Lc-ms/ms, Microglia and inflammation

### Affiliations
UK Dementia Research Institute at University of Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh bioQuarter, Chancellor’s Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB UK
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Siddharthan Chandran
UK Dementia Research Institute at University of Edinburgh, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh bioQuarter, Chancellor’s Building, 49 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB UK


