### Accession
PXD036940

### Title
Extracellular matrix educates a tumor macrophage phenotype found in ovarian cancer metastasis

### Description
Recent studies have shown the tumor extracellular matrix (ECM) associates with immunosuppression, and that targeting the ECM can improve immune infiltration and immunotherapy response. A question that remains is whether the ECM is directly educating the immune phenotypes seen in cancer. We identified a tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) population correlated with poor prognosis, interruption of the cancer immunity cycle, and tumor ECM composition. To investigate whether ECM was capable of generating the TAM phenotype seen, we developed a decellularized tissue model that retains the native ECM architecture and composition. Macrophages cultured on decellularized ovarian metastasis shared transcriptional profiles with the TAMs found in human tissues. ECM educated macrophages have a tissue remodeling and immunoregulatory phenotype, inducing altered T cell function. We conclude that the tumor ECM is directly educating this macrophage population found in cancer tissues. Therefore, current and emerging cancer therapies that target the tumor ECM may be tailored to improve macrophage phenotype and their downstream regulation of immunity.

### Sample Protocol
The ECM component was enriched from frozen whole decellularized tissue sections (20 x 30 μm sections, approximately 40-50 mg of tissue). Briefly, the extracted proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were separated by nanoflow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC, NanoAcquity, Waters) and analyzed by mass spectrometry using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was analysed using Pescal analysis and analyzed as previously described (Naba et al., 2017).  Naba, A. et al. Characterization of the Extracellular Matrix of Normal and Diseased Tissues Using Proteomics. Journal of proteome research 16, 3083-3091 (2017). https://doi.org:10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00191

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Decellularized tissue model, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular matrix, Immunity, Tumor-associated macrophages, Cancer

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Pedro R Cutillas
Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology Barts Cancer Institute  Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ Tel: +44 (0)20 7882 8266 | Fax: +44 (0)20 7882 3891


