### Accession
PXD038422

### Title
Epigenetic inactivation of the 5-methylcytosine RNA methyltransferase NSUN7 is associated with clinical outcome and therapeutic vulnerability in liver cancer

### Description
RNA modifications are important regulators of transcript activity and an increasingly emerging body of data suggest that the epitranscriptome and its associated enzymes are altered in human tumors. In this study, the initial screening for genetic and epigenetic defects of 5-methylcytosine RNA methyltransferases in tranformed cell lines, identified the NOL1/NOP2/Sun domain family member 7 (NSUN7) as undergoing promoter CpG island hypermethylation-associated transcriptional silencing in a cancer-specific manner. NSUN7 epigenetic inactivation was common in liver malignant cells and we coupled bisulfite conversion of cellular RNA with next-generation sequencing (bsRNA-seq) to found the RNA targets of this poorly characterized putative methyltransferase. Using knock-out and restoration-of-function models, we observed that the mRNA of the coiled-coil domain containing 9B (CCDC9B) gene required NSUN7-mediated methylation for transcript instability. Most important, proteomics analyses determined that CCDC9B loss impaired protein levels of its partner, the MYC-regulator Influenza Virus NS1A Binding Protein (IVNS1ABP), creating sensitivity to bromodomain inhibitors in those liver cancer cells exhibiting NSUN7 epigenetic silencing. The DNA methylation-associated loss of NSUN7 was also observed in primary liver tumors where it was associated with poor overall survival and an immune-like signature, providing a potential attractive therapeutic niche for the current use of immune checkpoint inhibitors in hepatocellular carcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from HEP3B2-1-7 EV- and CCDC9B-FLAG-transfected cells were immunoprecipitated with Anti-Flag M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma) in 1X TBS buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions. Beads were then washed five times with 1X TBS buffer. Prior to digestion, immunoprecipitation efficiency was assessed by boiling and loading 10% of beads with 1X Laemmli buffer on a polyacrylamide gel. The remaining 90% of beads were washed with 100mM Tris and reduced and alkylated with DTT and CAA in 6M Urea 100mM Tris. Proteins were overnight digested with 1 ug of trypsin at 30 °C. Samples were desalted using PolyLC C18 pipette tips, and tryptic peptides were reconstituted with 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution. Peptides were separated using an Evosep EV1106 column (150 μm × 150 mm, 1.9 μm) (Evosep) at a flow rate of 500nL/min with an 88 min run and fitted on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific), using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 350–1,400. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution m/z range (350-1,400 a.m.u), the highest charge state ions per scan were fragmented in the HCD (28% Collision Energy) and detected in the Orbitrap (MS1 120k, and MS2 30k) resolution. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software (v4.2.28.14) (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (v.1.6.2.6a) using the built-in search engine Andromeda to search against the Swissprot Human database downloaded from UniprotKB website in March 26, 2020. The final list of identified peptides and proteins were filtered by using a 5% False Discovery Rate (FDR) both at peptide and protein level. To enhance the identification of proteins the “match between runs” option was selected. The statistical analysis of the protein-protein interactions found in our experimental conditions was performed with the Significance Analysis of the INTeractome (SAINT) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maxquant, Interactome, Methyltransferase, Nsun7, Label free

### Affiliations
Cancer Epigenetics Group,  Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute,  08916, Badalona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Manel Esteller
Cancer Epigenetics Group,  Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute,  08916, Badalona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain


