### Accession
PXD011876

### Title
Protein aggregation mediates protein complex stoichiometry in aneuploid cells, part 3

### Description
Aneuploidy, a condition characterized by chromosome gains and losses, causes reduced fitness and numerous cellular stresses, including increased protein aggregation. Here, we identify protein complex stoichiometry imbalances as a major cause of protein aggregation in aneuploid cells. Subunits of protein complexes encoded on excess chromosomes aggregate in aneuploid cells, which is suppressed when expression of other subunits is coordinately altered. We further show that excess subunits are either degraded or aggregate and that protein aggregation is nearly as effective as protein degradation at lowering levels of excess proteins. Our study explains why proteotoxic stress is a universal feature of the aneuploid state and reveals protein aggregation as a form of dosage compensation to cope with disproportionate expression of protein complex subunits.

### Sample Protocol
Aggregate purification and analysis. Aggregate purification was carried out based on methods published by Koplin et al., (2010), with some modifications to the cell lysis procedure. Cells were grown to exponential phase in SC medium under the conditions indicated above. Sodium azide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM in the cultures before pelleting cells. 10 OD600 units of cell pellets were washed with 50 mM sodium azide and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen pellets were then resuspended in 1 mL of buffer containing 1M sorbitol, 100mM sodium citrate, 60mM EDTA, 10mM DTT, pH 7.0 (SCED), 1mM PMSF, and 2x protease inhibitor tablets (Roche). Cells were pelleted then resuspended in 1 mL of SCED buffer containing 1 mg/mL 20T Zymolyase (MP Biomedicals) and rotated gently for 8 minutes at room temperature. Digested cells were pelleted by spinning at 250xg for 5 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were washed gently in ice cold SCED buffer containing 1mM PMSF and 2x protease inhibitors. Cells were lysed by resuspending in 1.5 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer containing 20mM NaPi pH 6.8, 10mM DTT, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% Tween 20 (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM PMSF, and 5x protease inhibitors and then sonicated for 8 pulses at output level 4, 50% duty cycle. Lysates were cleared by spinning for 2 minutes at 850xg at 4°C yielding the total lysate fraction. Protein concentrations of the cleared lysate were determined by Bradford (Bio-Rad). Quantitative Proteomics of Yeast Aggregates 5 OD600 units of heavy labeled cells were mixed with 5 OD600 units of light labeled cells and aggregates were harvested as described above. Purified SILAC-labeled aggregates were boiled in SDS lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 2mM EDTA, 2% SDS) and separated on 4-12% Tris-Glycine by SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen). Proteins were visualized by Coomassie staining (45% methanol, 5% glacial acetic acid, 3g/L Coomassie brilliant blue G-250) and subjected to gel band cutting (Shevchenko et al., 2006), destaining, and in-gel Lys-C digest at a 50:1 protein to protease ratio to liberate peptides. Following digest, the buffer containing peptides and gel slices were acidified using 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, and recovered peptides were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each gel fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry MS data were collected using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled with a Famos autosampler (LC Packings) and an Accela600 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on an ~18cm column with 100µm inner diameter packed with of Accucore150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA); ~1µg peptides were loaded onto the column for each analysis. Peptides were separated with a 2hour gradient of 5-26% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ~300nL/min. For the MS1 scan, resolution was set to 70,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. We selected the top 20 precursors for HCD MS2 analysis with the following parameters: resolution, 17,500; AGC 1 × 105; maximum injection time, 90 ms; isolation window, 2 Th; normalized collision energy (NCE), 25; and centroid spectrum data type. In addition, unassigned and singly charged species were excluded from MS2 analysis, and dynamic exclusion was set to automatic. SILAC mass spectrometry of total lysate and soluble fractions Total lysate samples were prepared, and soluble fractions (supernatant post aggregate isolation) were collected as described above. Each sample was fractionated using off-line basic pH reversed-phase chromatography (BPRP HPLC). Peptides were subjected to a 50-min linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). The peptide mixture was fractionated into a total of 96 fractions, which were consolidated into 24, from which 12 non-adjacent samples were analyzed (Paulo et al., 2016). Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each consolidated fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Samples were analyzed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer using the same instrument method and data processing as described above for yeast aggregate samples.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. MS2 spectra were searched with a database including all predictive ORFs for entries from the yeast SGD (http://www.yeastgenome.org/download-data; downloaded March 12, 2014). For human aggregate samples, Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt database (10 August 2011). Both yeast and human databases were concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reverse order. Searches were performed using a 50ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and heavy lysine (K8) incorporation (+8.0142) were set as a variable modification. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were altered to a 1% False discovery rate (FDR) (Elias and Gygi, 2007; 2010). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Peptide-spectral matches were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% FDR and then further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Furthermore, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. 4 gel band regions were cut per sample (individual lanes) of the SDS-PAGE gel; these 4 regions were processed separately and each is an independent MS sample (to decrease complexity of peptides in each run). Protein assembly was utilized to group the 4 runs of a given sample together for batched analysis and calculation of log2(Heavy/Light) ratios. The resulting data were filtered for SILAC quantified proteins based on the summed signal to noise for heavy and light peptides; contaminant peptides identified in the search were removed at this step. An intensity cutoff of 10 was applied for summed heavy plus light channels, and each individual channel had an intensity cutoff of 5 (to avoid identifying proteins with an intensity of 0 in either the light or heavy channel; i.e. proteins found only in one condition or the other). A SILAC-labeled total lysate reference sample (to allow for normalization of SILAC mixing) was obtained as described above.

### Publication Abstract
Aneuploidy, a condition characterized by chromosome gains and losses, causes reduced fitness and numerous cellular stresses, including increased protein aggregation. Here, we identify protein complex stoichiometry imbalances as a major cause of protein aggregation in aneuploid cells. Subunits of protein complexes encoded on excess chromosomes aggregate in aneuploid cells, which is suppressed when expression of other subunits is coordinately altered. We further show that excess subunits are either degraded or aggregate and that protein aggregation is nearly as effective as protein degradation at lowering levels of excess proteins. Our study explains why proteotoxic stress is a universal feature of the aneuploid state and reveals protein aggregation as a form of dosage compensation to cope with disproportionate expression of protein complex subunits.

### Keywords
Yeast, Proteostasis, Aneuploidy, Aggregate

### Affiliations
David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research Howard Hughes Medical Institute Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Laura Vaites

### Lab Head
Dr Angelika Amon
David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research Howard Hughes Medical Institute Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02139, USA


