### Accession
PXD018372

### Title
Stress response within the host affects antibiotic persistence and treatment outcome in Staphylococcus aureus infections

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus can cause severe invasive infections that require prolonged antibiotic treatment. Although S. aureus can easily acquire antibiotic resistance, even fully susceptible bacteria can persist and survive antibiotic therapy, thus complicating treatment. These so-called persisters are phenotypic variants of bacteria characterized by an arrested-growth phenotype that can tolerate high concentrations of chemotherapeutics and are associated with chronic and recurrent infections. Here, we show that S. aureus recovered directly from infection sites, displayed an increased bacterial lag-phase heterogeneity, forming more non-stable small colonies, indicating the presence of dormant bacteria. Infection modelling showed that host-mediated stress, including acidic pH, neutrophil exposure and murine abscesses, as well as antibiotic treatment, promoted formation of persisters both in vitro and in vivo.  Proteomics and RNA-sequencing revealed molecular changes in bacteria in response to acidic stress leading to an overall more virulent population. However, after persister-enrichment, S. aureus displayed downregulation of pathways involved in virulence, cell division, and DNA replication, while ribosomal proteins, nucleotide-, and amino acid- metabolic pathways were upregulated, suggesting their requirement to fuel and maintain the persister phenotype. We demonstrate that decreased aconitase activity and ATP-levels as well as accumulation of insoluble proteins correlated with dormancy and growth reactivation cycles. Combination of antibiotics with retinoid derivatives, especially CD1530, significantly reduced both persisters and total bacterial load in a murine infection model. Our study provides an in-depth characterization of S. aureus persisters and shows that treatment failure due to antibiotic persistence could be addressed by using retinoid derivatives in combination with conventional antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus cells (2-5*108 per sample) were lysed in 50 µL of lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5) using thirty cycles of sonication (30 sec on, 30 sec off per cycle) on a Bioruptor (Dianode). Following sonication, proteins in the bacterial lysate were reduced by TCEP at 95°C for 10 min. Proteins were then alkylated using 15 mM chloroacetamide at 37°C for 30 min and further digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w, trypsin/protein; Promega, USA) at 37°C overnight. After digestion, the samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Peptide desalting was performed using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Germany) following the manufactures instructions. After drying the samples under vacuum, peptides were stored at -20° C and dissolved in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml upon use.

### Data Protocol
For each sample, aliquots of 1 µg total peptides were subjected to LC-MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP HPLC column (75 μm × 30 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil Pur C18 AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and a custom-made column heater (60°C). Peptides were separated using a step wise linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 19.9% water) to 35% solvent B over 75 min to 50% solvent B over 15 min to 95% solvent B over 2 min and 95% solvent B over 18 min at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min. Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 20 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 45 seconds. For MS1, 3x106 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1x105 ions, accumulation time of 50 ms and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 28%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The acquired raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf-files were searched using MASCOT against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the Staphylococcus aureus proteome (UniProt, NCTC 8325, release date: 09.12.2016) and commonly observed contaminants generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The following search criteria were used: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> causes invasive infections and easily acquires antibiotic resistance. Even antibiotic-susceptible <i>S. aureus</i> can survive antibiotic therapy and persist, requiring prolonged treatment and surgical interventions. These so-called persisters display an arrested-growth phenotype, tolerate high antibiotic concentrations, and are associated with chronic and recurrent infections. To characterize these persisters, we assessed <i>S. aureus</i> recovered directly from a patient suffering from a persistent infection. We show that host-mediated stress, including acidic pH, abscess environment, and antibiotic exposure promoted persister formation in vitro and in vivo. Multiomics analysis identified molecular changes in <i>S. aureus</i> in response to acid stress leading to an overall virulent population. However, further analysis of a persister-enriched population revealed major molecular reprogramming in persisters, including down-regulation of virulence and cell division and up-regulation of ribosomal proteins, nucleotide-, and amino acid-metabolic pathways, suggesting their requirement to fuel and maintain the persister phenotype and highlighting that persisters are not completely metabolically inactive. Additionally, decreased aconitase activity and ATP levels and accumulation of insoluble proteins involved in transcription, translation, and energy production correlated with persistence in <i>S. aureus</i>, underpinning the molecular mechanisms that drive the persister phenotype. Upon regrowth, these persisters regained their virulence potential and metabolically active phenotype, including reduction of insoluble proteins, exhibiting a reversible state, crucial for recurrent infections. We further show that a targeted antipersister combination therapy using retinoid derivatives and antibiotics significantly reduced lag-phase heterogeneity and persisters in a murine infection model. Our results provide molecular insights into persisters and help explain why persistent <i>S. aureus</i> infections are so difficult to treat.

### Keywords
Antibiotic persistence

### Affiliations
University of Basel, Biozentrum, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland, Tel. +41 61 207 2059
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Thomas Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
University of Basel, Biozentrum, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland, Tel. +41 61 207 2059


