### Accession
PXD045653

### Title
Revealing the transitory and local effect of the demethylation agent zebularine on plant development and proteome dynamics of Salix purpurea

### Description
DNA methylation plays major roles in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression, transposon and transcriptional silencing, and DNA repair, with implications in developmental processes and phenotypic plasticity. Relevantly for arboreal species, DNA methylation constitute a regulative layer in cell wall dynamics associated with xylogenesis. The use of methyltransferase and/or demethylase inhibitors has been proven informative to shed light on the methylome dynamics behind the regulation of these processes. The present work employs the cytidine analog zebularine to inhibit DNA methyltransferases and induce DNA hypomethylation in Salix purpurea plantlets grown in vitro and in soil. An integrative approach has been adopted to highlight the effects of hypomethylation on proteomic dynamics, exposing the age-specific (three weeks of in vitro culture and one month of growth in soil) and tissue-specific (shoot and root) effects following exposure to zebularine. Significant proteomic shifts were revealed in the development from in vitro to in-soil culture and, whereas zebularine treatment decreased methylation in three-weeks roots, a functionally heterogeneous subset of protein entries was differentially accumulated in shoot samples, including entries associated with cell wall dynamics, tissue morphogenesis, and hormonal regulation. The identification of tissue-specific proteomic hallmarks in combination with hypomethylating agents provides new insights into the role of DNA methylation in early plant development in willow species.

### Sample Protocol
S. purpurea in vitro plantlets obtained by bud culture of the PSP33 genotype selected from the Salix purpurea germplasm collection at the University Warmia Mazuria in Olsztyn (Poland) (Sulima et al., 2017a, 2017b). The conditions for in vitro tissue culture were previously optimized for S. purpurea genotypes (Gomes et al., 2019). Namely, for the present work, actively growing stems of 5-10 mm in diameter were cut into nodal segments of 5-10 mm in length, each one containing one or to axillary buds. The resulting explants were surface sterilized for 15 min in a 10% (v/v) sodium hypochlorite solution and subsequently rinsed three times with sterile water. The explants were then collocated in upright position in plates containing full strength Murashige and Skoog (MS medium, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), 30 g L-1 sucrose (Duchefa, The Netherlands) and solidified with 8 g L-1 agar (Micro-agar, Duchefa, The Netherlands). The in vitro explants were kept under cool white fluorescent light at 20 μmol m-2 s-1, 16 h light/8 h dark photoperiod, 40% humidity and day/night temperature of 20-22 °C. After 3-4 weeks, 10-15 mm plantlets were excised from the stem and sub-cultured to fresh MS30. To maintain and propagate the S. purpurea in vitro culture, 15-20 mm explants (with two axillary buds) were sub-cultured to fresh MS30 every 6 weeks.  S. purpurea in vitro apical explants (15-20 mm) were transferred to glass jars containing full-strength MS30 medium and grown under the same culture conditions described in the previous section: cool white fluorescent light at 20 μmol m-2 s-1, 16 h light/8 h dark photoperiod, 40% humidity and day/night temperature of 20-22 °C. To administrate the treatments necessary to alter the 5-mC levels, the culture medium was supplemented with 25 µM and 50 µM zebularine (‘ZEB25’ and ‘ZEB50’ plants, respectively), whereas no treatment was administered to control (‘CTRL’) plants. The explants were grown under these conditions for 14 days. During this period of treatment, both zebularine doses prevent root formation. After treatment administration, apical explants (15-20 mm) from treated and untreated plantlets were transferred to fresh MS30 medium non-supplemented with zebularine and grown for 21 days to allow recovery from the treatments and subsequent root development also in zebularine-treated samples. Stem (‘S’ samples) and root (‘R’ samples) tissue samples were collected after 21 days of recovery (‘3W’, ‘three weeks’ samples). After 21 days of recovery, the rooted plantlets were transferred to soil non-supplemented with zebularine and grown in these conditions for 30 days (‘1M’, ‘one month’ samples,). Stem and root tissue samples were also collected after this period of culture in soil. All the samples were stored at -80 °C until analysis. Then, whole protein extractions were made from the roots and shoot samples collected from plantlets treated with 0 and 50 µM zebularine (CTRL and ZEB50 samples, respectively), after three weeks of in vitro recovery (3W samples) and one month of after transfer to the soil (1M samples). A total of 5-6 biological replicates were considered for each combination of tissue, treatment and timepoint. One plant was used for each replicate. ~100 mg of frozen tissue was ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen. Powders were resuspended in 1 ml buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5) supplemented with protease inhibitor (cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease inhibitor plates, Roche, 1 tablet for 12 ml buffer). Samples were vortexed, incubated on ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 12.000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and stored at -80 °C.  Dried protein extract was dissolved in 8 M urea and 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a concentration of 1µg/µl.   Proteins were first reduced by addition of DTT to a concentration of 15 mM and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition iodoacetamide to a concentration of 10 mM and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 1 µg lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was purified using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent) and eluted with 0.1% tri-fluoretic acid in water/acetonitrile, 40/60 (v/v). Peptides were dried completely by vacuum drying and stored at -20°C. Purified peptides were re-dissolved in MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC™ column (C18-endcapped functionality, 300 µm wide channels, 5 µm porous-shell pillars, inter pillar distance of 2.5 µm and a depth of 20 µm; Pharmafluidics, Belgium). It was kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient reaching 55% MS solvent B after 145 min and 99% MS solvent B  at 150 min, followed by a 10-minutes wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The first 15 min the flow rate was set to 750 nl/min after which it was kept constant at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired in 3s acquisition cycles at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum injection time of 30 ms. The precursor ions were filtered for charge states (2-7 required), dynamic range (60 s; +/- 10 ppm window) and intensity (minimal intensity of 5E3). The precursor ions were selected in the multipole with an isolation window of 1.2 Da and accumulated to an AGC target of 12E3 or a maximum injection time of 40 ms and activated using HCD fragmentation (34% NCE). The fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at normal scan rate. The polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass). For each experiment, LC-MS/MS runs of all 23 samples were searched together using the MaxQuant algorithm (version 1.6.10.34) with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human protein sequences in the S. Purpurea database (Spurpurea_289_v1.0.protein primaryTranscriptOnly, containing 37.865 protein sequences) and Spurpurea_289_v1, containing 61,520 protein sequences) both provided by Phytozome (https://phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Cytidine analogue, Proteomics, Purple willow, Cell wall

### Affiliations
1. Department of Integrative Plant Biology, Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland. 2. Associação CECOLAB, Rua Nossa Sra. da Conceição2, 3405-155 Oliveira do Hospital, Portugal
Ghent University - VIB

### Submitter
Evy Timmerman

### Lab Head
Dr Jorge Almiro Pinto Paiva1
1. Department of Integrative Plant Biology, Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland. 2. Associação CECOLAB, Rua Nossa Sra. da Conceição2, 3405-155 Oliveira do Hospital, Portugal


