### Accession
PXD006385

### Title
Peptidomics analysis of saliva of the two-spotted spider mite Tetranychus urticae

### Description
Recently, we elucidated T. urticae’s repertoire of secreted salivary proteins, revealing several members of expanded protein families with unknown functions [PMID: 27703040]. In this study, mite salivary secretions were additionally examined using a peptidomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of spider mite saliva was done as in Jonckheere et al. 2016 [PMID: 27703040]. Briefly, mites on P. vulgaris, G. max and S. lycopersicum were collected (mites originating from the same replicated host plant line were pooled) and transferred to feeding arenas containing holidic artificial diet encapsulated in parafilm. The spider mites were allowed to feed for 24 hours, after which the remaining diet, containing saliva, was collected for all host plant-specific samples separately. Samples were stored at -80 °C until enough sample (about 0.3 ml, 10–15 diet hemispheres/sample) was collected for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. Two technical replicates of artificial diets enriched with saliva of mites maintained on three different host plant species were analyzed in this nano-LC MS/MS study. Samples (0.2 - 0.3 ml) were filtered on a Millipore Amicon Ultra-0.5 ml 10K spindown filter (Merck Chemicals, Belgium). The flow-through, containing the peptides was collected and a solid phase extraction was performed on a Pierce C18 spin column (ThermoFisher Scientific, Belgium), according to the manufacturers protocol. The eluate was collected, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80°C until analysis. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometric (LC-MS) analysis was performed on an Easy nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The dried eluate was dissolved in 10 µl of 2% acetonitrile in HPLC-grade water. Half (5 µl) of this 10 µl solution was loaded on the trapping column (PepMap C18, 300 µm x 20 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) with an isocratic flow of 2% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 5 µl min-1. After 2 min, the column-switching valve was switched, placing the pre-column online with the analytical capillary column, an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, 50 µm i.d. x 15 cm, Thermo Scientific). Separation was conducted using a linear gradient from 2% acetonitrile in water, 0.1% formic acid to 40% acetonitrile in water, 0.1% formic acid in 100 min. The flow rate was set at 300 nl min-1. The Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap was set up in a data dependent MS/MS mode where a full scan spectrum (350–2000 m/z, resolution 60,000) was followed by a maximum of twenty HCD tandem mass spectra (100 to 2000 m/z). Peptide ions were selected as the 20 most intense peaks of the MS1 scan. The normalized collision energy used was 28% in HCD. We applied a dynamic exclusion list of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using OMSSA version 2.1.9 [PMID 15473683], X!Tandem version X! Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) [PMID 14976030] and MS-GF+ version Beta (v10282) [PMID 25358478]. The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 3.2.9 [PMID  21337703]. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the T. urticae protein database holding 19,086 T. urticae target sequences (version of August 11th 2016) and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (available at http://www.thegpm.org/crap/; 116 sequences). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: no cleavage specificity; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 10.0 ppm as MS2 tolerances; variable modifications: Amidation of the peptide C-term (--0.984016 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), variable modifications during refinement procedure: Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da).Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.2 [PMID 25574629]. PSMs were validated at a 1.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
The salivary protein repertoire released by the herbivorous pest Tetranychus urticae is assumed to hold keys to its success on diverse crops. We report on a spider mite-specific protein family that is expanded in T. urticae. The encoding genes have an expression pattern restricted to the anterior podocephalic glands, while peptide fragments were found in the T. urticae secretome, supporting the salivary nature of these proteins. As peptide fragments were identified in a host-dependent manner, we designated this family as the SHOT (secreted host-responsive protein of Tetranychidae) family. The proteins were divided in three groups based on sequence similarity. Unlike TuSHOT3 genes, TuSHOT1 and TuSHOT2 genes were highly expressed when feeding on a subset of family Fabaceae, while expression was depleted on other hosts. TuSHOT1 and TuSHOT2 expression was induced within 24 h after certain host transfers, pointing toward transcriptional plasticity rather than selection as the cause. Transfer from an 'inducer' to a 'noninducer' plant was associated with slow yet strong downregulation of TuSHOT1 and TuSHOT2, occurring over generations rather than hours. This asymmetric on and off regulation points toward host-specific effects of SHOT proteins, which is further supported by the diversity of SHOT genes identified in Tetranychidae with a distinct host repertoire.

### Keywords
Acari, Arthropod, Saliva, Effector, Herbivore

### Affiliations
Ghent University
Department of Crop Protection Faculty of Bioscience Engineering Ghent University Coupure Links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Wannes Dermauw

### Lab Head
Dr Wannes Dermauw
Department of Crop Protection Faculty of Bioscience Engineering Ghent University Coupure Links 653, 9000 Ghent, Belgium


