### Accession
PXD013786

### Title
Paradoxical mitotic exit induced by a small molecule inhibitor of APC/C Cdc20

### Description
The Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome (APC/C) is a mega-dalton  ubiquitin ligase that initiates mitotic exit by targeting substrates for degradation. The  APC/C is activated by Cdc20, which acts as a substrate receptor, and is inhibited by the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC), which delays mitotic exit when the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) is activated.  We previously identified apcin, a small molecule ligand of Cdc20, as an inhibitor of APC/CCdc20. Surprisingly, we found that apcin paradoxically  accelerates substrate degradation and promotes mitotic exit in cells with high SAC activity.  Biochemical studies indicate that apcin cooperates with p31comet to relieve  MCC-dependent inhibition of APC/C. Apcin’s behavior as an antagonist of Cdc20 can  thus result in either net inhibition of APC/C, delaying mitotic exit when SAC activity is slow, or net activation of APC/C, promoting mitotic exit when SAC activity is high. Genetic experiments suggest that the dual behaviors of apcin arise from targeting a common binding site in Cdc20 that is required for both substrate ubiquitination as well as efficient  APC/C inhibition by MCC. We therefore establish a new mechanism through which a small molecule, by targeting a single site on a dynamic protein interface, can lead to opposing biological effects depending on the regulatory context.

### Sample Protocol
The TMT labeling and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis was based on the SL-TMT sample processing strategy. Briefly, proteins were precipitated via Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation. TCA was added to a final concentration of 20% v/v and samples were incubated at 4 °C overnight.  Samples were centrifuged at 14,000  RPM for 15 minutes at 4 °C and subsequently washed twice in ice-cold 100% acetone and once in ice-cold 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH  8.5 and digested at room temperature overnight with Lys-C protease (Wako Chemicals)  at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin (Pierce Biotechnology) was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio, incubated for 6 hours at 37 °C.  Tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile to a final concentration of 20 μg/uL of which 7 μL was added to the peptides (~100 µg). Following incubation at room temperature for 1.5  hours, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%  (v/v). The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples. The pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample was vacuum centrifuged and fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce, 84868). Twelve fractions were collected using: 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 27.5%, 30%, 35%, and 60% acetonitrile. Samples were pooled in pairs (every 6th sample was pooled) to generate 6 final fractions, acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer  (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography  (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, we loaded approximately 2 μg onto the column. Peptides were separated using a 120 minute gradient of 3 to 25% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of 450 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based  TMT method, which has been shown to reduce ion interference compared to MS2  quantification51. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400−1400 Th, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of: collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion  trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 120 ms), and isolation window at 0.7. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum in which multiple MS2 fragment ions are captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65, AGC 1.0E5, maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 400 Th). For MS3 analysis, we used charge state-dependent isolation windows: For charge state z=2, the isolation window was set at 1.3 Th, for z=3 at 1 Th, for z=4 at 0.8 Th, and for z=5 at 0.7 Th.

### Publication Abstract
The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) is a ubiquitin ligase that initiates anaphase and mitotic exit. APC/C is activated by Cdc20 and inhibited by the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC), which delays mitotic exit when the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) is activated. We previously identified apcin as a small molecule ligand of Cdc20 that inhibits APC/C<sup>Cdc20</sup> and prolongs mitosis. Here we find that apcin paradoxically shortens mitosis when SAC activity is high. These opposing effects of apcin arise from targeting of a common binding site in Cdc20 required for both substrate ubiquitination and MCC-dependent APC/C inhibition. Furthermore, we found that apcin cooperates with p31<sup>comet</sup> to relieve MCC-dependent inhibition of APC/C. Apcin therefore causes either net APC/C inhibition, prolonging mitosis when SAC activity is low, or net APC/C activation, shortening mitosis when SAC activity is high, demonstrating that a small molecule can produce opposing biological effects depending on regulatory context.

### Keywords
Apcin, Mitosis, Cdc20

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


