### Accession
PXD012220

### Title
Effects of CerS4 deletion in murine epidermis on proteome and lipidome

### Description
Epidermal deletion of the lipid modifying enzyme CerS4 causes epidermal barrier impairments associated with human skin diseases. Proteomes of Wt newborn and P47 mice were compared in order to identify molecular differences between barrier formation and maintenance. Proteomes of epidermal splits from Ctr and CerS4epi-/- at different ages (P21, P33, P47) were compared, to identify the effect of CerS4 on barrier maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Epidermal splits were diluted in 8M urea and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were sonicated with a microtip (60%, 2sec, 0.5 sec intervals) and cleared by centrifugation (table top centrifuge, 20 000g, 10min room temperature). 30µg of lysate was reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA and digested with lysC and trypsin before loading the peptides on SDB-RP stage tips. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC coupled to Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer in a 4h gradient.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Maxquant 1.5.7.4 or later and Uniprot mouse proteome database, default parameters plus enabeling the following options: 1. match between runs 2. match unidentified features 3. re-quantify 4. LFQ 5. Unique peptides for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal barrier dysfunction is associated with a wide range of highly prevalent inflammatory skin diseases. However, the molecular processes that drive epidermal barrier maintenance are still largely unknown. Here, using quantitative proteomics, lipidomics, and mouse genetics, we characterize epidermal barrier maintenance versus a newly established barrier and functionally identify differential ceramide synthase 4 protein expression as one key difference. We show that epidermal loss of ceramide synthase 4 first disturbs epidermal lipid metabolism and adult epidermal barrier function, ultimately resulting in chronic skin barrier disease characterized by acanthosis, hyperkeratosis, and immune cell accumulation. Importantly, prolonged barrier dysfunction induced by loss of ceramide synthase 4 induced a barrier repair response that largely recapitulates molecular programs of barrier establishment. Collectively, this study provides an unbiased temporal proteomic characterization of barrier maintenance and disturbed homeostasis and shows that lipid homeostasis is essential to maintain adult skin barrier function to prevent disease.

### Keywords
Barrier maintenance, Barrier formation, Ceramides, Epidermal barrier, Lipid homeostasis, Cers4

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne
Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne

### Submitter
Frederik Tellkamp

### Lab Head
Dr Carien M. Niessen
Department of Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne


