### Accession
PXD026217

### Title
OTS Development and E. coli Proteome LC-MSMS

### Description
Over the past twenty years, the development of orthogonal biological systems has sparked a revolution in our ability to study cellular physiology. Orthogonal translation systems (OTSs) enable site-specific incorporation of hundreds of non-standard amino acids, offering unprecedented access to the study of cellular mechanisms modulated by post-translational modifications (e.g. protein phosphorylation). Although development of phosphoserine-OTSs (pSerOTS) has been significant, little work has focused on the biology of OTS development and utilization. To better understand the impact of OTSs on host physiology, we utilize pSerOTS as a model to systematically explore the extent to which OTS components interact with Escherichia coli. Using this information, we constructed pSerOTS variants designed to enhance OTS orthogonality by minimizing interactions with host processes and decreasing stress response activation. Our expanded understanding of OTS:host interactions enables informed OTS design practices which minimize the negative impact of OTSs while improving OTS performance across a range of experimental settings.

### Sample Protocol
MS-READ analysis: Affinity purified, buffer exchanged protein was digested and analyzed by mass spectrometry as described previously with some modifications . Briefly, the concentration of protein was determined by UV280 spectroscopy and 5 μg ELP-GFP (MS-READ) reporter from E. coli was and dissolved in 12.5 μl solubilization buffer consisting of 10 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.5 (23°C), 10 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 % acid labile surfactant (ALS-101, Protea). Samples were heat denatured for 20 min at 55 °C in a heat block. Alkylation of cysteines was performed with iodoacetamide (IAM) using a final IAM concentration of 24 mM. The alkylation reaction proceeded for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess IAM was quenched with DTT and the buffer concentration was adjusted using a 1 M Tris-HCl  pH 8.5 resulting in a final Tris-HCl concentration of 150 mM. The reaction was then diluted with water and 1 M CaCl2 solution to obtain a ALS-101 concentration of 0.045 % and 2 mM CaCl2 respectively. Finally, sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) was added to obtain an enzyme/protein ratio of 1/5.3 and the digest was incubated for 15 h at 37 °C without shaking. The digest was quenched with 20% TFA solution resulting in a sample pH of 2. Cleavage of the acid cleavable detergent proceeded for 15 min at room temperature. Digests were frozen at -80 °C until further processing. Peptides were desalted on C18 UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group Inc.) essentially following the instructions provided by the manufacturer but using 300 μl elution solvent consisting of 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA for peptide elution. Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at room temperature. Dried peptides were reconstituted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Digestion of intact E. coli for shotgun proteomics: 20 mL cultures were inoculated to a starting OD 600nm of 0.01 in LB media using an overnight culture to stationary phase. After reaching mid-log, cells chilled on ice and pelleted by centrifugation for 2 min at 8000 rpm. The resulting pellet was frozen at -80 °C for downstream processing. For cell lysis and protein digest, cell pellets were thawed on ice and 2 ul of cell pellet was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube containing 40 μl of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.5 % ALS). Cells were lysed by vortex for 30 s and disulfide bonds were reduced by incubating the reaction for 30 min. at 55 °C . The reaction was briefly quenched on ice and 16 μl of a 60 mM IAM solution was added. Alkylation of cysteines proceeded for 30 min in the dark. Excess IAM was quenched with 14 μl of a 25 mM DTT solution and the sample was then diluted with 330 μl of 183 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0  supplemented with 2 mM CaCl2. Proteins were digested overnight using 12 μg sequencing grade trypsin. Following digestion, the reaction was then quenched with 12.5 μl of a 20 % TFA solution, resulting in a sample pH<3. Remaining ALS reagent was cleaved for 15 min at room temperature. The sample ( ~30 μg protein) was desalted by reverse phase clean-up using C18 UltraMicroSpin columns. The desalted peptides were dried at room temperature in a rotary vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 30 μl 70 % formic acid 0.1 % TFA (3:8 v/v) for peptide quantitation by UV280. The sample was diluted to a final concentration of 0.2 μg/μl and 5 μl (1 μg) was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. Data acquisition and analysis: LC-MS/MS was performed using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class (Waters) and Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The analytical column employed was a 65-cm-long, 75-μm-internal-diameter PicoFrit column (New Objective) packed in-house to a length of 50 cm with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 Å C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch) using methanol as the packing solvent. Peptide separation was achieved using mixtures of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B) with either a 90-min gradient 0/1, 2/7, 60/24, 65/48, 70/80, 75/80, 80/1, 90/1; (min/%B, linear ramping between steps). Gradient was performed with a flowrate of 250 nl/min. At least one blank injection (5 μl 2% B) was performed between samples to eliminate peptide carryover on the analytical column. 100 fmol of trypsin-digested BSA or 100 ng trypsin-digested wildtype K-12 MG1655 E. coli proteins were run periodically between samples as quality control standards. The mass spectrometer was operated with the following parameters: (MS1) 70,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC target, 300–1,700 m/z scan range; (data dependent-MS2) 17,500 resolution, 1e6 AGC target, top 10 mode, 1.6 m/z isolation window, 27 normalized collision energy, 90 s dynamic exclusion, unassigned and +1 charge exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.6.10.43 with Deamidation (NQ), Oxidation (M), and Phospho(STY) as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification with up to 3 missed cleavages, 5 AA minimum length, and 1% FDR against a modified Uniprot E. coli database containing custom MS-READ reporter proteins. MS-READ search results were analyzed using Skyline version 20.1.0.31 and proteome search results were analyzed with Perseus version 1.6.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Over the past two decades, synthetic biological systems have revolutionized the study of cellular physiology. The ability to site-specifically incorporate biologically relevant non-standard amino acids using orthogonal translation systems (OTSs) has proven particularly useful, providing unparalleled access to cellular mechanisms modulated by post-translational modifications, such as protein phosphorylation. However, despite significant advances in OTS design and function, the systems-level biology of OTS development and utilization remains underexplored. In this study, we employ a phosphoserine OTS (pSerOTS) as a model to systematically investigate global interactions between OTS components and the cellular environment, aiming to improve OTS performance. Based on this analysis, we design OTS variants to enhance orthogonality by minimizing host process interactions and reducing stress response activation. Our findings advance understanding of system-wide OTS:host interactions, enabling informed design practices that circumvent deleterious interactions with host physiology while improving OTS performance and stability. Furthermore, our study emphasizes the importance of establishing a pipeline for systematically profiling OTS:host interactions to enhance orthogonality and mitigate mechanisms underlying OTS-mediated host toxicity.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteome, Ms reporter, Ots

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine  Systems Biology Institute, Yale University
Yale University

### Submitter
Kyle Mohler

### Lab Head
Dr Jesse Rinehart
Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine  Systems Biology Institute, Yale University


