### Accession
PXD041525

### Title
A chemistry-based orthogonal enzyme-substrate design strategy for discovery of substrates of protein palmitoyltransferases

### Description
Attachment of lipids to proteins is a key form of protein modification which intersects with all areas of cellular physiology 1 . Of these, the most pervasive form of protein lipidation is protein S-acylation, also commonly known as protein palmitoylation. Protein palmitoylation is a post-translational modification whereby long chain fatty acids, most typically the 16-carbon palmitic acid, is attached to a cytosol-facing cysteine through a thioester linkage. More than 10% of the proteome is targeted by this modification2, which is catalyzed by members of the zDHHC family of integral membrane enzymes. In humans, there are 23 members of the zDHHC family localized at a variety of organellar membranes as well as the plasma membrane that catalyze protein palmitoylation. Despite having been discovered more than twenty years ago 3 4 the chemistry and biology of many of the zDHHC members remain poorly understood and for several members, few substrates have been characterized. Intriguingly, there are no primary sequence determinants that dictate sites of protein palmitoylation. Cysteines that are proximal to the membrane have a high propensity of being palmitoylated.

### Sample Protocol
Isobaric labeling of peptides and proteomic preparation Peptides were dissolved in 50-60 µL of 100 mM TEAB buffer and their resulting concentrations determined via BCA assay. From each sample, 10 µg of protein was supplemented with 3 µL of 150 fmol of internal standard (yeast ADH1, final concentration:13.5 fmol, Waters) and subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeling using TMT 6-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT 126-128 were used for the control and TMT 129-131 were used for the hDHHC3 or hDHHC20 mutant samples. To each sample 0.2 µg of the respective TMT tag was added. The sample was then normalized to 33.3 µL with 100 mM TEAB buffer. The reaction incubated at rt for 120 min. To quench the reaction 5 µL of 0.5% of NH2OH in water (v/v, final concentration: 0.08%) was added and the reaction rotated at rt for 15 min. Then the TMT-labeled samples were combined, dried, and then dissolved in 200 mM NH4HCO2 (pH 10, 300 µL). Multiplexed samples were subsequently fractionated using a homemade stage tip [three layers of SDB-XC extraction disks, (3M, 1.07 mm x 0.50 mm i.d.)] in a 200 µL pipette tip. Peptides were fractionated under high pH reverse phase conditions yielding 7 fractions of 60 µL in volume (5, 10, 15, 20, 22.5, 27.5, 80% CH3CN in 200 mM NH4HCO3, pH 10). The first two fractions were combined, then all fractions were dried by lyophilization. Samples were then dissolved in 30 µL of 0.1% aqueous CH2O2 for LC-MS3 analysis. This method is based on a previously reported method . LC-MS data acquisition Data acquisition was performed as described previously . Briefly, TMT-labeled peptides were resolved at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system (Dionex) with a reversed-phase column (75 μm i.d., 45 cm) packed in-house.79 Each fraction from the high pH prefractionation was subjected to varying 80 min gradients (7-34 % of gradient of Solvent B where Solvent A was H2O with 0.1% CH2O2 and Solvent B was CH3CN with 0.1% CH2O2) and sprayed directly into the Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 scans were collected with a resolution of 120,000 in a 320–2,000 m/z range with 100 ms max injection time (IT) and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000. The subsequent data-dependent MS/MS scans were collected with collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% with a 1.2 m/z isolation window, with max IT of 100 ms and AGC target of 5000. Acquisition at MS3 was done by selecting the top 10 precursors (SPS) for fragmentation by high-collisional energy dissociation (HCD) in the orbitrap with the following settings: 55% NCE, 2.5 m/z isolation window, 120 ms max IT, and 50,000 AGC target, and a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Prenylomic Data processing Raw data files were uploaded into MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) and searched against a non-redundant human database (UP0000000589) from Uniprot. For all but the following parameters, the default settings were maintained. Trypsin/P was used for digestion with allowance for 3 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was set to 7, protein FDR was set to 0.5, modifications in search oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-Term), and unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. MaxQuant was run through the MaxQuantCmd.exc at the University of Minnesota Supercomputing Institute. The proteingroup.txt file generated was uploaded into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). Proteins that were potential contaminants and reverse peptides were removed by site identification. Raw intensities were transformed to log2 values, and proteins with more than 3 out of 6 values returning “NaN” after transformation were removed. Missing values were imputed from the normal distribution of the remaining values. From here all proteins with a sequence coverage of less than 5% were removed. Reported values (TMT) were normalized by subtracting rows by mean value and columns by median value. Statistical analysis was performed using a two-sample t-test FDR = 5 % and s0 = 0.1. Data was exported to excel for generation of plots and figures. Enriched palmitoylated proteins were identified using SwissPlam.

### Publication Abstract
Protein palmitoylation, with more than 5000 substrates, is the most prevalent form of protein lipidation. Palmitoylated proteins participate in almost all areas of cellular physiology and have been linked to several human diseases. Twenty-three zDHHC enzymes catalyze protein palmitoylation with extensive overlap among the substrates of each zDHHC member. Currently, there is no global strategy to delineate the physiological substrates of individual zDHHC enzymes without perturbing the natural cellular pool. Here, we outline a general approach to accomplish this on the basis of synthetic orthogonal substrates that are only compatible with engineered zDHHC enzymes. We demonstrate the utility of this strategy by validating known substrates and use it to identify novel substrates of two human zDHHC enzymes. Finally, we employ this method to discover and explore conserved palmitoylation in a family of host restriction factors against pathogenic viruses, including SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Palmitoyltransferases, Palmitoylation, Bump-hole

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota 

### Submitter
Shelby Auger

### Lab Head
Dr Mark, D.
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota


