### Accession
PXD031942

### Title
Day-night phosphoproteome analysis in WT, pgm mutant and sweet11/sweet12 mutant

### Description
In this progect, we anallyzed the phosphoproteome change of shoot and root from WT pgm mutant and sweet11/sweet12 mutant at the end of day and the end of night. The purpose is to understand the role of sugar distribution in shoot and root phopshoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
1) WT, pgm mutant and sweet11/sweet12 mutant were germinated and grown under 16/8 day/night (22 °C, 120 E/s*m2) in 1/2 MS medium in a hydroponic cultivation system. After 21 days, shoot and root were starved separately for microsomal and soluble protein preparation 2) A total of 1 to 1.5 g of shoot or roots (fresh weight) was homogenized in 10 ml ice-cold extraction buffer (330 mM mannitol, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-MES, fresh 5 mM DTT, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride, pH 7.5) in the presence of 0.5% v/v proteinase inhibitor mixture (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) and phosphatase inhibitors (25 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM benzamidin, 3 M proteinase inhibitor leupeptin). The homogenate was centrifuged for 15 min at 7500 g at 4 °C. The pellet was discarded, and the supernatant was centrifuged for 75 min at 48,000 g at 4 °C. The microsomal pellet was resuspended in 100µl of UTU (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, pH 8). Supernatant (soluble protein) were precipitated using 3×Aceton.  3) Around 150 µg microsomal fraction from shoot or root material was subjected to the phosphopeptide enrichment. In-solution tryptic digested peptides were dried before mixing with the beads. TiO2 beads were first suspended with methanol and distributed to tubes (1 mg TiO2 beads per 100 µg protein) then methanol was washed away with 100 µL Elution buffer (1% NH4OH) for 10 min. The beads were equilibrated with three times 50 µL loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 1 min. The dry peptide sample was resuspended with 100 µL Loading buffer and incubated with TiO2 beads for 20 min. After centrifugation and discarding the supernatant, the beads were washed with 100 µL Loading buffer for 30 s and then three times with 100 µL Wash buffer (80% ACN, 1% TFA) for 2 min. Finally the phosphopeptides were eluted three times with 80 µL Elution buffer (1% Ammonium solution) for 15 min and acidified with 60 µL 10% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.4.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008) was used for raw file peak extraction and protein identification against the Arabidopsis Uniprot database. The following parameters were applied: trypsin as cleaving enzyme; minimum peptide length of six amino acids; maximal two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. For phosphopeptide identification also the phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine was included as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da was used as MS/MS tolerance. Further settings were: “label-free quantification” marked, multiplicity set to 1; “match between runs” marked with time window 2 min; peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) set to 0.01; common contaminants (trypsin, keratin, etc.) excluded. Phosphorylation sites were determined by the site-scanning algorithm search engine Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
Multi-omics data sets are increasingly being used for the interpretation of cellular processes in response to environmental cues. Especially, the posttranslational modification of proteins by phosphorylation is an important regulatory process affecting protein activity and/or localization, which, in turn, can have effects on metabolic processes and metabolite levels. Despite this importance, relationships between protein phosphorylation status and metabolite abundance remain largely underexplored. Here, we used a phosphoproteomics-metabolomics data set collected at the end of day and night in shoots and roots of Arabidopsis to propose regulatory relationships between protein phosphorylation and accumulation or allocation of metabolites. For this purpose, we introduced a novel, robust co-expression measure suited to the structure of our data sets, and we used this measure to construct metabolite-phosphopeptide networks. These networks were compared between wild type and plants with perturbations in key processes of sugar metabolism, namely, sucrose export (<i>sweet11/12</i> mutant) and starch synthesis (<i>pgm</i> mutant). The phosphopeptide-metabolite network turned out to be highly sensitive to perturbations in sugar metabolism. Specifically, KING1, the regulatory subunit of SnRK1, was identified as a primary candidate connecting protein phosphorylation status with metabolism. We additionally identified strong changes in the fatty acid network of the <i>sweet11/12</i> mutant, potentially resulting from a combination of fatty acid signaling and metabolic overflow reactions in response to high internal sucrose concentrations. Our results further suggest novel protein-metabolite relationships as candidates for future targeted research.

### Keywords
Membrane fraction, Sweet1/sweet12, Pgm, End of night, Arabidopsis shoot/root, End of day

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Systems Biology, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany
Life Science center, Life Science college, Yunnan University

### Submitter
Xuna Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Waltraud Schulze
Department of Plant Systems Biology, University of Hohenheim, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany


