### Accession
PXD016024

### Title
Intact Transition Epitope Mapping- Thermodynamic Weak-force Order (ITEM-TWO)

### Description
Most important characteristics of antibodies are that they typically strongly bind to specific epitopes, thereby expressing  low dissociation constants (KDs) and high Gibbs free binding energies (delta Gs). In this study, we describe an off-line nano-electrospray  mass spectrometry method, termed ITEM-TWO, which enables one to simultaneously identify epitopes and obtain characteristic gas phase  dissociation constants of antibody - epitope interactions in a single experiment. To validate the method, we characterize the  interaction between an antiHistag antibody and its epitope peptide obtained from a tryptic digest of a His-tag containing beta actin.  In a mixture of solution 1 (tryptic digest of a His-tag containing recombinant human beta-actin protein in 30 mM ammonium bicarbonate)  and solution 2 (antiHis-tag antibody in 200 mM ammonium acetate) the specific immune complexes form (molar ratio 2.2 : 1).  Without any purification steps this mixture (solution 3) is then electrosprayed. With the aid of a quadrupole ion filter, the immune complex  ions are separated from unbound peptide ions. Increasing the voltage difference (DeltaCV) in the subsequent collision cell results in  collision induced dissociation (CID) by which the epitope peptide(s) is(are) released from the immune complex. The mass(es) of the  complex-released peptide(s) is(are) then measured in a ToF analyzer by which the epitope is identified. A step-wise increase in DeltaCV  allows the simultaneous determination of the intensities of (i) the surviving ionized immune complexes together with (ii) released epitope  peptide ions plus (iii) the left behind antibody ions. From the ions´ normalized intensity ratios are deduced the apparent gas phase dissociation  constants (KD#m0g) and the apparent dissociation energies over temperature values (delta G#m0g / T) of the gas phase dissociation processes.

### Sample Protocol
A peptide mixture or a tryptic digest of an antigen protein (solution 1) is mixed with an antibody solution (solution 2) to obtain  a solution (solution 3) in which is formed the specific immune complex. A final concentration of ca. 0.2 µg/µl of each antibody-containing  solution (solution 2) is prepared by diluting the antibody solutions obtained after performing buffer exchange with 200 mM ammonium acetate,  pH 7.1. Solutions 3 are binary mixtures of one solution 1 with one solution 2 to obtain the molar ratios of approximately 2.2 : 1 (epitope peptide : antibody).  Immune complex-containing mixtures (solutions 3) are incubated at room temperature for at least 1 h before electro-spraying.

### Data Protocol
The fractions of educts and products of antibody-epitope peptide complex dissociation are obtained from heights of multiply charged ion signals of  antibody-epitope peptide complexes (educts) and their dissociated constituents (products) at all applied DeltaCVs. For the antibody-peptide complexes,  the heights of apexes of Gaussian fits of the multiply charged ion series of the antibody-epitope peptide complex ions are determined. This is done by  recording the maximum intensities and respective m/z values for each charge state of the multiply charged ion series of the antibody-epitope peptide complex.  The heights of apexes of the Gaussian fits serve as the heights of the multiply charged ion series of the antibody-epitope peptide  complex ions (antibody which binds one epitope peptide: h0(1), and antibody which binds two epitope peptides: h0(2)). Similarly, Gaussian fits of the  complex-released peptide ion signals are calculated and the height of apexes of Gaussian fits of the peptide ion series is determined (h1).  When necessary, additional virtual peptide charge states and/or virtual charge states of peptide dimers are calculated and given the intensity “0”,  to reach the minimum of five values which are requested for Gaussian fitting. If resolving power allows, the heights of apexes of Gaussian fits  of the free antibody ions (and when present those of the fragment ions) are determined as well (h2). All height values are then subjected to normalization.  Normalized intensities of products are then plotted against the applied collision cell voltage differences to obtain a sigmoidal curve. The linearly rising  part of the sigmoidal shaped curve is used for determining increments of (delta G#mg / T). Linear extrapolation of the line that results from the  plot of (delta G#mg / T) vs. delta CV enables to extrapolate to deltaCV = 0 V, thereby providing a means of estimating apparent Gibbs energy of activation  of “neutral and resting” antibody-epitope peptide complexes in the gas phase (delta G#m0g / T).

### Publication Abstract
We have developed an electrospray mass spectrometry method which is capable to determine antibody affinity in a gas phase experiment. A solution with the immune complex is electrosprayed and multiply charged ions are translated into the gas phase. Then, the intact immune-complex ions are separated from unbound peptide ions. Increasing the voltage difference in a collision cell results in collision induced dissociation of the immune-complex by which bound peptide ions are released. When analyzing a peptide mixture, measuring the mass of the complex-released peptide ions identifies which of the peptides contains the epitope. A step-wise increase in the collision cell voltage difference changes the intensity ratios of the surviving immune complex ions, the released peptide ions, and the antibody ions. From all the ions&#xb4; normalized intensity ratios are deduced the thermodynamic quasi equilibrium dissociation constants (K<sub>Dm0g</sub><sup>#</sup>) from which are calculated the apparent gas phase Gibbs energies of activation over temperature (&#x394;G<sub>m0g</sub><sup>#</sup>T). The order of the apparent gas phase dissociation constants of four antibody - epitope peptide pairs matched well with those obtained from in-solution measurements. The determined gas phase values for antibody affinities are independent from the source of the investigated peptides and from the applied instrument. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016024. SIGNIFICANCE: ITEM - TWO enables rapid epitope mapping and determination of apparent dissociation energies of immune complexes with minimal in-solution handling. Mixing of antibody and antigen peptide solutions initiates immune complex formation in solution. Epitope binding strengths are determined in the gas phase after electrospraying the antibody / antigen peptide mixtures and mass spectrometric analysis of immune complexes under different collision induced dissociation conditions. Since the order of binding strengths in the gas phase is the same as that in solution, ITEM - TWO characterizes two most important antibody properties, specificity and affinity.

### Keywords
Antibody affinity determination, Antibody specificity determination

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Rostock
Proteome Center Rostock Department for Proteome Research Institute of Immunology Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty University of Rostock Schillingallee 69 18057 Rostock Germany

### Submitter
Michael Kreutzer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Michael O. Glocker
Proteome Center Rostock Department for Proteome Research Institute of Immunology Medical Faculty and Natural Science Faculty University of Rostock Schillingallee 69 18057 Rostock Germany


