### Accession
PXD002563

### Title
The quantitative proteome of mouse testicular cord formation

### Description
Testicular cord formation in male gonadogenesis involves assembly of several cell types, the precise molecular mechanism is still not well known.With the high-throughput quantitative proteomics technology, a comparative proteomic profile of mouse embryonic male gonads were analyzed at three time points (11.5, 12.5 and 13.5 days post coitum), corresponding to critical stages of testicular cord formation in gonadal development.

### Sample Protocol
Gonads from 11.5, 12.5, and 13.5 dpc were kept separate and collected in ice-coldPBS, and proteins were extracted using protein extraction buffer consisting of 7 M urea, 2 M Thiourea, 65 mMdithiothreitol (DTT) and 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein samples were digested by Trypsin and labeled with TMT 6-plex reagents according to the manufacturer's protocol. The labeled peptide mixture was resuspended in SCX chromatography Buffer A (10 mMNH4COOH and 5% ACN; pH 2.7) and loaded onto an SCX column (1 mm internal diameter × 10 cm, packed with Poros10S; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) in an UltiMate® 3000 HPLC systems at a flow rate of 50 μL/min. Peptides were detected on LTQOrbitrapVelos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using a data-dependent acquisition mode. For each cycle, one full MS scan of mass/charge ratio (m/z) = 350–1800 was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. After each full scan, eight of the most intense ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation (CE 35%), and the most intense product ion from the MS2 step was selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (NCE 68%). Wide band activation was enabled. Lockmass, with siloxane (m/z = 445.120025), was used in all runs to calibrate orbitrap MS precursor masses.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5) using the International Protein Index (IPI) mouse proteome database (version 3.83; 60,010 entries). A database of common contaminants embedded in MaxQuant (248 entries) was also included for quality control. The reverse strategy was used to estimate the false discovery rate. Trypsin/P was set as proteolytic enzyme and, a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was permitted. A minimum peptide length of six was required. Except for TMT labels, carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications were oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm at the first search as applied in MaxQuant for initial mass recalibration. For the main search, the mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 6 ppm. The mass tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. Protein quantification was calculated by combining MaxQuant identification results according to Libra algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Testicular cord formation in male gonadogenesis involves assembly of several cell types, the precise molecular mechanism is still not well known. With the high-throughput quantitative proteomics technology, a comparative proteomic profile of mouse embryonic male gonads were analyzed at three time points (11.5, 12.5, and 13.5 days post coitum), corresponding to critical stages of testicular cord formation in gonadal development. 4070 proteins were identified, and 338 were differentially expressed, of which the Sertoli cell specific genes were significant enrichment, with mainly increased expression across testis cord development. Additionally, we found overrepresentation of proteins related to oxidative stress in these Sertoli cell specific genes. Of these differentially expressed oxidative stress-associated Sertoli cell specific protein, stromal interaction molecule 1, was found to have discrepant mRNA and protein regulations, with increased protein expression but decreased mRNA levels during testis cord development. Knockdown of Stim1 in Sertoli cells caused extensive defects in gonadal development, including testicular cord disruption, loss of interstitium, and failed angiogenesis, together with increased levels of reactive oxygen species. And suppressing the aberrant elevation of reactive oxygen species could partly rescue the defects of testicular cord development. Taken together, our results suggest that reactive oxygen species regulation in Sertoli cells is important for gonadogenesis, and the quantitative proteomic data could be a rich resource to the elucidation of regulation of testicular cord development.

### Keywords
Testicular cord, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt6, Gonadogenesis

### Affiliations
Central Laboratory, Wuxi Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
Tao Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jiahao Sha
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


