### Accession
PXD020436

### Title
Global proteomic analysis of extracellular matrix in mouse and human brain highlights association with cerebrovascular disease

### Description
The extracellular matrix (ECM), a key interface between the cerebrovasculature and other cells within the neuro-glial-vascular unit , provides structural stability and modulates cell behaviour and signalling. These functions are dependent on ECM protein composition. Since ECM defects may contribute to a broad range of disorders including cerebrovascular disease, it is crucially important to characterize ECM composition to better understand the mechanisms by which the ECM modulates brain health and disease. To date, molecular studies of the cerebrovascular ECM have been limited. We therefore generated ECM extracts from vascular enriched tissues of both mouse and human post-mortem brain. We used mass spectrometry with off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionation to increase proteome depth and characterized the identified proteins. This identified a large number of proteins (>1000 mouse, >2000 human) in the ECM-enriched fractions, with > 66% of the identified proteins covered in both human and mouse samples. We now report 147 ECM proteins, including collagens (as major ECM components), laminins, fibronectin and nidogens, that can be considered as the core constituents of the human brain vascular matrisome. We also identified 12 novel proteins in the ECM-enriched fraction, that may have regulate or interact with the matrisome, including several key regulators of neurovascular interactions, such as BCAM, CDH5 and PARVB. Many of the identified brain vascular matrisome proteins are encoded by genes identified in stroke and cerebral small vessel disease genome-wide association studies, underscoring the importance of the vascular ECM in health and disease. This brain vascular matrisome represents a powerful resource for investigating the impact of aging and disease on the cerebrovasculature.

### Sample Protocol
ECM and non-ECM samples were prepared for mass spectrometry following an S-Trap protocol. Proteins were digested with trypsin. Prefractionation was done on a Agilent Bravo AssayMAP automated liquid handler in high pH reversed phase mode. The samples were analysed on the 60 samples per day gradient of the Evosep One LC system coupled to a Bruker timsTOF Pro in DDA PASEF mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spec data files were searched against either the reviewed Uniprot homo sapiens databased (retrieved 20180131) or mus musculus (retrieved 20190304) using MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011) version 1.6.10.43 and its built-in contaminant database using tryptic specificity and allowing two missed cleavages.  Downstream analysis of proteomics data  ECM proteins were identified and categorized in our datasets based on the recently updated publicly available Matrisome list (http://matrisome.org/;; (Naba et al., 2016; Shao et al., 2020)). The Venn diagrams and bar plots were based on proteins identified in two replicates with at least two unique peptides. Further analysis (including Venn diagrams and differential expression) was performed on datasets from which we filtered out proteins with nuclear and mitochondrial annotation using the genes from the respective terms of BioPlanet and GO Biological Processes databases of the Enrichr web server ((Kuleshov et al., 2016); http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr/ ). To identify the potentially secreted proteins, which might interact with ECM we used a 2-step filtering approach. Firstly, we used recently reported list of 5137 potentially secreted human proteins, which were identified using computational prediction algorithms (Thul et al., 2017). This allowed us to narrow down the list of potential ECM interactors. On the second step, we use the web servers SignalP 4. (ref) and Phobius (ref) to further analyse the list of potential ECM-interactors on the presence of secreted or transmembrane domains.  Statistical analysis  Western blot data were analysed with Mann Whitney U test. A p value below 0.05 was considered to be significant. For proteomics analysis peptide and protein identifications are reported by MaxQuant using the protein parsimony principles (Nesvizhskii and Aebersold, 2005) and results were filtered to a 1% FDR (false discovery rate). At least one unique peptide  was required to identify a protein group. Protein quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm within MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014). The intensity and LFQ intensity columns of the Maxquant output were used for protein identification and quantification, respectively. The data were analysed in three samples (biological replicates) derived from three individual mice or three patients.  Differential protein analysis was done using all proteins, which were quantified in both ECM-enriched and cellular fractions in at least two replicates, with at least two unique peptides. The analysis of the differences in protein levels between the ECM-enriched and cellular fractions was done using limma package in R. We used an empirical Bayes method for two group comparison with the moderated t-test of the eb.fit function output (Kammers et al., 2015). The results were visualized on volcano plots by plotting the false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p values for multiple-hypothesis testing with the Benjamini–Hochberg method, with significance level p ≤ 0.05 and absolute value of log2 fold changes, log2fc ≥ 1. Additionally, we plotted on the volcano plots the ECM markers quantified in the ECM-enriched fraction in ≥ two replicates, with ≥ two unique peptides, but present at zero levels in all 3 replicates of the cellular fraction. The significance of the enrichment of identified proteins in the vascular and adhesion proteins were calculated using the hypergeometric test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Extracellular matrix, Cerebrovascular, Matrisome, Ecm, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB Oxford, OX3 7FZ
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Raphael A Heilig

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB Oxford, OX3 7FZ


