### Accession
PXD034474

### Title
Characterization and composition of membrane vesicles and secreted proteins in Apilactobacillus kunkeei

### Description
Secreted particles, including membrane vesicles, have increasingly been recognized as important for bacterial community functions and host-interaction processes, but their specific compositions and functional roles are debated. In this study, we have characterized the secreted particles of Apilactobacillus kunkeei, a defensive symbiont of honeybees. We cultivated A. kunkeei strains A1401 and A0901 and separated the secreted protein particles from the extracellular membrane vesicles using density gradient ultracentrifugation. A proteomics analyses identified more than 500 proteins in each strain, of which 27 to 45 proteins were relatively more abundant in the cell-free supernatant, including glycoside hydrolases and peptidases. The extracellular transcriptome associated with the membrane vesicles contained a relatively higher fraction of mRNAs derived from highly transcribed operons such as those for ribosomal proteins and ATP synthase subunits, whereas highly expressed tRNAs were relatively more abundant in the cellular fraction. Based on these results, we propose that mRNAs for highly expressed proteins are overproduced and that superfluous mRNAs are fragmented, packaged into membrane vesicles and secreted. The results have implications for the utilization of membrane vesicles in A. kunkeei as a delivery tool for small RNA molecules, while also providing more general insights into the role of membrane vesicles in bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of whole cell lysate (WCL) and cell-free supernatant (CFS)  The A. kunkeei strains A0901 and A1401 were cultivated in MRS-medium (Sigma Aldrich) according to (De Man et al., 1960) supplemented with 0.5% (w/v) D-Fructose (Sigma Aldrich) and 0.1% (v/v) Tween-80 (Sigma Aldrich), in the following referred to as fMRS. Batch-cultivation was performed at 35°C and 5% CO2 in batch-cultures of 100–150 mL fMRS medium and the cells were harvested during exponential growth phase at OD600 ≈ 0.3. Cells and large debris were separated from the supernatant by low-speed centrifugation at 4 500 x g for 10 min at 4°C (“P0”). To obtain samples from the whole cell lysate (WCL), pellets P0 were washed twice in HyClone water before being re-suspended in 25 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 6 M urea, 1x Sigma Fast protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich) to achieve a cell concentration corresponding to OD600 ≈ 20. Cells were lysed by sonication using a Vibra-Cell VCX 130 sonicator by repeated 10s pulses (10–15 cycles) followed by 10 s breaks using a 2 mm probe and 30–40% amplitude (on ice). After sonication, the cleared cell suspensions were centrifuged at 17 000 x g for 10 min at room temperature and the supernatant was carefully recovered for SDS-PAGE, proteomics and transcriptomics analysis.  To obtain samples from the cell-free supernatant, any remaining cells and debris were first removed from the crude supernatant (“S0”) by filtering through 0.45 µm cellulose membrane filters connected to a 50 mL syringe. The cell-free filtrate (“F1”) was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 150 000 x g for 2 h at 4°C using a 45Ti rotor in an Optima XPN-100 ultracentrifuge (Beckman). The supernatant (“S2”) was carefully decanted and the small and translucent cell-free pellets (CFP) were allowed to air-dry for ≈ 5 min before being re-suspended in 10 mM Tris, pH 7.5 for negative stain TEM and Nanoparticle Tracking (NTA) analysis, in 1 x PBS for cryo-electron tomography, in 25 mM Tris, 6 M urea, pH 8.0 for proteome analysis and in HyClone Water (Sigma Aldrich) for transcriptome analysis. To assess the complete removal of whole cells, aliquots of filtrate F1 were plated on fMRS agar plates and incubated together with 10–20 mL of the filtrate over night at 35°C, 5% CO2.   Sample preparation for proteomics  For the SDS-PAGE and proteomics analysis, the pellets obtained from the whole cell lysate and cell-free supernatant of A. kunkeei strains A1401 and A0901 in biological triplicates were re-suspended in 25 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 6 M urea, 1x Sigma Fast protease inhibitors. The solutions were sonicated on ice using a Vibra-Cell VCX 130 sonicator (Sonics & Materials Inc) by repeated 10s pulses (5 cycles) followed by 10 s breaks using a 2 mm probe and 30–40% amplitude. Reagents for SDS-PAGE were purchased from Life Technologies. For SDS-PAGE, extracted proteins, 1x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer and 1x NuPAGE Sample Reducing Agent were incubated at 70°C for 10 min. 10 µL sample and 5 µL Novex Sharp Unstained Protein Standard were loaded on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel (1.0 mm) and electrophoresis was performed in 1x MOPS SDS Running buffer supplemented with NuPAGE Antioxidant for 55 min at 200 V. The gel was washed, stained and destained using SimplyBlue SafeStain based on the manufacturers microwave protocol and imaged on a ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad). Extracted proteins were analyzed for Label-free quantification (LFQ) by LC-MS/MS as described previously (Seeger et al., 2021).  Digestion  Aliquots corresponding to 13 μg protein were taken out for digestion. The proteins were reduced, alkylated and in-solution digested with trypsin according to a standard operating procedure. Thereafter the samples were purified by Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) and dried. Dried peptides were resolved in 40 μL of 0.1% FA and further diluted 4 times prior to nano-LC- MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS  The resulting peptides were separated in reversed-phase on a C18-column and electrosprayed on- line to a QExactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) with 90 min gradient. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed applying HCD.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed in the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2). Proteins were identified by searching against database Lactobacillus kunkeei strain A1401 provided by the customer. The search criteria for protein identification were set to at least two matching peptides of 95% confidence level per protein. Fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications were Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ)

### Publication Abstract
Extracellularly released particles, including membrane vesicles, have increasingly been recognized as important for bacterial community functions and host-interaction processes, but their compositions and functional roles differ between species and also between strains of the same species. In this study, we have determined the composition of membrane vesicles and protein particles identified in the cell-free pellets of two strains of <i>Apilactobacillus kunkeei</i>, a defensive symbiont of honeybees. The membrane vesicles were separated from the extracellular particles using density gradient ultracentrifugation. The peaks of the RNA and protein distributions were separated from each other and the highest concentration of RNA was observed in the fractions that contained the membrane vesicles while the highest protein concentration coincided with the fractions that contained extracellular particles. A comparative proteomics analysis by LC-MS/MS showed that 37 proteins with type-I signal peptides were consistently identified across the fractionated samples obtained from the cell-free pellets, of which 29 were orthologs detected in both strains. Functional predictions of the extracellular proteins revealed the presence of glycoside hydrolases, glycosyltransferases, giant proteins and peptidases. The extracellular transcriptomes mapped to a broad set of genes with a similar functional profile as the whole cell transcriptome. This study provides insights into the composition of membrane vesicles and extracellular proteins of a bee-associated symbiont.

### Keywords
Lactic acid bacteria, Apilactobacillus kunkeei, Membrane vesicles, Secreted proteins

### Affiliations
Molecular Evolution, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden
ICM, Molecular Evolution, Uppsala University

### Submitter
Christian Seeger

### Lab Head
Dr Siv Andersson
ICM, Molecular Evolution, Uppsala University


