### Accession
PXD026659

### Title
AATF interactome in human Kms27 cells

### Description
Multiple myeloma is a hematological neoplasm of plasma cells characterized by an abnormal production of immunoglobulins. Che-1/AATF (Che-1) is an RNA binding protein involved in transcription regulation and highly expressed in this malignancy. In order to better characterize its functions in this type of disease, we performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments coupled with a mass-spec analysis by using total MM Kms27 cell lysates. From this analysis we were able to identify more than 600 proteins significantly enriched in Che-1 precipitates. As expected from its role in ribosomal RNA maturation, the Che-1 interactome contains numerous proteins involved in pre-rRNA processing and several ribosomal proteins. Notably, among other proteins interacting with Che-1, we identified many essential components of the paraspeckle which play an important role in the regulation of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Total extracts from human Kms27 cells were purified as described by Bruno et al. (Bruno, T., De Angelis, R., De Nicola, F., Barbato, C., Di Padova, M., Corbi, N.,Libri, V., Benassi, B., Mattei, E., Chersi, A., Soddu, S., Floridi, A., Passananti, C., Fanciulli, M. (2002) Che-1 affects cell growth by interfering with the recruitment of HDAC1 by Rb. Cancer Cell, 2, 387-399). For mass-spectrometry (MS) analysis, AATF/Che-1 was immunoprecipitated from total extracts of Kms27 cells. Immunoprecipitation with normal IgGs was performed as negative control. Co-immunoprecipitated complexes were eluted by incubation in 5% SDS in PBS at 95°C. Afterwards samples were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55°C for 30 min. and alkylated with chloroacetamide (CAA) 40 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.  2 µl (10 µg/µl) of a 1:1 mix of the Hydrophilic and hydrophobic Sera-Mag carboxylate-modified magnetic particles (GE Healthcare) were added to the reduced samples and then acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a 50% final concentration. The samples were then incubated at room temperature for 8 min and placed on a magnetic rack for 2 min. Supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 70% Ethanol (EtOH) and once with 100% ACN. The beads were then air-dried and reconstituted in 5µl of trypsin and LysC, 0.1 µg/µl in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C. Afterwards, ACN was added to 95% final concentration and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 8 min and then placed on a magnetic rack for 3 min. Supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 100% ACN. Peptides were eluted from the beads by the addition 9 µl 4% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and sonication for 5 min. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. This step was repeated once to ensure complete removal of magnetic beads. Peptides were acidified by the addition of 1 µl 10% formic acid and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analysis.   nLC-MS/MS All samples were measured at the CECAD proteomics facility. Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm lenght, 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 7-23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 35.0 min, 23-32% solvent B within 5.0 min, 32-85% solvent B within 5.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 108 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the canonical Uniprot HUMAN_UP000005640.fasta (downloaded at: 26.08.2020) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Several kinds of stress promote the formation of three-stranded RNA:DNA hybrids called R-loops. Insufficient clearance of these structures promotes genomic instability and DNA damage, which ultimately contribute to the establishment of cancer phenotypes. Paraspeckle assemblies participate in R-loop resolution and preserve genome stability, however, the main determinants of this mechanism are still unknown. This study finds that in Multiple Myeloma (MM), AATF/Che-1 (Che-1), an RNA-binding protein fundamental to transcription regulation, interacts with paraspeckles via the lncRNA NEAT1_2 (NEAT1) and directly localizes on R-loops. We systematically show that depletion of Che-1 produces a marked accumulation of RNA:DNA hybrids. We provide evidence that such failure to resolve R-loops causes sustained activation of a systemic inflammatory response characterized by an interferon (IFN) gene expression signature. Furthermore, elevated levels of R-loops and of mRNA for paraspeckle genes in patient cells are linearly correlated with Multiple Myeloma progression. Moreover, increased interferon gene expression signature in patients is associated with markedly poor prognosis. Taken together, our study indicates that Che-1/NEAT1 cooperation prevents excessive inflammatory signaling in Multiple Myeloma by facilitating the clearance of R-loops. Further studies on different cancer types are needed to test if this mechanism is ubiquitously conserved and fundamental for cell homeostasis.

### Keywords
Multiple myeloma, Aatf

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne,Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer
Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne,Germany


