### Accession
PXD022066

### Title
A regulatory role for CHD4 in maintenance of the spermatogonial stem cell pool

### Description
Maintenance and self-renewal of the spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) population is the cornerstone of male fertility. In this manuscript we have identified a key role for the nucleosome remodelling protein Chromodomain Helicase DNA binding protein 4 (CHD4) in regulating SSC function. Gene expression analyses revealed that CHD4 expression is largely restricted to spermatogonia in the mouse testis, and is particularly enriched in SSCs. Using spermatogonial transplantation techniques and RNAi mediated knockdown it was established that loss of Chd4 expression significantly impairs SSC regenerative capacity, resulting in a ~50% reduction in colonisation of recipient testes. A single cell RNA-seq comparison depicted reduced expression of ‘self-renewal’ genes such as Gfra1 and Pten following Chd4 knockdown, along with increased expression of signature progenitor genes, Neurog3 and Dazl. Co-immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated that CHD4 regulates gene expression in spermatogonia not only though its traditional association with the remodelling complex NuRD, but also via interaction with the GDNF-responsive transcription factor SALL4. Cumulatively, the results of this study depict a previously unappreciated fundamental role for CHD4 in controlling fate decisions in the spermatogonial pool.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from 1 x 107 undifferentiated spermatogonia from culture using a modified CHAPS lysis buffer (10% glycerin, 10 mM CHAPS, 10 mM HEPES, 137mM NaCl in distilled water). Lysis was conducted at 4°C for 2 hours with rotation. Protein G Dynabeads (ThermoFisher) were crosslinked with 10 µg anti-CHD4 antibody using 5mM BS3 (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate) crosslinker (ThermoFisher). Before combining spermatogonia lysate with antibody-bound beads, lysate was ‘pre-cleared’ for any non-specific interaction via a 1h incubation with non-antibody bound Dynabeads. Pre-cleared lysate was then incubated with CHD4 antibody bound beads overnight at 4°C with rotation. The next day, Dynabead-antibody-antigen complexes were isolated using magnetic separation, and eluate was collected using a 1:1 combination of a mass spectrometry lysis buffer, ice-cold 0.1 M Na2CO3 containing protease and complete EDTA free phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Holding AG, Basel, Switzerland), and an urea-based buffer (12M Urea and 4M thiourea). Eluates were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min at room temperature)  and 20 mM iodoacetamide (30 min protected from light at room temperature) respectively, followed by digestion overnight with 1:30 Lys-C/Trypsin Mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Formic acid (2% v/v final concentration) has added to the peptide populations, spun at 10,000xg for 10 min and the resultant supernatant purified using in-house packed oligo™ R3 (Thermo Fisher) columns. Reverse phase nLC-MS/MS was performed using an Obritrap ExplorisTM 480 MS coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 75μm, x 20mm trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for pre-concentration and online de-salting. Separation was then achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75μm x 250mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), employing a linear gradient of acetonitrile (2-40%) over 70 minutes. Using Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 4.2.47) full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode were utilised with the Orbitrap mass analyzer was used at a resolution of 60,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 350–1500, incorporating a normalised automatic gain control target of 300% and maximum fill times of 50ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a collisional energy of 30%. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 using standard mode for automatic gain control target and maximum fill times of 120ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of all raw files was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEQUEST HT was used to search against the UniProt Mus musculus database (25,280 sequences, downloaded 30th May 2020). Database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, and trypsin designated as the digestion enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while dynamic modifications included acetylation (N-terminus), and oxidation (M). Interrogation of the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification using fixed value PSM validator based on q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. To filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches, a fixed FDR of 1% was set at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance and self-renewal of the spermatogonial stem cell (SSC) population is the cornerstone of male fertility. Here, we have identified a key role for the nucleosome remodeling protein CHD4 in regulating SSC function. Gene expression analyses revealed that CHD4 expression is highly enriched in the SSC population in the mouse testis. Using spermatogonial transplantation techniques it was established that loss of Chd4 expression significantly impairs SSC regenerative capacity, causing a &#x223c;50% reduction in colonization of recipient testes. An scRNA-seq comparison revealed reduced expression of "self-renewal" genes following Chd4 knockdown, along with increased expression of signature progenitor genes. Co-immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated that CHD4 regulates gene expression in spermatogonia not only through its traditional association with the remodeling complex NuRD, but also via interaction with the GDNF-responsive transcription factor SALL4. Cumulatively, the results of this study depict a previously unappreciated role for CHD4 in controlling fate decisions in the spermatogonial pool.

### Keywords
Spermatogonial stem cell, Self-renewal, Chd4, Mi-2β

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, Discipline of Biological Sciences, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 2300, Australia; School of Molecular Biosciences, Centre for Reproductive Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 99164, USA.

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr Tessa Lord
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, Discipline of Biological Sciences, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, 2300, Australia; School of Molecular Biosciences, Centre for Reproductive Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 99164, USA.


