### Accession
PXD007994

### Title
Reversible Lysine Derivatization Enables High Specificity of Arg-C Digestion Using Trypsin

### Description
Bottom-up proteomics approach has become an important strategy in diverse areas of biological research, and the enzymatic digestion is essential for this technology. Endopeptidase Arg-C catalyzing the hydrolytic cleavage of peptide bonds C-terminal to arginine could be an important protease in bottom-up proteomics. However, it has been seldom applied due to its low specificity and high cost. Reversible chemical derivatization of amine allows a real Arg-C digestion using trypsin. In this paper, a reversible amine derivatization method, citraconylation and decitraconylation were optimized and evaluated for large-scale proteomics studies. Combination of the reversible derivatization and trypsin digestion (termed Arg-C* digestion to distinguish from the conventional Arg-C digestion) resulted in 64.2% more peptide identification (11,925 ± 199 vs 7,262 ± 59) and significantly higher cleavage specificity (95.6% vs 73.6%) than the conventional Arg-C digestion. Comparison of Arg-C* digestion with the widely used trypsin and Lys-C digestion revealed that Arg-C* performed equally or slightly better than Lys-C although not comparable to trypsin. Therefore, the well-established Arg-C* digestion method is a promising approach for proteomics studies and could be used as the prior alternative digestion method to trypsin digestion in order to achieve higher proteome coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation E. coli strain DH5α cultures were grown in Luria-Bertani rich medium (10 g/L NaCl, 10 g/L tryptone, and 5 g/L yeast extracts) at 37 °C overnight. E. coli cells were harvested by 2,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 20 min. HeLa (Human epithelial carcinoma) Cells (ATCC) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum in humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C and were grown as monolayer cultures in 10 cm tissue culture plate. HeLa cells were harvested by 2,000g centrifugation at 4 °C for 20 min.  The harvested cells were washed three times with PBS buffer and then resuspended in lysis buffer containing 4 M guanidine hydrochloride and 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.7). The slurry solution was sonicated for 6 min (2 s sonication with 5 s intervals) in ice incubation, and the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. A volume of 20 μL of sample aliquot was kept for protein determination using Bradford assay.  Subsequently, the sample was submitted to reduction by incubation with DTT at 37 °C for 45min, followed by alkylation using 100 mM acrylamide for 1 h at room temperature. The excess acrylamide was quenched by adding 40 mM DTT. The protein solution was diluted to 1 mg/mL with lysis buffer prior to the following application.  Citraconylation reaction Citraconic anhydride and NaOH were added five times to the solution to accomplish the citraconylation reaction. E.g., to reach a final concentration of 200 mM citraconic anhydride, 5 μL of 2M citraconic anhydride was added to 200 μL protein sample and immediately followed by the addition of 5 μL 4M NaOH, then the solution was kept in a Thermomixer Comfort (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) with a vortex of 800 rpm for 10 min. The procedure was repeated for another four times. Finally the solution was kept for 1 h to accomplish citraconylation reaction.  Digestion The FASP method was adapted for the following procedures. The citraconylated samples were transferred to Microcon YM-10 filters and centrifuged at 13,800g for three-time buffer displacement with digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). After buffer displacement, digestion was carried out at 37 °C for 12 h with trypsin at a ratio of enzyme/protein as 1:50. After digestion, the solution was filtrated out and the filter was washed twice with 10% ACN. All filtrates were pooled and vacuum-dried to reach a final concentration to about 1 mg/mL.  Decitraconylation reaction TFA was added to reach a final concentration of 1% and the acidified solution was kept at room temperature for 2 h to accomplish decitraconylation reaction.  Nanoflow LC-ESI-MS/MS LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A two-column system was adopted for all analyses. Samples were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano Trap Column (5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)) and then analyzed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The derivatized peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 2-5% B in 3 min, 5-28% B in 160 min, 28-35% B in 5 min, 35-90% B in 2 min and 90% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data-dependent analysis was employed in MS analysis: the 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan were automatically selected and fragmented in HCD mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). E. coli protein Database (20161228, 4,304 sequences) and Human protein Database (20160213, 20,186 sequences) were downloaded from UniProt.  For citraconylated samples, data were searched using the following parameters: Arg-C/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modifications; protein N-terminal citraconylation, citraconylation on lysine, oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. For Arg-C, Lys-C or trypsin digested samples, data were searched using the following parameters: Arg-C/P, Lys-C/P or trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modifications; oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. For the analysis of wrong cleavage sites, the enzymes were changed to the corresponding semi-enzyme.  The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
The bottom-up proteomics approach has become an important strategy in diverse areas of biological research, and the enzymatic digestion is essential for this technology. Endopeptidase Arg-C catalyzing the hydrolytic cleavage of peptide bonds C-terminal to arginine could be an important protease in bottom-up proteomics. However, it has been seldom applied due to its low specificity and high cost. In this report, the reversible amine derivatization method (citraconylation and decitraconylation) was introduced and optimized toward a real Arg-C digestion using trypsin. Combination of the reversible derivatization and trypsin digestion (termed iArg-C digestion for improved Arg-C digestion) resulted in 64.2% more peptide identification (11&#x202f;925 &#xb1; 199 vs 7262 &#xb1; 59) and significantly higher cleavage specificity (95.6% vs 73.6%) than the conventional Arg-C digestion. Comparison of iArg-C digestion with the widely used trypsin and Lys-C digestion revealed that iArg-C performed slightly better than Lys-C although not comparable to trypsin. Therefore, the well-established iArg-C digestion method is a promising approach for proteomics studies and could be used as the prior alternative digestion method to trypsin digestion in order to achieve higher proteome coverage. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007994.

### Keywords
Trypsin, Arg-c, Proteomics, Citraconylation, Lc-ms/ms, Lys-c

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Zhen Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


