### Accession
PXD014282

### Title
Structure of the Fanconi anaemia monoubiquitin ligase complex

### Description
The Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway repairs DNA damage caused by endogenous and chemotherapy-induced DNA crosslinks. Genetic inactivation of this pathway impairs development, prevents blood production and promotes cancer. The key molecular step in the FA pathway is the monoubiquitination of a heterodimer of FANCI-FANCD2 by the FA core complex - a megadalton multiprotein E3 ubiquitin ligase. Monoubiquitinated FANCI-FANCD2 then activates a pathway to remove the DNA crosslink. Lack of molecular insight into the FA core complex limits a detailed explanation of how this vital DNA repair pathway functions. Here we reconstituted an active, recombinant FA core complex, and used electron cryo-microscopy (cryo-EM) and mass spectrometry to determine its overall structure. The FA core complex is comprised of a central symmetric dimer of the FANCB and FAAP100 subunits, flanked by two copies of the RING finger protein, FANCL. This acts as a scaffold to assemble the remaining five subunits, resulting in an extended asymmetric structure. The two FANCL subunits are positioned at opposite ends of the complex in an unusual asymmetric arrangement, distinct from other E3 ligases. We propose that each of the two FANCL subunits play unique roles within the complex – one is a structural component while the other monoubiquitinates FANCD2. The cryo-EM structure of the FA core complex, supported by crosslinking mass spectrometry and native mass spectrometry, therefore provides a foundation for a detailed understanding of this fundamental DNA repair pathway.

### Sample Protocol
The purified FA core complex (buffer 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, ~500 mM NaCl and 1 M TCEP) was cross-linked with 100-fold molar ratio of disulfosuccinimidyl suberate (BS3) for 2 h on ice and the reaction was quenched with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature. The cross-linked samples were cold acetone precipitated and resuspended in 8 M urea and 100 mM NH4HCO3. Peptides were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Following alkylation, proteins were digested with Lys-C (Pierce) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 for 4 h at 22 °C and, after diluting the urea to 1.5 M with 100 mM NH4HCO3 solution, further digestion with trypsin (Pierce) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20. Digested peptides were eluted from StageTips and split into two, for parallel crosslink enrichment by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and size exclusion chromatography (peptideSEC), and were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany). For SCX, eluted peptides were dissolved in mobile phase A (30 % acetonitrile (v/v), 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3) prior to strong cation exchange chromatography (100 x 2.1 mm Poly Sulfoethyl A column; Poly LC, Colombia, MD, USA). The separation of the digest used a non-linear gradient into mobile phase B (30 % acetonitrile (v/v), 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3, 1 M KCl) at a flow rate of 200 µl/min. Ten 1 min fractions in the high-salt range were collected and cleaned by StageTips, eluted and dried for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.  For peptideSEC, peptides were fractionated on an ÄKTA Pure system (GE Healthcare) using a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid as mobile phase. Five 50 µl fractions were collected and dried for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples for analysis were resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid, 1.6% v/v acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted in duplicate for SEC fractions and triplicate for SCX fractions, performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The sample was separated and ionized by a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B of 80% v/v acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid. Flow-rate of 0.3 μl/min using gradients optimized for each chromatographic fraction from offline fractionation ranging from 2% mobile phase B to 45% mobile phase B over 90 min, followed by a linear increase to 55% and 95% mobile phase B in 2.5 min, respectively. The MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a three second cycle time. For every cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range of 400 to 1,600 m/z. Ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 7+ were isolated and fragmented. Fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) employed a decision tree logic with optimized collision energies. The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
A recalibration of the precursor m/z was conducted based on high-confidence (<1% FDR) linear peptide identifications. The recalibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of cross-linked peptides using the Xi software suite (version 1.6.746) (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) for identification. The following parameters were applied for the search: MS1 accuracy = 3 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 10 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity) allowing up to four missed cleavages; cross-linker = BS3 with an assumed reaction specificity for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N termini); fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine, hydrolyzed / aminolyzed BS3 from reaction with ammonia or water on a free cross-linker end. The identified candidates were filtered to 1% FDR on link level using XiFDR version 1.1.26.58.

### Publication Abstract
The Fanconi anaemia (FA) pathway repairs DNA damage caused by endogenous and chemotherapy-induced DNA crosslinks, and responds to replication stress<sup>1,2</sup>. Genetic inactivation of this pathway by mutation of genes encoding FA complementation group (FANC) proteins impairs development, prevents blood production and promotes cancer<sup>1,3</sup>. The key molecular step in the FA pathway is the monoubiquitination of a pseudosymmetric heterodimer of FANCD2-FANCI<sup>4,5</sup> by the FA core complex-a megadalton multiprotein E3 ubiquitin ligase<sup>6,7</sup>. Monoubiquitinated FANCD2 then recruits additional protein factors to remove the DNA crosslink or to stabilize the stalled replication fork. A molecular structure of the FA core complex would explain how it acts to maintain genome stability. Here we reconstituted an active, recombinant FA core complex, and used cryo-electron microscopy and mass spectrometry to determine its structure. The FA core complex comprises two central dimers of the FANCB and FA-associated protein of 100&#xa0;kDa (FAAP100) subunits, flanked by two copies of the RING finger subunit, FANCL. These two heterotrimers act as a scaffold to assemble the remaining five subunits, resulting in an extended asymmetric structure. Destabilization of the scaffold would disrupt the entire complex, resulting in a non-functional FA pathway. Thus, the structure provides a mechanistic basis for the low numbers of patients with mutations in FANCB, FANCL and FAAP100. Despite a lack of sequence homology, FANCB and FAAP100 adopt similar structures. The two FANCL subunits are in different conformations at opposite ends of the complex, suggesting that each FANCL has a distinct role. This structural and functional asymmetry of dimeric RING finger domains may be a general feature of E3 ligases. The cryo-electron microscopy structure of the FA core complex provides a foundation for a detailed understanding of its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity and DNA interstrand crosslink repair.

### Keywords
Human, Fanconi anemia monoubiquitin ligase, Crosslinking ms, Em, Electron microscopy, Clms

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, United Kingdom


