### Accession
PXD011840

### Title
Structural and functional characterization of ubiquitin variant inhibitors of USP15

### Description
The multi-domain deubiquitinase USP15 regulates diverse eukaryotic processes and has been implicated in numerous diseases. We developed ubiquitin variants (UbVs) that targeted either the catalytic domain or each of three adaptor domains in USP15, including the N-terminal DUSP domain. Taking advantage of the modular nature of ubiquitin, we designed a linear dimer (diUbV) consisting of a UbV that bound the DUSP domain followed by a UbV that bound the catalytic domain, which exhibited enhanced specificity and more potent inhibition of USP15 catalytic activity than either UbV alone. In cells, the UbVs inhibited the deubiquitination of two USP15 substrates, SMURF2 and TRIM25, and the diUbV inhibited the effects of USP15 on the TGF- pathway. Structural analyses of three distinct UbVs bound to the catalytic domain revealed that the inhibitors locked the active site in a closed, inactive conformation. The structure of a UbV-DUSP domain complex revealed that the UbV formed an unusual strand-swapped dimer that bound two DUSP domains. These inhibitors will enable the study of USP15 function in vitro and in vivo to explore the role of the enzyme in oncology, neurology, immunology and inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
For affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry, HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with expression plasmids containing FLAG-tagged UbVs, lysed in high salt buffer, subjected to immune- affinity purification using immobilized anti-FLAG M2 affinity agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich A2220), and digested with TPCK-trypsin (Thermo Fisher 20233), as described (Marcon et al., 2015). The tryptic peptide samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap analyzer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher), as described (Tong et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Raw files acquired from the mass spectrometer were processed using PEAKS software version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Incorporated) against the Uniprot Human Database modified to include the UbV bait sequences. Label- free quantification (LFQ) values of each protein were exported from PEAKS and a peptide between the FLAG-tag and the UbV (K.GQGPDPSTNSADITSLYK.K), which is common to all UbV proteins, was used for the normalization of USP15 and USP4 expression.

### Publication Abstract
The multi-domain deubiquitinase USP15 regulates diverse eukaryotic processes and has been implicated in numerous diseases. We developed ubiquitin variants (UbVs) that targeted either the catalytic domain or each of three adaptor domains in USP15, including the N-terminal DUSP domain. We also designed a linear dimer (diUbV), which targeted the&#xa0;DUSP and catalytic domains, and exhibited enhanced specificity and more potent inhibition of catalytic activity than either UbV alone. In cells, the UbVs inhibited the deubiquitination of two USP15 substrates, SMURF2 and TRIM25, and the diUbV inhibited the effects of USP15 on the transforming growth factor &#x3b2; pathway. Structural analyses revealed that three distinct UbVs bound to the catalytic domain and locked the active site in a closed, inactive conformation, and one UbV formed an unusual strand-swapped dimer and bound two DUSP domains simultaneously. These inhibitors will enable the study of USP15 function in oncology, neurology, immunology, and inflammation.

### Keywords
Usp15

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 3E1 & Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1A8

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Sachdev S. Sidhu
The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 3E1 & Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 1A8


