### Accession
PXD036199

### Title
An integrated metabolomics and lipidomics approach for the study of metabolic network and early diagnosis in cerebral infarction

### Description
Cerebral infarction (CI) remains a major cause of high mortality and long-term disability worldwide. The exploration of biomarkers and pathogenesis is crucial for early diagnosis of CI. Although the understanding of metabolic perturbations underlying CI has increased in recent years, the relationship between altered metabolites and disease pathogenesis has only been partially elucidated and requires further investigation. Here, we performed an integrated metabolomics and lipidomics analysis on 59 healthy subjects and 47 CI patients. Ultimately, 49 metabolites and 68 lipids biomarkers were identified and enriched in 24 disturbed pathways. The metabolic network revealed a significant interaction between altered lipids and other metabolites. Using ROC analysis, a panel of 3 polar metabolites and 7 lipids was optimized in training set, which was taurine, oleoylcarnitine, creatinine, PE(22:6/P-18:0), Cer 34:2, GlcCer(d18:0/18:0), DG 44:0, LysoPC(16:0), 22:6-OH/LysoPC and TAG58:7-FA22:4. Subsequently, a support vector machine (SVM) model was constructed and validated, which showed an excellent predictive ability in validation set. Thereby, the integrated metabolomics and lipidomics approach could contribute to a comprehensive understanding of the metabolic dyshomeostasis associated with the pathogenesis underlying CI. The present research may promote a deeper understanding and early diagnosis of CI in clinic.

### Sample Protocol
For metabolites extraction, 200 μL serum aliquot was transferred into a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, followed by addition of 800 μL acetonitrile (-20℃). The mixture were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C. Then, the 600 μL supernatants per sample were stored in a −80 °C freezer for metabolomics analysis. For lipid extraction, 100 μL serum aliquot was transferred into a 2.0 mL Eppendorf tube containing 10μL internal standards (IS) solution, followed by addition of 400 μL methanol (-20℃) and vortex for 2 minutes. Then, 1 mL of MTBE was added and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at room temperature in a shaker. Phase stratification was induced by adding 200 μL of MS-grade water. Upon 10 min of incubation at room temperature, the sample was centrifuged at 4°C, 14000rps for 10min, 1000 μL of supernatant was dried under nitrogen flow. After that, the extract was reconstituted with 250 μL isopropanol/acetonitrile/water (2:1:1,v/v/v) and stored in a −80 °C freezer for lipidomics analysis. For both metabolite and lipid extraction, 20 μL aliquot of each supernatant was mixed to prepare quality control (QC) samples for UPLC-Q-TOF/MS methodological studies.

### Data Protocol
In untargeted metabolomics and lipidomics analysis, all the raw files acquired via Masslynx software (Version 4.1, waters, USA) were imported to Progenesis QI software (Non-linear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) and aligned against a full MS QC reference, followed by peak extraction and normalization for each compound. Compound annotations were assigned within Progenesis QI through accurate precursor and product ion mass matching (<15ppm) from the following databases: Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) (http://www.hmdb.ca/), LipidMaps (www.lipidmaps.org) and Lipidblast (https://fiehnlab.ucdavis.edu/). Then we confirmed the putative metabolites by comparison of the retention time and mass spectrum with available reference standards (Fig. S6a-n). The fragmentation patterns of mass spectrum for the other metabolites were proposed (Fig. S6-8). The raw files of QC sample acquired via CRB-SWATH approach were processed according to a previously described protocol24. For targeted analysis, all scheduled MRM data were subjected to MultiQuant software (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON, Canada) and Microsoft Excel for peak integration, IS adjustment and further data management. The peak area of each analyte was calculated as the ratio of analyte area to corresponding IS area. Multivariate analysis was performed via EZinfo 2.0 software (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) was used to explore the global metabolic variations and identify outliers. Supervised orthogonal partial least squares-discriminate analysis (OPLS-DA) was applied to filter irrelevant noise and maximize the global metabolic variations between groups. Student-t test was performed through IBM SPSS (version 22.0, Inc, IL, USA). Volcano plots and heatmaps were drawn by ImageGP (http://www.ehbio.com/Cloud_Platform/). The differentiation polar metabolites and lipids were mapped into the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database(https://www.kegg.jp/) to calculate significantly perturbed pathways. Metabolites and lipids with a p < 0.05 in two-tailed Mann-Whitney U tests were applied for pathway analysis, and biomarkers with no matched HMDB ID were removed. Correlation network analysis has significant advantages of interconnection discovery and biomarker selection30. The pearson correlation network of biomarkers was visualized by cytoscape software. The pathway-related network was performed by Metscape and MetDisease, plugins of Cytoscape software for pathway network visualization and metabolites annotation. Compared with traditional pattern recognition methods, machine learning algorithms are increasingly recognized as an effective method to evaluate and predict disease in recent years31, 32. Machine learning model was constructed by KNIME software, and the evaluation of corresponding model was carried out through receiver operator character curve (ROC), which was plotted by IBM SPSS.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral infarction (CI) remains a major cause of high mortality and long-term disability worldwide. The exploration of biomarkers and pathogenesis is crucial for the early diagnosis of CI. Although the understanding of metabolic perturbations underlying CI has increased in recent years, the relationship between altered metabolites and disease pathogenesis has only been partially elucidated and requires further investigation. In this study, we performed an integrated metabolomics and lipidomics analysis on 59 healthy subjects and 47 CI patients. Ultimately, 49 metabolite and 68 lipid biomarkers were identified and enriched in 24 disturbed pathways. The metabolic network revealed a significant interaction between altered lipids and other metabolites. Using receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis, a panel of three polar metabolites and seven lipids was optimized in the training set, which included taurine, oleoylcarnitine, creatinine, PE(22:6/P-18:0), Cer 34:2, GlcCer(d18:0/18:0), DG 44:0, LysoPC(16:0), 22:6-OH/LysoPC, and TAG58:7-FA22:4. Subsequently, a support vector machine (SVM) model was constructed and validated, which showed excellent predictive ability in the validation set. Thereby, the integrated metabolomics and lipidomics approach could contribute to a comprehensive understanding of the metabolic dyshomeostasis associated with the pathogenesis of underlying CI. The present research may promote a deeper understanding and early diagnosis of CI in the clinic. All raw data were deposited in PRIDE (PXD036199).

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Metabolomics, Cerebral infarction, Biomarkers, Lipidomics

### Affiliations
Capital Normal University

### Submitter
XX Y

### Lab Head
Dr Xinxin Ye
Capital Normal University


