### Accession
PXD004501

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of human malignant ascites

### Description
Ascites is a valuable source of cancer biomarkers, because it contains a variety of secreted and shed proteins from cancerous cells. Conversely, most proteomic studies on ascites have focused on ovarian cancer and provided insufficient depth for biomarker discovery. Further, no proteomic analysis of ascites from gastric cancer has been reported. To this end, we profiled the human ascites proteome to obtain a pool of biomarker candidates using comprehensive proteomic strategies. Subsequently, label-free quantitation was performed to compare the abundance of proteins between benign disease and gastric cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
We collected 50 ml of ascites per patient, who was diagnosed with benign disease (n=31) or stage IV gastric cancer (n=64). For label-free quantitation, three pairs of samples (N=6 per each group) were pooled from ascites of patients with liver cirrhosis or gastric cancer. To remove high-abundance proteins, pooled ascites samples were depleted using a MARS-6 column per the manufacturer’s instruction with some modifications. The protein concentration in undepleted and depleted ascites was measured using the BCA assay kit. Proteins were digested by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. The peptide samples were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS), consisting of an Easy-nLC 1000 (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) and a Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantitation, raw files were processed as described above, except for using of Uniprot Homo sapiens database (April, 2014 released; 88,708 protein entries). For each precursor ion, peak area is calculated from the ion chromatogram extracted by using the Precursor ion Area detector node. Protein abundance in each sample was calculated as the sum of all identified peptide area for a given protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Malignant ascites, Label-free quantitation, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Biomedical Research Institute ,Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Biomedical Research Institute ,Seoul National University Hospital


