### Accession
PXD027974

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mouse hearts treated with and without 2-deoxy-D-glucose

### Description
2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) is a glucose analog that is established to inhibit glucose metabolism via glycolysis. It has long been recognized as a potential chemical mimetic of calorie restriction, and it also has been shown to have anti-viral effects in infected cells, against among others SARS-CoV-2. This study aimed to determine whether intermittent treatment of mice with 2DG could alter nutrient metabolism in vivo and whether this would produce a proteomic signature of altered glucose metabolism and other cellular pathways, with a view to explaining the anti-viral properties of 2DG. Parallel physiological studies of the heart aimed to relate any proteomic changes to the function and performance of the heart, including assessing whether there were any signs of detrimental effects of 2DG.

### Sample Protocol
FASP protocol [Wisniewski 2009] was used for sample processing and digestion. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37oC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA. Peptides were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore). Samples were analyzed in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker). Sample (200ng) was directly loaded in a 15 cm Bruker nanoelute FIFTEEN C18 analytical column (Bruker) and resolved at 400 nl/min. Column was heated to 50ºC using an oven.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using PEAKS software (Bioinformatics solutions). Searches were carried out against a database consisting of human entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis. Data was loaded onto Perseus platform [Tyanova 2016] and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation). A t-test was applied in order to determine the statistical significance of the differences detected.

### Publication Abstract
2-Deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) has recently received emergency approval for the treatment of COVID-19 in India, after a successful clinical trial. SARS-CoV-2 infection of cultured cells is accompanied by elevated glycolysis and decreased mitochondrial function, whereas 2DG represses glycolysis and stimulates respiration, and restricts viral replication. While&#xa0;2DG has pleiotropic effects on cell metabolism in cultured cells it is not known which of these manifests in vivo. On the other hand, it is known that 2DG given continuously can have severe detrimental effects on the rodent heart. Here, we show that the principal effect of an extended, intermittent 2DG treatment on mice is to augment the mitochondrial respiratory chain proteome in the heart; importantly, this occurs without vacuolization, hypertrophy or fibrosis. The increase in the heart respiratory chain proteome suggests an increase in mitochondrial oxidative capacity, which could compensate for the energy deficit caused by the inhibition of glycolysis. Thus, 2DG in the murine heart appears to induce a metabolic configuration that is the opposite of SARS-CoV-2 infected cells, which could explain the compound's ability to restrict the propagation of the virus to the benefit of patients with COVID-19 disease.

### Keywords
Heart, 2-deoxy-d-glucose (2dg), Nutrient metabolism, Differential proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park, Build. 800 Derio 48160 Bizkaia (Spain)
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park, Build. 800 Derio 48160 Bizkaia (Spain)


