### Accession
PXD018186

### Title
RAP-MS analysis of LncRNA BGL3 interacting proteins in cells

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging regulators of genomic stability and human disease. However, the molecular mechanisms by which nuclear lncRNAs directly contribute to DNA damage responses remain largely unknown. Using RNA antisense purification coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry (RAP-qMS), we found that the lncRNA BGL3 binds to PARP1 and BARD1, exhibiting unexpected roles in homologous recombination. Mechanistically, BGL3 is recruited to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by PARP1 at an early time point, which requires its interaction with the DNA-binding domain of PARP1. BGL3 also binds the C-terminal BRCT domain and an internal region (amino acids 127-424) of BARD1, which mediates interaction of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex with its binding partners such as HP1γ and RAD51, resulting in BRCA1/BARD1 retention at DSBs. Cells depleted for BGL3 displayed genomic instability and were sensitive to DNA-damaging reagents.

### Sample Protocol
Captured proteins were reduced with 15 mM dithiothreitol at 56 ℃ for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 45 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 20 min. The proteins were resolved on SDS-PAGE gels, the gels were stained with Coomassie blue, and destained with 20% ethanol/10% acetic acid. The gel lanes were cut into cubes (about 1x1x1 mm), and gel cubes were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate twice. Gel cubes were subsequently subjected to in-gel digestion with 15 ng/μL sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at 37 ℃ for 12 h. Peptides were sequentially extracted by 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and 80% ACN/0.1% TFA at 37 ℃ for 30 min. The peptides were desalted using C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) and evaporated on a vacuum centrifuge to dryness.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data files were searched with MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8). Spectra were searched against the human proteome obtained from the UniProtKB dataset (downloaded December 10th, 2017). The following parameters were used for searching. Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C, + 57.022 Da); variable modifications: oxidation (M, + 15.995 Da); enzyme: trypsin; missed cleavages: 2; precursor mass tolerance: 6 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; false discovery rate < 1%. Intensity-based absolute quantification was performed on the identified peptides to quantify protein abundance. Protein groups exported from MaxQuant were filtered to remove ‘‘Potential contaminant’’ or ‘‘Reverse’’ decoy database entries, and entries with ‘‘Only identiﬁed by site’’. Proteins detected with at least two unique peptides were used for further analysis (Dataset EV1). Protein-protein interaction networks were identified using STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging regulators of genomic stability and human disease. However, the molecular mechanisms by which nuclear lncRNAs directly contribute to DNA damage responses remain largely unknown. Using RNA antisense purification coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry (RAP-qMS), we found that the lncRNA BGL3 binds to PARP1 and BARD1, exhibiting unexpected roles in homologous recombination. Mechanistically, BGL3 is recruited to DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by PARP1 at an early time point, which requires its interaction with the DNA-binding domain of PARP1. BGL3 also binds the C-terminal BRCT domain and an internal region (amino acids 127-424) of BARD1, which mediates interaction of the BRCA1/BARD1 complex with its binding partners such as HP1&#x3b3; and RAD51, resulting in BRCA1/BARD1 retention at DSBs. Cells depleted for BGL3 displayed genomic instability and were sensitive to DNA-damaging reagents. Overall, our findings underscore the biochemical versatility of RNA as a mediator molecule in the DNA damage response pathway, which affects the accumulation of BRCA1/BARD1 at DSBs.

### Keywords
Lncrna bgl3 lc-ms

### Affiliations
NCPSB
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Science, 2300 Eye Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20037, USA

### Submitter
Shaojie Mi

### Lab Head
Dr Huadong Pei
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Science, 2300 Eye Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20037, USA


