### Accession
PXD009398

### Title
Thrombocytopenia-associated mutations in MASTL deregulate global phosphorylation and actin cytoskeleton dynamics in platelets

### Description
MASTL, also known as Greatwall, was originally characterized in flies and Xenopus as a mitotic kinase involved in the maintenance of the mitotic state by inhibiting PP2A-B55 complexes. A specific mutation (E167D) in the human MASTL gene was simultaneously linked to autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia. However, the possible connections between the cell cycle machinery and this human disease remain unexplored. By analyzing genetically-engineered mice with specific ablation of Mastl in megakaryocytes and platelets we report here that Mastl ablation results in defective megakaryocyte maturation and reduced platelet counts. Platelet counts are also reduced in a new Mastl E166D knockin model carrying the thrombocytopenia-associated mutation in the murine locus. Surprisingly, thrombocytopenia in this model is not due to defective megakaryocyte maturation, but a consequence of aberrant activation and reduced survival of platelets. Stimulation of Mastl E166D platelets is characterized by rapid formation of hyper-stabilized pseudopods similarly to cells in which PP2A activity is chemically inhibited. These defects are accompanied by abnormal phosphorylation of multiple components of the actin cytoskeleton and can be rescued both in vitro and in vivo by inhibiting upstream kinases such as PKA, PKC or AMPK. These results suggest that Mastl E166D is a dominant mutation that may contribute to thrombocytopenia by altering the phosphorylation status of several molecular pathways critical in platelet cytoskeletal dynamics. These data reveal an unexpected role of Mastl in the control of cytoskeleton dynamics in a cell-cycle independent manner in nucleus-depleted, terminally differentiated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Phospho-proteomics analysis Cells were lysed using 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, in 100 mM Hepes pH 7.5, supplemented with 1:1000 (v/v) of benzonase (Novagen) and 1:100 (v/v) of HaltTM phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail 100x (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce® 660nm Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) using BSA as standard. Then, samples (160 µg) were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, room-temperature), alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, room-temperature) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at room-temperature) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37 °C). Samples were labeled using iTRAQ® reagent 8-plex following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were mixed in 1:1 ratios based on total peptide amount, which was determined from an aliquot by comparing overall signal intensities on a regular LC-MS/MS run. The final mixture was finally desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried. Phosphopeptides were enriched using home-made TiO2 micro-columns. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 6% TFA and 80% CH3CN and incubated for 20 min with TiO2 beads (10 µm particle size) (GL-Science) using a sample:TiO2 ratio of 1:2. Prior incubation, TiO2 beads were pre-conditioned with a solution of 20 mg/mL DHB in 80% CH3CN 6% TFA for 20 min. Then, beads were sequentially washed with 100 µL of 6% TFA and 10% CH3CN, 100 µL of 6% TFA and 100 µL of 40% CH3CN and 6% TFA and 60% CH3CN. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted first with 20 µL of 5% NH4OH and then with 20 µL 5% NH4OH in 10% CH3CN in the same vial. Phosphopeptides were fractionated offline by means of a high pH reverse phase micro-column. Sample was dissolved in phase A (20 mM NH4OH) and loaded into a tip containing 5 discs of C18 and the flow-through was collected to a vial. Peptides were sequentially eluted by increasing the percentage of buffer B (20 mM NH3 in CH3CN) (i.e. 4, 8, 12, 20, 60 and 80%).  Last three fractions were pooled together. LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to an Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker) via a Captivespray source (Bruker) supplemented with a nanoBooster operated at 0.2 bar/min with isopropanol as dopant. Peptides were loaded into a trap column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18 5 µm, 20 mm length, Nanoseparations) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2.5 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 2.4 µm, 500 mm length and 0.075 mm ID) and separated using a 95 min gradient (buffer A: 4% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient used was: 0-2 min 6 % B, 2-80 min 30% B, 80.5-87.5 min 98% B, 88-95 min 2% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.35 kV) into the mass spectrometer with a heated capillary temperature of 180 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS (80-1600 m/z) and MS/MS (80-1600 m/z) scans using a top 30 method (threshold signal ≥ 500 counts, z ≥ 2 and m/z ≥ 350). An active exclusion of 30 sec was used. The precursor intensities were re-evaluated in the MS scan (n) regarding their values in the previous MS scan (n-1). Any m/z intensity exceeding 5 times the measured value in the preceding MS scan was reconsidered for MS/MS. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with a collision energy of 23-56 eV as function of the m/z value.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.8.3) using the standard settings against a mouse protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL, August 2016, 43,965 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines, protein N-term acetylation and phosphorylation of serines, threnonines and tyrosines as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). For phosphoproteome, the “phospho(STY)sites.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.1.6) for further analysis. Phosphosites with a probability > 0.75 and a score difference < 5 were considered as localized (Class I). Phosphosites with a log2 ratio >0.5 or < -0.5 were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
MASTL, a Ser/Thr kinase that inhibits PP2A-B55 complexes during mitosis, is mutated in autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia. However, the connections between the cell-cycle machinery and this human disease remain unexplored. We report here that, whereas Mastl ablation in megakaryocytes prevented proper maturation of these cells, mice carrying the thrombocytopenia-associated mutation developed thrombocytopenia as a consequence of aberrant activation and survival of platelets. Activation of mutant platelets was characterized by hyperstabilized pseudopods mimicking the effect of PP2A inhibition and actin polymerization defects. These aberrations were accompanied by abnormal hyperphosphorylation of multiple components of the actin cytoskeleton and were rescued both in vitro and in vivo by inhibiting upstream kinases such as PKA, PKC, or AMPK. These data reveal an unexpected role of Mastl in actin cytoskeletal dynamics in postmitotic cells and suggest that the thrombocytopenia-associated mutation in MASTL is a pathogenic dominant mutation that mimics decreased PP2A activity resulting in altered phosphorylation of cytoskeletal regulatory pathways.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Cell cycle, Platelets, Mastl

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)
CNIO

### Submitter
Javier Munoz

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)


