### Accession
PXD013852

### Title
Quantitative comparative analysis of human erythrocyte surface proteins between individuals from two genetically distinct populations

### Description
Red blood cells (RBC) play a critical role in oxygen transport, and are the focus of important human diseases including malaria and the haemoglobinopathies. Although previous studies aimed at classifying the RBC proteome have examined whole or membrane-enriched fractions from RBC, none have used specific strategies directed at enriching proteins with exposed extracellular domains. Furthermore, there has been no systematic analysis of variation in abundance of RBC surface proteins either within or between genetically disparate human populations. These questions are of particular importance to inform not only basic RBC biology but additionally to identify novel candidate Plasmodium receptors, where selective pressures have moulded the RBC surface, exemplified by genetic absence of Duffy antigen in populations from sub-Saharan Africa. Here, we use ‘Plasma membrane profiling’ and tandem mass tag-based mass spectrometry to specifically enrich and quantify cell surface proteins from primary RBC from two sets of nine donors from the UK or Senegal. We define a ‘stringent’ and ‘sensitive’ RBC surface proteome and identify potential candidate Plasmodium receptors on the basis either of diminished protein abundance, or increased variation in West African individuals compared to people from the UK.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane profiling Plasma membrane profiling was performed as previously described. Briefly, for ~1.5x109 of each enriched erythrocyte sample, surface sialic acid residues were oxidized with sodium meta-periodate (Thermo) then biotinylated with aminooxy-biotin (Biotium). After quenching, cells were incubated in 1% (v/v) Triton X-100 lysis buffer (10mM Tris HCl, 1.6% Triton, 150mM NaCl). Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched with high affinity streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce) and washed extensively. Captured protein was denatured with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested on-bead with trypsin (Promega) in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 for 3 h. Tryptic peptides were collected and labelled using TMT reagents. The reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine, and TMT-labelled samples combined in a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. Labelled peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness.  Offline fractionation and mass spectrometry Mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Lumos for samples from UK donors, and an Orbitrap Fusion for samples from Senegal donors. In both cases, an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 50 cm 2.1 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. Samples were analysed on the Orbitrap Lumos or Orbitrap Fusion as described in the publication.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steve Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). In this extractor, the standard mzXML format has been augmented with additional custom fields that are specific to ion trap and Orbitrap mass spectrometry and essential for TMT quantitation. These additional fields include ion injection times for each scan, Fourier Transform-derived baseline and noise values calculated for every Orbitrap scan, isolation widths for each scan type, scan event numbers, and elapsed scan times. This software is a component of the MassPike software platform and is licensed by Harvard Medical School. A combined database was constructed from the human Uniprot database (26th January, 2017), and common contaminants such as porcine trypsin. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously. This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm, though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ”MassPike”, as described previously. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion. Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of ~1250 per spectrum) so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance. An isolation specificity filter was additionally employed to minimise peptide co-isolation. Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 250 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Microsoft Excel. For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed. Despite extensive washing of biotinylated proteins when bound to Streptavidin beads, variable levels of contamination with abundant haemoglobin components were nevertheless detectable. As opposed to normalisation assuming equal protein loading across all channels, normalisation was instead performed from the summed signal:noise values of the three most abundant RBC surface proteins (which are also all recognised cell surface blood group proteins), GlycophorinA (GYPA), Glycophorin C (GYPC) and SLC4A1. For further analysis and display in figures, fractional TMT signals were used (i.e. reporting the fraction of maximal signal observed for each protein in each TMT channel, rather than the absolute normalized signal intensity). This effectively corrected for differences in the numbers of peptides observed per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Erythrocyte, Blood cell, Quantitative proteomics, Tandem mass tag, Plasma membrane, Red blood cell, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


