### Accession
PXD027710

### Title
Initial Insights on the Proteomic Profile of Filipino Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinoma (NSCLC)

### Description
NSCLC remains to be the leading cause of cancer incidence and mortality in the Philippines. Early diagnosis, better understanding on the mechanisms of drug resistance, and proper treatment monitoring is necessary to lower the incidence and mortality rate of NSCLC. This study was able to provide initial insights on the proteomic profile of Filipino NSCLC by quantitative proteomic analysis and identification of aberrant expressions in the tumor tissue relative to the adjacent normal tissue specimen. A total of 4518 proteins were identified and from this, 1855 proteins were found to be significantly upregulated and downregulated. Functional and pathway analysis was done to the upregulated and downregulated proteins with at least 4-fold expression change. Pathway analysis revealed the possible activation of the upregulated protein, MUC1, which is a known oncogenic driver involved in the stimulation of pathways that promote angiogenesis in NSCLC tumor, and prevention of apoptosis. STAT1 and STAT3, also found upregulated in the tumor specimen, were known to have interactions with MUC1 which results to expression of proteins for cell proliferation. The analysis also suggests the stabilization of HIF which allows cell growth in the hypoxic tumor environment, and the activation of EIF signaling correlated with low survival rate of NSCLC patients. Our data demonstrate the rich proteomic information that can be obtained from comprehensive profiling of the NSCLC proteome and applications for better understanding of NSCLC tumorigenicity.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Digestion Tumor and adjacent normal tissue sample at least 5 cm away from each other was collected from a male Filipino with stage IB NSCLC through lobectomy procedure performed by the surgeons at the Lung Center of the Philippines (LCP). The collection protocol has been approved by the LCP-Institutional Ethics Review Board (LCP-IERB) with informed consent from the patient. Protein extraction and digestion followed the protocol previously reported in Chen et al. [5]. The tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples were sliced into small pieces and washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline to remove blood contaminants. The sliced tissue samples were suspended in the lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium lauryl sarcosine, protease inhibitor) and homogenized using Precellys® 24 (Bertin Technologies). The homogenized samples were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes to denature the proteins, and then sonicated at 4°C using Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, Denville, NJ). The samples were centrifuged to remove large cell and tissue debris. The supernatant was collected and sequentially added with 4 volumes of methanol, 1 volume of chloroform, and 3 volumes of ultrapure water with vortex mixing and spin down each time. Protein flakes formed at the interface of the upper aqueous layer and the chloroform layer were collected. The precipitated proteins were then washed with 3 volumes of methanol, and then collected by centrifugation and air-dried. Protein amount was quantified using BCA assay. For digestion, 450 µg of the extracted protein were resuspended in 8 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. Protein reduction was done using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) incubated with continuous shaking at 30 minutes and 29°C. Alkylation was done using 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) incubated with continuous shaking in the dark for 45 mins at 29°C. Enough volume of 50 mM TEABC was added to dilute the urea from 8 M to 4 M. Afterwards, the reduced and alkylated proteins was digested using Lys-C (protein : Lys-C = 100 : 1, w/w) for 3 hours and then trypsin (protein : trypsin = 50 : 1, w/w) for 16 hours at 29°C with continuous shaking. Trypsin digestion was stopped by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting peptide solution was dried in a vacuum concentrator system. Peptide amount was quantified using BCA assay.  Mass Spectrometry Analysis The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific,) equipped with UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were injected onto a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 column (Nanoviper Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a NanoSpray interface. Two sets of tumor and adjacent normal tissue specimens were analyzed. The peptides were eluted using 160 minutes linear concentration gradient from 0.1% formic acid to 95% of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile using a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Mass Spectrometry (MS) instrument was operated in positive mode, with an electrospray through a heated ion transfer tube of 275°C and a resolution of 60,000. Full scan was done with AGC target value of 4e5 and maximum injection time of 50 ms spanning the mass range of 400 to 1250 m/z. For data dependent acquisition mode, the top 15 most-intense ions were sequentially selected for HCD fragmentation in each scan cycle. The AGC target value for the fragment scans was set at 5e4 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and resolution of 15,000. The intensity threshold was set at 5e4, and an isolation window of 1.4 Th was used. Two injections for each specimen were done.

### Data Protocol
All the resulting spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.7.0 [8] and searched against the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot human database (last updated January 15, 2020, 205,596 gene entries) (https://www.uniprot.org/) using Andromeda search engine [9]. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine were set as variable modifications while carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Peptide search was done allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages for full Lys-C and tryptic digestion with FDR set at 1%. Quantification was done using label-free quantification (LFQ).  Quantification analysis was done using Perseus v1.6.12 [10]. LFQ values were transformed to Log2, and then missing values were replaced with intensities in the lower region of the normal distribution around the detection limit of the mass spectrometer (width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8). Paired t test was used for accepting relative protein expression with FDR of 0.05 and S0 of 0.2

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Filipino, Nsclc, Lung, Lc-ms/ms, Cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, University of the Philippines-Diliman

### Submitter
Baby Rorielyn Dimayacyac-Esleta

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Baby Rorielyn T. Dimayacyac-Esleta
Institute of Chemistry, University of the Philippines-Diliman


