### Accession
PXD038382

### Title
Enriching cysteine-containing peptides using a sulfhydryl-reactive alkylating reagent with a phosphonic acid group, and immobilized metal affinity chromatography

### Description
The reduction of disulfide bonds and their subsequent alkylation is commonplace in typical proteomics workflows. Here, we highlight a sulfhydryl-reactive alkylating reagent with a phosphonic acid group (iodoacetamido-LC-phosphonic acid, 6C-CysPAT) that facilitates the enrichment of cysteine-containing peptides for isobaric tag-based proteome abundance profiling. Specifically, we profile the proteome of SH-SY5Y cells following 24 hr treatments with two proteasome inhibitors (bortezomib and MG-132) in a TMTpro9-plex experiment. We acquired three datasets - 1) Cys-enriched, 2) Cys-depleted, and 3) non-depleted - and compared the peptides and proteins quantified in each dataset, with emphasis on Cys-containing peptides. The data show that enrichment using 6C-CysPAT quantified over 38,000 Cys-containing peptides in 5 hr with >90% specificity. In addition, our combined dataset provides the research community with a resource of over 9,900 protein abundance profiles that exhibit the effects of two different proteosome inhibitors. Overall, the seamless incorporation of alkylation by 6C-CysPAT into a current TMT-based workflow permits the enrichment of a Cys-containing peptide subproteome.  The acquisition of this “Mini-Cys” dataset can be used to preview and assess the quality of a deep, fractionated dataset.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion. Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle and incubated at 4°C with gentle agitation for 30 min. The homogenate was sedimented at 18,000 x g for 5 min. Protein concentrations were determined from the supernatant using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 15 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the free cysteines were alkylated with 5 mM 6C-CysPAT reagent for 20 min in the dark at room temperature, and later quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol for 15 min in the dark, also at room temperature. Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and then digested for 14 hr at room temperature with LysC (100:1 protein-to-protease ratio). Trypsin was then added also at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. The samples were incubated at 37 °C for an additional 6 hr. Tandem mass tag labeling. 100 µg of TMT reagent (in 5 μL of acetonitrile) was added to the peptides (50 µg) along with 15 μL of acetonitrile. After incubating for 1 hr at room temperature, we quenched the reaction with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across the samples and desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters). The eluate was split in half, each of which was vacuum centrifuged to dryness. For each experiment, the sample was split such that each half had the equivalent of 25 µg of peptide per channel (225 µg of protein in total for the TMTpro9-plex experiment). Enrichment of cysteine-containing peptides with Fe3+-NTA. We enriched cysteine-containing peptides (which have been modified by the 6C-CysPAT reagent) from the pooled TMT-labeled mixtures using the Pierce High-Select Fe3+-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment kit following manufacturer’s instructions. After column equilibration, sample binding, and washing, the phosphopeptides were eluted into a new microcentrifuge tube containing 100 µL of 10% formic acid and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The unbound peptides retained and fractionated using basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the Human UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2020) concatenated with that database with all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.03 Da product ion tolerance in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. For the final dataset, TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and the 6C-CysPAT modification on cysteine residues (+221.082 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as variable. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described previously and then assembled further to a protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and normalized such that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent and so as to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.

### Publication Abstract
The reduction of disulfide bonds and their subsequent alkylation are commonplace in typical proteomics workflows. Here, we highlight a sulfhydryl-reactive alkylating reagent with a phosphonic acid group (iodoacetamido-LC-phosphonic acid, 6C-CysPAT) that facilitates the enrichment of cysteine-containing peptides for isobaric tag-based proteome abundance profiling. Specifically, we profile the proteome of the SH-SY5Y human cell line following 24 h treatments with two proteasome inhibitors (bortezomib and MG-132) in a tandem mass tag (TMT)pro9-plex experiment. We acquire three datasets&#x2500;(1) Cys-peptide enriched, (2) the unbound complement, and (3) the non-depleted control&#x2500;and compare the peptides and proteins quantified in each dataset, with emphasis on Cys-containing peptides. The data show that enrichment using 6C-Cys phosphonate adaptable tag (6C-CysPAT) can quantify over 38,000 Cys-containing peptides in 5 h with &gt;90% specificity. In addition, our combined dataset provides the research community with a resource of over 9900 protein abundance profiles exhibiting the effects of two different proteasome inhibitors. Overall, the seamless incorporation of alkylation by 6C-CysPAT into a current TMT-based workflow permits the enrichment of a Cys-containing peptide subproteome. The acquisition of this "mini-Cys" dataset can be used to preview and assess the quality of a deep, fractionated dataset.

### Keywords
Cyspat, Fe3+-nta, Orbitrap eclipse, Faims, Isobaric tagging, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA


