### Accession
PXD009039

### Title
Dissecting the malaria interactome

### Description
To identify malaria protein interactions systematically we combined blue native polyacrylamide electrophoresis fractionation with quantitative mass spectrometry and machine learning. Our integrative approach identified over twenty thousand protein interactions in Plasmodium schizonts, organized into 600 complexes, the majority of which are novel, and generated a high-confidence Plasmodium protein interaction network.

### Sample Protocol
Purified Plasmodium schizonts were lysed as previously described [Pardo et al, 2010]. The cleared lysate was dialysed into 20 mM Bis-Tris pH 7, 500 mM 6-aminocaproic acid, 12 mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, supplemented with 0 (for lysates with no NP-40) or 0.1% (for lysates with 0.1 or 1% NP-40), by centrifugal filtration through a 10 kDa cut-off membrane (PES, Vivaspin 500, Sartorius). The dialysed lysate containing 50 g protein was separated by Blue Native PAGE in NativePAGE 3-12% Bis-Tris gels as previously described [Bode et al, 2016]. Gels were fixed in 40% methanol and 2% acetic acid for 30 minutes and then left in water until further processing.  Gel lanes were excised into 48 1.5 mm-slices, reduced with 5 mM TCEP, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide. After complete gel destaining, proteins were digested with 1 ng/uL trypsin (sequencing grade, Roche). Peptide extraction was performed as described previously [Pardo et al, 2010]. Peptides were analysed by online nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. Samples were first loaded and desalted on a nanotrap (100 µm id x 2 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µ) at 10 µL/min with 0.1% formic acid for 10 min and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 25 cm) (PepMap C18, 2µ) over a 60 min linear gradient of 5 – 42% B (B = 80% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL/min, and the total cycle time was 90 min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in standard data-dependent acquisition. The survey scans (m/z 380-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. The 10 most abundant multiply charged ions with a minimal intensity of 2000 counts were subject to MS/MS in the linear ion trap at an isolation width of 2 Th. Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 10 ppm for 45 s. The automatic gain control target value was regulated at 1x106 for the Orbitrap and 5000 for the ion trap, with maximum injection time at 200 ms for Orbitrap and 100 ms for the ion trap, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files for each fractionation experiment were analysed together using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.5.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008) to identify and quantify proteins across all gel slices. Trypsin was set as digestion mode with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Main search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and MS/MS match tolerance set to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and acetylation at the N-terminus, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine or glutamine were set as variable modifications. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Database searches were conducted against protein sequence databases from GeneDB (Logan-Klumpler et al., 2012) (P. falciparum – 5431 sequences, P. knowlesi – 5477 sequences, P. berghei – 5019 sequences)  for each of P. berghei, P. falciparum and P. knowlesi, and additionally with mouse protein sequences from UniProt (2017)(Mus musculus - 16950 sequences) for samples without saponin treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria represents a major global health issue, and the identification of new intervention targets remains an urgent priority. This search is hampered by more than one-third of the genes of malaria-causing Plasmodium parasites being uncharacterized. We report a large-scale protein interaction network in Plasmodium schizonts, generated by combining blue native-polyacrylamide electrophoresis with quantitative mass spectrometry and machine learning. This integrative approach, spanning 3 species, identifies &gt;20,000 putative protein interactions, organized into 600 protein clusters. We validate selected interactions, assigning functions in chromatin regulation to previously unannotated proteins and suggesting a role for an EELM2 domain-containing protein and a putative microrchidia protein as mechanistic links between AP2-domain transcription factors and epigenetic regulation. Our interactome represents a high-confidence map of the native organization of core cellular processes in Plasmodium parasites. The network reveals putative functions for uncharacterized proteins, provides mechanistic and structural insight, and uncovers potential alternative therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
P. knowlesi, Plasmodium, Fractionation, Malaria, Multiprotein complexes, P. berghei, Interactome, P. falciparum, Blue native page, Protein-protein interactions, Schizont

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


