### Accession
PXD004585

### Title
BRAF complexes -  Discrete cytosolic macromolecular BRAF complexes exhibit distinct activities and composition

### Description
BRAF interactomes dependent on the mutation V600E are analyzed by SEC-PCP-SILAC and HA-IPs comparing V600E to WT

### Sample Protocol
Two experimental groups are submitted: (a) SEC-PCP-SILAC runs followed by in-solution tryptic digest of fractions and LC-MS/MS (b) anti-HA-BRAF IPs follwed by geLC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was processed by MaxQuant (1.3.0.5)using following parameters: carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein amino-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Three miss cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P + DP, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peak lists were searched by Andromeda for peptide identification using a Uniprot human database from July 2012 containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion (86749 entries). Peptide lists were further used by MaxQuant to identify and relatively quantify proteins using the following parameters: peptide, and protein false discovery rates were set to 0.01, maximum peptide posterior error probability (PEP) was set to 1, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the PEP was based on Andromeda score, minimum number peptides for identification and quantitation of proteins was set to one and must be unique, and identified proteins have been re-quantified.

### Publication Abstract
As a central element within the RAS/ERK pathway, the serine/threonine kinase BRAF plays a key role in development and homeostasis and represents the most frequently mutated kinase in tumors. Consequently, it has emerged as an important therapeutic target in various malignancies. Nevertheless, the BRAF activation cycle still raises many mechanistic questions as illustrated by the paradoxical action and side effects of RAF inhibitors. By applying SEC-PCP-SILAC, we analyzed protein-protein interactions of hyperactive BRAF<sup>V</sup><sup>600E</sup> and wild-type BRAF (BRAF<sup>WT</sup>). We identified two macromolecular, cytosolic BRAF complexes of distinct molecular composition and phosphorylation status. Hyperactive BRAF<sup>V</sup><sup>600E</sup> resides in large complexes of higher molecular mass and activity, while BRAF<sup>WT</sup> is confined to smaller, slightly less active complexes. However, expression of oncogenic K-Ras<sup>G12V</sup>, either by itself or in combination with RAF dimer promoting inhibitors, induces the incorporation of BRAF<sup>WT</sup> into large, active complexes, whereas pharmacological inhibition of BRAF<sup>V</sup><sup>600E</sup> has the opposite effect. Thus, the quaternary structure of BRAF complexes is shaped by its activation status, the conformation of its kinase domain, and clinically relevant inhibitors.

### Keywords
V600e, Ap-ms, Caco2 cells, Sec-pcp-silac, Lc-ms/ms, Braf

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musee 10, CH-1700 Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musee 10, CH-1700 Fribourg


