### Accession
PXD035819

### Title
Phospho-regulation of Cdc48/p97 cofactor protein Shp1/p47 in budding yeast

### Description
Shp1/p47 is a cofactor of the Cdc48/p97 complex involved in the energy-dependent segregation of intracellular aggregates and multiprotein complexes. We identified two serine residues (S108 and S315) in the S. Cerevisiae protein Shp1 which increase in phosphorylation upon various cell stresses such as heat shock, TORC1 inhibition, ER stress and oxidative stress. To identify binding partners of phosphorylated vs non-phosphorylated Shp1, we generated endogenous C-terminal 5xFLAG-tagged Shp1 yeast strains either harbouring either WT shp1 or CRISPR-modified S108A + S315A (2SA) shp1. These were cultured with 200 nM rapamycin treatment for 2 h to induce phosphorylation, prior to lysis, FLAG immunoprecipitation, peptide digestion and processing for LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Three replicates were performed for WT and 2SA Shp1-5xFLAG strains. For each replicate, 30 ml YEPD cultures of Shp1-5xFLAG yeast strains were grown to exponential phase at 30°C, treated with 200 mM rapamycin for 2 h, pelleted, washed in cold water and lysed in 400 μl IP lysis buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris 7.5, 1% Triton, supplemented with freshly-added: 20 mM NEM, 1 mM PMSF, Roche cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA-free and PhosSTOP™ at recommended concentrations). The resuspension was added to an equal volume of glass beads (Sigma, G8772-500G) in 2ml tubes, and cells were broken by shaking vigorously for 3 x 30 seconds with 5 minutes rest between pulses using a FastPrep-24 bead beating grinder (MP bio). After centrifuging for 10 minutes at 15,000 x g, supernatant was transferred to clean tubes and protein concentration was determined using the Protein A280 function of a NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo). Samples were diluted to equal concentrations of 2.5 mg/ml in a total volume of 0.5 ml. Immunoprecipitation was carried out overnight at 4°C using anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (pre-equilibrated using IP buffer, 20 μl slurry per replicate). Beads were next washed 4x with 300 μl IP buffer and bound proteins eluted using 3xFLAG peptide (150 ng/μl) in 100 μl IP buffer per sample. Eluates were applied to S-Trap™ mini spin columns (Protifi, C01-micro-80) and digested to peptides using trypsin (Thermo, 90058). Purified peptides were eluted prior to speed-vac drying, resuspended in 5% formic acid and analysed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS using an Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 against Uniprot SwissProt Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c) (Baker's yeast) database containing isoforms (released on 05 July 2021). Parameters were left as default, with LFQ quantitation and match between runs enabled. Only protein groups with at least 2 valid values in at least 1 condition were kept. Missing values were then imputed from a normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 and width of 0.3 relative to the standard deviation. Finally, statistical significance was assessed using a 2 sample Welch test. When using adjusted P-values, multiple hypothesis correction was carried out using Benjamini Hochberg procedure.

### Publication Abstract
The homohexameric p97 complex, composed of Cdc48 subunits in yeast, is a crucial component of protein quality control pathways including ER-associated degradation. The complex acts to segregate protein complexes in an ATP-dependent manner, requiring the engagement of cofactor proteins that determine substrate specificity. The function of different Cdc48 cofactors and how they are regulated remains relatively poorly understood. In this study, we assess the phosphorylation of Cdc48 adaptor proteins, revealing a unique and distinctive phosphorylation pattern of Shp1/p47 that changed in response to TORC1 inhibition. Site-directed mutagenesis confirmed that this pattern corresponded to phosphorylation at residues S108 and S315 of Shp1, with the double-phosphorylated form becoming predominant upon TORC1 inhibition, ER-stress, and oxidative stress. Finally, we assessed candidate kinases and phosphatases responsible for Shp1 phosphorylation and identified two regulators. We found that cells lacking the kinase Mpk1/Slt2 show reduced Shp1 phosphorylation, whereas impaired PP1 phosphatase catalytic subunit (Glc7) activity resulted in increased Shp1 phosphorylation. Overall, these findings identify a phosphoregulation of Shp1 at multiple sites by Mpk1 kinase and PP1 phosphatase upon various stresses.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Protein degradation, Proteostasis, Ubx domain, Torc1, Stress, Ubx1

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Frederic Lamoliatte

### Lab Head
Dr Adrien Rousseau
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland


