### Accession
PXD005333

### Title
Delta-like ligand 4-Notch signaling inhibition regulates pancreatic islet function and insulin secretion

### Description
Dll4-Notch signaling is required for cell fate decisions and neoplasias. However, emerging evidence suggests a role for Dll4-Notch signaling in metabolic and immune diseases. To date, there is no evidence of a direct effect of Dll4-Notch signaling inhibition on pancreatic islet function and insulin secretion.

### Sample Protocol
Six week old C57B1/6 mice were treated with Anti-Dll4 Ab, a gamma secretase inhibitor or control antibody (Hfc). Pancreas was isolated, suspended in 0.5M TEAB, 0.05% SDS, subjected to tip sonication, centrifuged and supernatant moved in fresh tubes. Eluates were quantitaed for protein content and 100ug of protein from each of the eight samples was subjected to reduction, alkylation, trypsin proteolysis and iTRAQ labeling. Labeled peptides were mixed and analysed using offline LC and online LC-MS techniques.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for target decoy search using Sequest against the mouse TREMBL database. Ratios were log2 transformed and median normalized. Co-isolation percentage excluding peptides from quantitation was set at 30.

### Publication Abstract
Although Notch signaling has been proposed as a therapeutic target for type-2 diabetes, liver steatosis, and atherosclerosis, its direct effect on pancreatic islets remains unknown. Here, we demonstrated a function of Dll4-Notch signaling inhibition on the biology of insulin-producing cells. We confirmed enhanced expression of key Notch signaling genes in purified pancreatic islets from diabetic NOD mice and showed that treatment with anti-Dll4 antibody specifically abolished Notch signaling pathway activation. Furthermore, we showed that Notch inhibition could drive proliferation of &#x3b2;-islet cells and confer protection from the development of STZ-induced diabetes. Importantly, inhibition of the Dll4 pathway in WT mice increased insulin secretion by inducing the differentiation of pancreatic &#x3b2;-islet cell progenitors, as well as&#xa0;the proliferation of insulin-secreting cells. These findings reveal a direct effect of Dll4-blockade on pancreatic islets that, in conjunction with its immunomodulatory effects, could be used for unmet medical needs hallmarked by inefficient insulin action.

### Keywords
Dll4, Gsis, Diabetes

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Proteas Bioanalytics Inc.

### Submitter
Antigoni Manousopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
University of Southampton


