### Accession
PXD030888

### Title
Displacement of PKA catalytic subunit from AKAP signaling islands drives pathology in Cushing’s syndrome C4PR_LIV

### Description
Mutations in the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKAc) drive the stress hormone disorder adrenal Cushing’s syndrome. We define mechanisms of action for the PKAcL205R and W196R variants. Proximity proteomic techniques demonstrate that both Cushing’s mutants are excluded from A kinase anchoring protein (AKAP) signaling islands, whereas live-cell photoactivation microscopy reveals that these kinase mutants indiscriminately diffuse throughout the cell. Only cAMP analog drugs that displace native PKAc from AKAPs enhance cortisol release. Rescue experiments that incorporate PKAc mutants into AKAP complexes abolish cortisol overproduction, indicating that kinase anchoring restores normal endocrine function. Analyses of adrenal-specific PKAc-W196R knock-in mice and Cushing’s syndrome patient tissue reveal defective signaling mechanisms of the disease. Surprisingly each Cushing’s mutant engages a different mitogenic signaling pathway, with upregulation of YAP/TAZ by PKAc-L205R and ERK kinase activation by PKAc-W196R. Thus, aberrant spatiotemporal regulation of each Cushing’s variant promotes the transmission of distinct downstream pathogenic signals.

### Sample Protocol
Concentrated purified PKA (10 μg) were diluted to 400 μl in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (~60-fold dilution) before being subject to reduction (with dithiothreitol) and alkylation (with iodoacetamide) as previously described (REF: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00337). The eluent was equally divided into two for digestion with either: 33:1 (w/w) trypsin gold (Promega) or 10:1 (w/w) elastase (Promega) at 37 oC for 18 hours with 600 rpm shaking. Digests were then subject to strong cation exchange using in-house packed stage tip clean-up, as previously described by (REF: 10.1126/scisignal.abf6685). Dried peptides were solubilized in 20 μl of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water, sonicated for 10 min, and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min at 4°C before separation and analysis by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex), over a 60-min gradient, as described in (REF: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00337). Briefly, samples were loaded at a rate of 12 μL/min onto a trapping column (PepMap100, C18, 300 μm × 5 mm) in loading buffer (3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA) before being resolved on an analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 μm × 500 mm, 2 μm bead diameter column) using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid): 3% B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to 80% B over 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All data acquisition was performed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), with higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation set at 32% normalized collision energy for 2+ to 5+ charge states using a 3 s cycle time. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (120K resolution at 200 m/z) over a range of 350 to 1400 m/z, AGC target = standard, maximum injection time = auto, with an intensity threshold for fragmentation of 2e4. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (30K resolution at 200 m/z), AGC target = standard, maximum injection time = dynamic. A dynamic exclusion window of 20 s was applied at a 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using the UniProt Human reviewed database (updated January 2021) with fixed modification = carbamidomethylation (C), variable modifications = oxidation (M) and phospho (S/T/Y), instrument type = electrospray ionization–Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance (ESI-FTICR), MS1 mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS2 mass tolerance = 0.01 Da, and the ptmRS node on; set to a score > 99.0. For label free relative quantification of phosphopeptide abundances in the different forms of PKA, the area under the curve of extracted ion chromatograms (in Xcalibur, Qual browser) of the phosphopeptide ions were normalised against 5 non-modified peptides to account for potential protein load variability during analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proximity biotinylation, Signaling, Stress hormone, Photoactivation, Cortisol, Prkaca, Scaffold, Adrenal, Anchoring

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool

### Submitter
leonard daly

### Lab Head
Dr Claire Eyers
University of Liverpool


