### Accession
PXD023871

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic characterization of the pectoralis major at three chronological ages in Beijing-You chicken

### Description
Chronological age is one of the important factors influencing muscle development and meat quality in chickens. To evaluate the protein expression profiles during skeletal muscle development, we performed a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic strategy in pectoralis major (breast muscle) of Beijing-You chicken (BYC) at the age of 90, 120 and 150 days. A total of 1,413 proteins in chicken breast muscle and 197 of them were differentially expressed (fold change ≥ 1.2 or ≤ 0.8333 and p < 0.05). There were 110 up- and 71 down-regulated proteins in 120 d vs. 90 d group, 13 up- and 10 down-regulated proteins in 150 d vs. 120 d group. The proteomic profiles of BYC at 120 d were very similar to those at 150 d and highly different from those at 90 d, suggesting that 120 d might be an important chronological age for BYC. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses indicated that these differentially expressed proteins were mainly involved in the pathway of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes, focal adhesion, oocyte meiosis and phagosome. Protein expression analysis indicated that the differences in muscle growth rate between ages were regulated by proteins such as LDHA and ENO3, whereas ATP2A1 and HSP70 were associated with water-holding capacity (WHC), and PPP1CB and COL1A2 were suggested to lie in the role of intramuscular fat (IMF) deposition. In addition, RACK1 was thought to be crucial for the sexual maturation during chicken development. Furthermore, some DEPs were quantified using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) to validate the results from TMT analysis. Overall, the present work could strengthen our view of the temporal expression profile during development and identify novel biomarkers for genetic breeding of chickens.

### Sample Protocol
Ninety one-day-old female BYC birds entered the experiment at the same time and were randomly distributed into 3 replicate groups; each group comprised 30 BYC birds. Birds were raised in an environmentally controlled room with 3 floor pens under the recommended environmental and nutritional conditions for BYC. Feed and water were provided ad libitum during the experiment. For each chronological age (90, 120 or 150 d), 5 birds of similar weight from each replication were weighed individually to obtain the live weight before the birds were electrically stunned and killed by exsanguination. Breast meat from both sides was used. After 10 cube samples (200 mg per cube) of each left fillet were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ until the TMT and PRM test, the remaining meat samples from the left side were used to obtain the IMF content. The right fillets were collected as well and were weighed and stored at 4℃ for measurement of meat quality characteristics.

### Data Protocol
The resulting LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) for data interpretation and protein identification against the database UniProt-gallus gallus-35124-20190830.fasta (released in August 2019 and including 35124 sequences), which was sourced from the protein database at https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=taxonomy:9031. An initial search was performed with a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of trypsin/P and allowed two maximal missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for fragment ions. The modification set was as follows: fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex (K), and TMT6plex (N-term); variable modification: oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). A minimum of 6 amino acids was required for peptides, and ≥ 1 unique peptide was required per protein. For peptide and protein identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Normalized TMT reporter ion intensity was used for peptide and protein quantification. The relative quantitative protein analysis of samples was conducted using the MaxQuant algorithms (http://www.maxquant.org).

### Publication Abstract
Chronological age is one of the important factors influencing muscle development and meat quality in chickens. To evaluate the protein expression profiles during skeletal muscle development, we performed a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic strategy in pectoralis major (breast muscle) of Beijing-You chicken (BYC) at the chronological age of 90, 120, and 150 days. Each chronological age contained 3 pooling samples or 15 birds (five birds per pooling sample). A total of 1,413 proteins were identified in chicken breast muscle with FDR &lt; 1% and 197 of them were differentially expressed (fold change &#x2265;1.2 or &#x2264;0.83 and <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). There were 110 up- and 71 down-regulated proteins in 120 d vs 90 d group, 13 up- and 10 down-regulated proteins in 150 d vs 120 d group. The proteomic profiles of BYC at 120 d were very similar to those at 150 d and highly different from those at 90 d, suggesting that 120 d might be an important chronological age for BYC. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses indicated that these differentially expressed proteins were mainly involved in the pathway of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes, focal adhesion, oocyte meiosis and phagosome. Furthermore, some DEPs were quantified using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) to validate the results from TMT analysis. In summary, these results provided some candidate protein-coding genes for further functional validation and contribute to a comprehensive understanding of muscle development and age-dependent meat quality regulation by proteins in chickens.

### Keywords
Beijing-you chicken; pectoralis major; chronological age; tmt-based quantitative proteomic analysis; parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations

Shaoxing Women and Children's Hospital, Shaoxing, China.
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing，100097, China.

### Submitter
Hai-Tao Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Huagui Liu
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing，100097, China.


