### Accession
PXD008838

### Title
The farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) skin-mucus proteome

### Description
Norway is the largest producer and exporter of farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) worldwide. Skin disorders correlated with bacterial infections represent an important challenge for fish farmers due to the economic losses caused. Little is known about this topic, thus studying the skin-mucus of Salmo salar and its bacterial community depict a step forward in understanding fish welfare in aquaculture. In this study, we used label free quantitative mass spectrometry to investigate the skin-mucus proteins associated with both Atlantic salmon and bacteria. In addition, the microbial temporal proteome dynamics during 9 days of mucus incubation with sterilized seawater was investigated, in order to evaluate their capacity to utilize mucus components for growth in this environment.

### Sample Protocol
The mixture of mucus and seawater was centrifuged at 5500 × g for 10 minutes and the supernatant was collected and stored at -20ºC until use. Protein precipitation was performed by adding 50% (v/v) Trichloroacetic acid to a final concentration of 10% (v/v), followed by incubation for 1h at 4°C. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged for 15 min at 15000 × g, washed one time with 0.01 M HCl/90% (v/v) acetone and centrifuged again for 15 min at 15000 × g. Subsequently, pellets were resuspended in SDS sample buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE using the AnykD Mini-PROTEAN gel (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) at 240 V for 12 minutes and stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue R250. Each gel lane was cut into five bands and distained two times using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. The proteins were reduced and alkylated at 25ºC using 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodacetamide, respectively, with an incubation time of 30 minutes in each step. Afterwards, proteins were digested overnight with 0.1 µg trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C as previously described (Arntzen et al., 2015). Prior to mass spectrometry, peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), dried under vacuum (45ºC) (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf, Denmark) and dissolved in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) tri-fluoro acetic acid.

### Data Protocol
A community database was generated by extracting and concatenating UniProt or NCBI protein entries for the 18 genera detected in the 16S rRNA analysis (Figure 1). In detail, 16 genera were extracted from UniProt (SwissProt + TrEMBL, release 2017_01) (Bacteriovorax, Colwellia, Halomonas, Litoreibacter, Lysobacter, Marinomonas, Methylobacterium, Neptuniibacter, Phaeobacter, Polaribacter, Pseudoalteromonas, Ralstonia, Shewanella, Sphingomonas, Sulfitobacter, Vibrio) and two were extracted from NCBI (Olleya, Rubritalea). In addition, UniProt entries for Salmo were added in the database for the detection of salmon proteins. In total, the database had 2.297.141 protein entries. MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and proteins were identified and quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014).The tolerance levels for matching to the database was 6 ppm for MS and 20 ppm for MS/MS. Trypsin was used as digestion enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines were allowed as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant, which enables identification transfer between samples based on accurate mass and retention time (Cox et al., 2014), was applied with a match time window of one minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and further filtering were applied to include at least one unique peptide and at least two peptides in total.

### Publication Abstract
Norway is the largest producer and exporter of farmed Atlantic salmon (<i>Salmo salar</i>) worldwide. Skin disorders correlated with bacterial infections represent an important challenge for fish farmers due to the economic losses caused. Little is known about this topic, thus studying the skin-mucus of <i>Salmo salar</i> and its bacterial community depict a step forward in understanding fish welfare in aquaculture. In this study, we used label free quantitative mass spectrometry to investigate the skin-mucus proteins associated with both Atlantic salmon and bacteria. In particular, the microbial temporal proteome dynamics during nine days of mucus incubation with sterilized seawater was investigated, in order to evaluate their capacity to utilize mucus components for growth in this environment. At the start of the incubation period, the largest proportion of proteins (~99%) belonged to the salmon and many of these proteins were assigned to protecting functions, confirming the defensive role of mucus. On the contrary, after nine days of incubation, most of the proteins detected were assigned to bacteria, mainly to the genera Vibrio and Pseudoalteromonas. Most of the predicted secreted proteins were affiliated with transport and metabolic processes. In particular, a large abundance and variety of bacterial proteases were observed, highlighting the capacity of bacteria to degrade the skin-mucus proteins of Atlantic salmon.

### Keywords
Teleost, Mucin, Proteases, Salmo salar, Proteome, Skin-mucus, Microbiome, Aquaculture

### Affiliations
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU), Ås, Norway
Norwegian University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Magnus Arntzen

### Lab Head
Dr Gustav Vaaje-Kolstad
Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of Life Sciences (NMBU), Ås, Norway


