### Accession
PXD009723

### Title
Genital proteins in women at risk of HIV infection

### Description
In this study, we used a bead-based affinity proteomics method to examine genital proteins in women living in HIV-serodiscordant relationships. Proteins identified using the affinity set-up were validated by a label free tandem mass spectrometry based method in a parallel cohort with concordant results.

### Sample Protocol
Two cotton-tipped swabs were used to collect secretions from the cervical os and posterior vaginal fornix. Both swabs were placed in the same vial containing 5 ml of phosphate-buffered saline and transferred on ice to the laboratory within 2 hours of collection, centrifuged at 800 g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove cellular debris, and the supernatant was aliquoted and cryopreserved in cryovials at -80°C. 50 μg of protein from each sample was denatured in 8M urea and digested with trypsin enzyme using filter-aided sample preparation. Peptides were cleaned of salts and detergents with reverse-phase liquid chromatography (high pH RP, Agilent 1200 series micro-flow pump, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Equal amounts of sample peptides were analyzed using a Linear Trap Quadrupole Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a nano-flow Easy nLC II (Thermo Fisher). MS data was analyzed label-free based on peak intensities using the program Progenesis LC-MS Software (v3 Nonlinear Dynamics) with default settings. Peptide quantification was performed in Progenesis QI software with “Relative quantification using Hi-N” where the 3 (n=3) abundant peptides for each protein are averaged for quantification. For minimum threshold for data quantification, Progenesis Q1 defaults were used. Searches were performed in Mascot v2.4.0 (Matrix Science); peptide identity search was performed using Mascot v2.4.0 against the UniProtKB/SwissProt database (356786 entries at the time of search) restricting taxonomy to Human (Genus), Bacteria (Kingdom), Candida (Genus), Trichomonas (Genus). For the present study, only proteins restricted to Human taxonomy were analyzed. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin” and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C) of cysteine, and a variable modification was set to oxidation (O) of methionine. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was 10 ppm and 0.5 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. The peptides identified were further confirmed using Scaffold (version 4.4.1) with the following criteria: ≤0.1% false discovery rate (FDR) peptide identification, ≤1% FDR protein identification and ≥2 unique peptides/protein. When proteins could not be differentiated based on the MS analysis because they contain similar peptides, proteins were grouped parsimoniously.

### Publication Abstract
Women at high risk of HIV infection, including sex workers and those with active genital inflammation, have molecular signatures of immune activation and epithelial barrier remodeling in samples of their genital mucosa. These alterations in the local immunological milieu are likely to impact HIV susceptibility. We here analyze host genital protein signatures in HIV uninfected women, with high frequency of condom use, living in HIV-serodiscordant relationships. Cervicovaginal secretions from women living in HIV-serodiscordant relationships (<i>n</i> = 62) were collected at three time points over 12 months. Women living in HIV-negative seroconcordant relationships (controls, <i>n</i> = 25) were sampled at one time point. All study subjects were examined for demographic parameters associated with susceptibility to HIV infection. The cervicovaginal samples were analyzed using a high-throughput bead-based affinity assay. Proteins involved in epithelial barrier function and inflammation were increased in HIV-serodiscordant women. By combining several methods of analysis, a total of five proteins (CAPG, KLK10, SPRR3, elafin/PI3, CSTB) were consistently associated with this study group. Proteins analyzed using the affinity set-up were further validated by label-free tandem mass spectrometry in a partially overlapping cohort with concordant results. Women living in HIV-serodiscordant relationships thus had elevated levels of proteins involved in epithelial barrier function and inflammation despite low prevalence of sexually transmitted infections and a high frequency of safe sex practices. The identified proteins are important markers to follow during assessment of mucosal HIV susceptibility factors and a high-throughput bead-based affinity set-up could be a suitable method for such evaluation.

### Keywords
Cervicovaginal secretions

### Affiliations
Dpt of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada National HIV and Retrovirology Labs, JC Wilt infectious Disease Centre, Public Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, Canada Department of Medicine Solna, Unit of Infectious diseases, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stocholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Frideborg Bradley

### Lab Head
Dr Adam D Burgener
Dpt of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada National HIV and Retrovirology Labs, JC Wilt infectious Disease Centre, Public Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, Canada Department of Medicine Solna, Unit of Infectious diseases, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stocholm, Sweden


