### Accession
PXD028247

### Title
AK2 promotes the migration and invasion of lung adenocarcinoma by activating TGF-β/Smad pathway in vitro and in vivo

### Description
Adenylate kinase 2 (AK2) is a wide-spread and highly conserved protein kinase whose main function is to catalyze the exchange of nucleotide phosphate groups. In this study, we showed that AK2 regulated tumor cell metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma. Positive expression of AK2 is related to lung adenocarcinoma progression and poor survival of patients. Knockdown or knockout of AK2 inhibited, while overexpression of AK2 promoted, human lung adenocarcinoma cell migration and invasion ability. Differential proteomics results showed that AK2 might be closely related to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Further research indicated that AK2 regulated EMT occurrence through the Smad-dependent classical signaling pathways as measured by western blot and qPCR assays. Additionally, in vivo experiments showed that AK2-knockout in human lung tumor cells reduced their EMT-like features and formed fewer metastatic nodules both in liver and in lung tissues. In conclusion, we uncover a cancer metastasis-promoting role for AK2 and provide a rationale for targeting AK2 as a potential therapeutic approach for lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
A549 and A549 AK2-KO cells were used to perform the experiment. Cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Wisent, Canada) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, Australia) and 50 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), in a humidified CO2 (5%) incubator at 37 °C.

### Data Protocol
The protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method. Equal amount of protein (200 μg) was used for iTRAQ labeling according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Raw MS/MS data were analyzed by the Agilent G2721AA Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench (Rev A.03.03.078) in the UniProtKB/SWISS Prot database for protein identification. The network building tool MetaCoreTM version 5.4 (GeneGo) was used to establish potential signaling network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tgf-β, Ak2, Lung adenocarcinoma, Emt, Tumor metastasis

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Blvd., Nanjing 210023, China.
Nanjing University

### Submitter
Fangfang Cai

### Lab Head
Dr Hongqin Zhuang
School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, 163 Xianlin Blvd., Nanjing 210023, China.


