### Accession
PXD008582

### Title
In vitro DDR1 signalling -  Inhibition of DDR1-BCR signalling by nilotinib as a new therapeutic strategy for metastatic colorectal cancer

### Description
The clinical management of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) faces major challenges. For instance, patients harbouring oncogenic mutations in RAS signalling do not respond to anti-EGFR targeted treatment. Therefore, RAS-independent therapies are needed. Interestingly nilotinib, a clinically approved drug for chronic myeloid leukaemia, inhibits human CRC cell invasion in vitro and reduces their metastatic potential in intrasplenic tumour mouse models. Nilotinib acts by inhibiting the kinase activity of DDR1, a receptor tyrosine kinase for collagens, which we identified as a RAS-independent inducer of CRC metastasis. Using quantitative phosphoproteomics, we identified BCR as a new DDR1 substrate and demonstrated that nilotinib prevents DDR1-mediated BCR phosphorylation on Tyr177, which is important for maintaining -catenin transcriptional activity necessary for tumour cell invasion. DDR1 kinase inhibition also reduced the invasion of patient-derived metastatic and circulating CRC cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Cells samples were lysed in urea buffer (8M urea in 200mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5). Phosphopeptides were purified after tryptic digestion of 20 mg (for cells) or of 35 mg (for mouse tumours) total proteins using the PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) Kit (Cell Signalling Technology), according to manufacturer’s protocol. An additional enrichment step using the IMAC-Select Affinity Gel (Sigma Aldrich) was performed to increase the phosphopeptide enrichment. Purified phosphopeptides were resuspended in 10% formic acid and two technical replicates for each sample were analysed using an EASY-nano LC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) coupled online with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Each sample was loaded onto a 15 cm column packed in-house with 3µM ReproSil-Pur C18 (75 µm inner diameter). Buffer A consisted of H2O with 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B of 100% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated using a gradient from 0% to 24% buffer B for 65min, from 24% to 40% buffer B for 15min and from 40% to 80% buffer B for 15min (a total of 95 min at 250 nL/min).

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired with the ‘Top 15 method’, where every full MS scan was followed by 15 data-dependent scans on the 15 most intense ions from the parent scan. Full scans were performed in the Orbitrap at 120’000 resolution with target values of 1E6 ions and 500ms injection time, while MS/MS ion trap scanning parameters were 1E4 ions as target value and 200ms as maximum accumulation time. Database searches were performed with Mascot Server using the human Uniprot database (version 3.87). Mass tolerances were set at 10ppm for the full MS scans and at 0.8Da for MS/MS. Label-free quantification was performed on duplicate LC-MS runs for each sample using Progenesis LC-MS (Nonlinear Dynamics Software). Peptide intensities were normalized across all LC-MS runs and normalized peptide intensities were summed for each unique phosphorylated peptide with a Mascot score exceeding 25. These intensities were then used to calculate the log2 fold change ratios of each unique phosphopeptide or each unique protein. In case of ambiguous phosphorylation site assignments, spectra were manually interpreted to confirm the localization of the phosphorylation site using Scaffold (Proteome software).

### Publication Abstract
The clinical management of metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) faces major challenges. Here, we show that nilotinib, a clinically approved drug for chronic myeloid leukaemia, strongly inhibits human CRC cell invasion <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and reduces their metastatic potential in intrasplenic tumour mouse models. Nilotinib acts by inhibiting the kinase activity of DDR1, a receptor tyrosine kinase for collagens, which we identified as a RAS-independent inducer of CRC metastasis. Using quantitative phosphoproteomics, we identified BCR as a new DDR1 substrate and demonstrated that nilotinib prevents DDR1-mediated BCR phosphorylation on Tyr177, which is important for maintaining &#x3b2;-catenin transcriptional activity necessary for tumour cell invasion. DDR1 kinase inhibition also reduced the invasion of patient-derived metastatic and circulating CRC cell lines. Collectively, our results indicate that the targeting DDR1 kinase activity with nilotinib may be beneficial for patients with mCRC.

### Keywords
Ddr1 tyrosine kinase, Signalling, Metastatic colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Debora Bonenfant, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research

### Submitter
Debora Bonenfant

### Lab Head
Dr Debora Bonenfant, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research
Debora Bonenfant, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland


