### Accession
PXD018533

### Title
V. longisporum elicits media-dependent secretome responses with a further capacity to distinguish between plant-related environments

### Description
Plant pathogens secrete distinct effector molecules in their host plants to establish successful infections. Verticillium longisporum colonizes the vascular system of the plant. We analyzed the exoproteome of the fungus dependent on different environmental conditions including non plant-related and plant-related environments. This exoproteomic comparison led to the identification of a set of proteins that are specifically secreted in the xylem sap.

### Sample Protocol
For the exoproteome comparison, 150 ml potato dextrose broth (PDM) was inoculated with 1.5 x 106 spores of V. longisporum 43 (Vl43) and incubated for four days with 150 rpm agitation. Each culture was centrifuged and the mycelium and spore sediment was resuspended in 150 ml extracted xylem sap of Brassica napus, simulated xylem medium (SXM), the minimal medium Czapek-Dox medium (CDM) supplemented with 7% extracted xylem sap or plant proteins; H2O and H2O supplemented with 0.1% glucose; yeast nitrogen base (YNB) and vegetable juice (V8, Campbell Soup Company). After an additional incubation period of four days, proteins of the supernatant were precipitated with 10% TCA (w/v) in acetone at 4°C overnight. This mixture was centrifuged at 4 000 rpm for 60 min at 4°C. The protein sediment was washed three times with 80% (v/v) acetone, once with 100% (v/v) acetone and then dissolved in 8 M urea/ 2 M thiourea. For one-dimensional gel analysis, 30 µg of the extracellular protein extract was separated by 12% SDS-PAGE gels. Each gel lane was divided into up to ten pieces. For all growth conditions two lanes were tested for each of the two independent cultures except SXM and xylem sap, which were tested an additional time. The excised polyacrylamide gels were in-gel digested with trypsin [Shevchenko et al., 1996]. Resulting tryptic peptide mixtures were separated by a reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC column, 75 μm x 15 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, P/N164534, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to further reduce sample complexity prior to mass analyses with an LTQ Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  References: Shevchenko A, Wilm M, Vorm O, Mann M. Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins from silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem. 1996. 68: 850–858.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using an in-house genome-wide protein sequence database of Verticillium longisporum and a Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3) workflow that integrates Sequest and Mascot search engines. For the search an initial precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da Carbamidomethylcysteine was used as fixed modification. Oxidized methionine was included as variable modification and two missed cleavages were allowed for each peptide. For peptide and protein validation, a 0.5% false discovery rate was set and determined by using peptide validator with a reverse decoy database. Resulting lists of identified proteins were semi-quantitatively processed using the Marvis Suite software [Kaever et al., 2012].  References: Kaever A, Landesfeind M, Possienke M, Feussner K, Feussner I, Meinicke P. MarVis-filter: Ranking, filtering, adduct and isotope correction of mass spectrometry data. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012. 2012: 263910.

### Publication Abstract
Verticillia cause a vascular wilt disease affecting a broad range of economically valuable crops. The fungus enters its host plants through the roots and colonizes the vascular system. It requires extracellular proteins for a successful plant colonization. The exoproteomes of the allodiploid <i>Verticillium longisporum</i> upon cultivation in different media or xylem sap extracted from its host plant <i>Brassica napus</i> were compared. Secreted fungal proteins were identified by label free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry screening. <i>V. longisporum</i> induced two main secretion patterns. One response pattern was elicited in various non-plant related environments. The second pattern includes the exoprotein responses to the plant-related media, pectin-rich simulated xylem medium and pure xylem sap, which exhibited similar but additional distinct features. These exoproteomes include a shared core set of 221 secreted and similarly enriched fungal proteins. The pectin-rich medium significantly induced the secretion of 143 proteins including a number of pectin degrading enzymes, whereas xylem sap triggered a smaller but unique fungal exoproteome pattern with 32 enriched proteins. The latter pattern included proteins with domains of known pathogenicity factors, metallopeptidases and carbohydrate-active enzymes. The most abundant proteins of these different groups are the necrosis and ethylene inducing-like proteins Nlp2 and Nlp3, the cerato-platanin proteins Cp1 and Cp2, the metallopeptidases Mep1 and Mep2 and the carbohydrate-active enzymes Gla1, Amy1 and Cbd1. Their pathogenicity contribution was analyzed in the haploid parental strain <i>V. dahliae</i>. Deletion of the majority of the corresponding genes caused no phenotypic changes during <i>ex planta</i> growth or invasion and colonization of tomato plants. However, we discovered that the <i>MEP1</i>, <i>NLP2</i>, and <i>NLP3</i> deletion strains were compromised in plant infections. Overall, our exoproteome approach revealed that the fungus induces specific secretion responses in different environments. The fungus has a general response to non-plant related media whereas it is able to fine-tune its exoproteome in the presence of plant material. Importantly, the xylem sap-specific exoproteome pinpointed Nlp2 and Nlp3 as single effectors required for successful <i>V. dahliae</i> colonization.

### Keywords
Verticillium longisporum, Plant pathogen, Exoproteome, Brassica napus, Secretome, Xylem sap

### Affiliations
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard H. Braus
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics


