### Accession
PXD006023

### Title
AGK human LC-MSMS project part I (proteome)

### Description
Mutations in the mitochondrial acylglycerol kinase AGK cause Sengers syndrome characterized by cataracts, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and skeletal myopathy. AGK generates phosphatidic acid and lyso-phosphatidic acid, bioactive phospholipids involved in lipid signaling and the regulation of tumor progression. However, molecular mechanisms of the mitochondrial pathology remain enigmatic. Determining its mitochondrial interactome, we have identified AGK as a constituent of the TIM22 protein translocase in the mitochondrial inner membrane. AGK assembles with TIMM22 and TIMM29 and supports the import of a subset of multi-spanning membrane proteins. The function of AGK as subunit of the TIM22 translocase does not depend on its kinase activity. However, enzymatically active AGK is required to maintain mitochondrial cristae morphogenesis and the apoptotic resistance of cells. The dual function of AGK as lipid kinase and constituent of the TIM22 translocase reveals that disturbances in both phospholipid metabolism and mitochondrial protein biogenesis contribute to the pathogenesis of Sengers syndrome. See the published paper for more information of the experimental setup.

### Sample Protocol
In-Solution digestion Proteins were dissolved in 6M Urea, 2M Thio-Urea in 10 mM HEPES pH=8 and reduced by 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in the dark using 55 mM Iodacetamide (IAA). Then Lys-C was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and incubated at room temperature for 2h. Urea concentration was diluted to 6M by adding 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and Trypsin was used at the same ratio for overnight digestion. Digestion was stopped by adding Acetonitrile and TFA to a final concentration of 2.5% and 0.1% respectively. Solution was clarified by centrifugation and peptide were desalted using the StageTip technique. Peptides were eluted using 80% Acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, concentrated in a speed vac to complete dryness and resuspended in 10 µL of 2.5 % Acetonitrile and 5 % formic acid.       Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted out of an Easy nLC 1000 coupled to a quadrupole based QExactive Plus instrument. In brief, a 50 cm column packed with 1.9 µm Reprosil C18 Beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) was used for peptide separation. Column temperate was controlled by a home-made oven to 50°C. A binary buffer system was used within the gradient: a) 0.1%formic acid and b) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and peptides were eluted along an increasing content of buffer b.  MS1 level spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z using an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20ms. The Mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent Top10 mode and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30s. For proteome measurement of mitochondria resolution was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z aiming for an AGC target of 5e5 within a maximum injection time of 60ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 and the implemented Andromeda search engine. Acquired MS/MS data were correlated against the Human reference proteome Uniprot database. False discovery rates on protein and peptide-spectrum-match level were estimated by the target-decoy algorithm to 1%. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids and carbamidomethyolation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and N-term protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. The match-between run and label-free quantification algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in mitochondrial acylglycerol kinase (AGK) cause Sengers syndrome, which is characterized by cataracts, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and skeletal myopathy. AGK generates phosphatidic acid and lysophosphatidic acid, bioactive phospholipids involved in lipid signaling and the regulation of tumor progression. However, the molecular mechanisms of&#xa0;the mitochondrial pathology remain enigmatic. Determining its mitochondrial interactome, we have identified AGK as a constituent of the TIM22 complex in the mitochondrial inner membrane. AGK assembles with TIMM22 and TIMM29 and supports the import of a subset of multi-spanning membrane proteins. The function of AGK as a subunit of the TIM22 complex does not depend on its kinase activity. However, enzymatically active AGK is required to maintain mitochondrial cristae morphogenesis and the apoptotic resistance of cells. The dual function of AGK as lipid kinase and constituent of the TIM22 complex reveals that disturbances in both phospholipid metabolism and mitochondrial protein biogenesis contribute to the pathogenesis of Sengers syndrome.

### Keywords
Human, Agk, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


