### Accession
PXD037764

### Title
Multiomics Approach to Profiling Development of the Spermatogonial Stem Cell Niche Focused on Sertoli cell Maturation

### Description
Spermatogonial stem cells are the foundation of spermatogenesis and as such can serve as a tool for the treatment of infertility in prepubertal cancer survivors. Spermatogonial stem cells are unique as they develop from primordial germ cells (PGCs), which colonize the developing tubules as immature SSC precursors. It has been controversial, when SSCs are maturing to an adult-like stem cell and recent research has found that prepubertal SSCs are actually metabolically distinct from adult SSCs until puberty.  Sertoli cells picture a major part of the  SSC niche and undergo drastic changes with puberty and polarize to compartmentalize the seminiferous epithelium with formation of tight junctions to a tight basal part where SSCs reside and an apical part with more differentiated stages of spermatogenesis. In the study were mapping the progression of Sertoli cells maturation events to the metabolic changes SSCs undergo during prepubertal development.

### Sample Protocol
Five million Sertoli cell from 1-week and 8-week-old pig testes were washed twice with cold PBS. Cell preparation was performed as previously described (Voigt et al., 2022) and liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis was performed at the Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry (SAMS) core facility (University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada). Phospho-proteomics analysis was performed by sequential enrichment using metal oxide affinity chromatography (SOMAC) following the manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher, Application note 65381). For labeling, protein lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (1% SDS, 0.1 M DTT in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8) and protease inhibitor tablets [Roche]) and diluted to a final concentration of 3 M guanidine HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), and 10 mM DTT. Alkylation of the sample was accomplished by incubation with a final concentration of 15 mM iodoacetamide for 25 min in the dark at room temperature. Proteins were then trypsinized overnight. The pH was next adjusted to 6.0 with HCl.  To label peptide α- and ε-amines, samples were incubated for 18 h at 37 °C with isotopically heavy [40 mM 13CD2O +20 mM NaBH3CN (sodium cyanoborohydride)] or light labels [40 mM light formaldehyde (CH2O) + 20 mM NaBH3CN], all final concentrations. Next, proteins were precipitated and acidified with 100% acetic acid to pH < 3.0 and pass through C18 Sep-Pak C18 columns (Mississauga, Ontario).

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the pig (Sus scrofa) proteome using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.0.1. For the peptide-spectrum match, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% was applied. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), and phosphorylation (STY, +79.966330 Da). N-terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylation were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P (search for free N-terminus and for only lysines), with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Minimum peptide length was set to 5, and maximum peptide mass was set to 6,600 Da. Minimum score for modified peptides was set to 20, and match between runs was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are the basis of spermatogenesis, a complex process supported by a specialized microenvironment, called the SSC niche. Postnatal development of SSCs is characterized by distinct metabolic transitions from prepubertal to adult stages. An understanding of the niche factors that regulate these maturational events is critical for the clinical application of SSCs in fertility preservation. To investigate the niche maturation events that take place during SSC maturation, we combined different '-omics' technologies. Serial single cell RNA sequencing analysis revealed changes in the transcriptomes indicative of niche maturation that was initiated at 11&#x2009;years of age in humans and at 8&#x2009;weeks of age in pigs, as evident by Monocle analysis of Sertoli cells and peritubular myoid cell (PMC) development in humans and Sertoli cell analysis in pigs. Morphological niche maturation was associated with lipid droplet accumulation, a characteristic that was conserved between species. Lipidomic profiling revealed an increase in triglycerides and a decrease in sphingolipids with Sertoli cell maturation in the pig model. Quantitative (phospho-) proteomics analysis detected the activation of distinct pathways with porcine Sertoli cell maturation. We show here that the main aspects of niche maturation coincide with the morphological maturation of SSCs, which is followed by their metabolic maturation. The main aspects are also conserved between the species and can be predicted by changes in the niche lipidome. Overall, this knowledge is pivotal to establishing cell/tissue-based biomarkers that could gauge stem cell maturation to facilitate laboratory techniques that allow for SSC transplantation for restoration of fertility.

### Keywords
Metabolic microenvironment, Niche development, Lipid metabolism, Sertoli cell maturation

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada


