### Accession
PXD005509

### Title
Phase separation of C9orf72 dipeptide repeats perturbs stress granule metabolism

### Description
Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of RNA binding proteins underlies the formation of multiple membraneless organelles involved in RNA metabolism, including stress granules. Defects in stress granule homeostasis constitute a corner stone of ALS/FTLD pathogenesis. Phase separation of ALS-linked stress granule proteins has been shown to rely on hydrophobic interactions. Here we identify an active role for arginine-rich domains in these phase separations. Moreover, arginine-rich dipeptide repeats (DPRs) derived from C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions similarly undergo LLPS, and induce phase separation of a large set of proteins involved in RNA and stress granule metabolism.  In the present proteomics experiment, we wondered which cellular proteins could interact with synthetic PR30 peptide. We took soluble HeLa cell lysate, to which we added increasing concentrations of PR30. The PR30 peptide spontaneously demixed, and could be separated from the solution by gentle centrifugation. Unexpectedly, the resulting pellet was largely resistant to washing steps, suggesting that PR induced the precipitation of different cellular proteins to the insoluble fraction. To see whether weak interactions could still be involved in the process, we also performed mild crosslinking with paraformaldehyde. Mass-spectroscopy (MS) analysis on both crosslinked and uncrosslinked samples identified 874 proteins that were detected and quantified in both conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Uncrosslinked (2 replicates) and crosslinked pellets (3 replicates) were redissolved in 300 mM NaCl Tris pH 8.0 buffer, sonicated and boiled to remove crosslinks. Urea was added to a final concentration of 8M to solubilize insoluble proteins. The total sample volume was 1.5 ml. Proteins in each sample were reduced with 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were further diluted to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were then purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent), dried and re-dissolved in solvent A (25 μl 0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) of which 10 μl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A (on a reverse-phase column produced in-house, 100 μm I.D. x 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) followed by loading the sample on a 40 cm column packed in the needle (produced in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by an increase in solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in linear gradients from 2% to 30% in 100 minutes, then from 30% to 56% in 40 minutes and finally from 56% to 99% in 5 minutes, all at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 with a maximum fill time of 60 ms. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of April 2016 containing 20,193 human protein sequences). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 1811 human proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.0) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples of uncrosslinked and crosslinked were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.01 and S0=1) to compare samples uncrosslinked and crosslinked and calculate the fold change for each protein between both samples. After removal of potential contaminants, 874 proteins were quantified in total.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of RNA-binding proteins plays an important role in the formation of multiple membrane-less organelles involved in RNA metabolism, including stress granules. Defects in stress granule homeostasis constitute a cornerstone of ALS/FTLD pathogenesis. Polar residues (tyrosine and glutamine) have been previously demonstrated to be critical for phase separation of ALS-linked stress granule proteins. We now identify an active role for arginine-rich domains in these phase separations. Moreover, arginine-rich dipeptide repeats (DPRs) derived from C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansions similarly undergo LLPS and induce phase separation of a large set of proteins involved in RNA and stress granule metabolism. Expression of arginine-rich DPRs in cells induced spontaneous stress granule assembly that required both eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation and G3BP. Together with recent reports showing that DPRs affect nucleocytoplasmic transport, our results point to an important role for arginine-rich DPRs in the pathogenesis of C9orf72 ALS/FTLD.

### Keywords
Labelfree shotgun proteomics, Arginine-rich dipeptide repeats, Liquid-liquid phase separation, Stress granules

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Neurology and Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), 3000 Leuven, Belgium  VIB, Vesalius Research Center, Laboratory of Neurobiology, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Ludo Van Den Bosch
KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Neurology and Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), 3000 Leuven, Belgium  VIB, Vesalius Research Center, Laboratory of Neurobiology, 3000 Leuven, Belgium


