### Accession
PXD024164

### Title
Proteomic analysis of breast EMT cell models reveal UGDH is upregulated during EMT and holds the potential as a clinical target

### Description
Epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to be involved in cancer metastasis and pathogenesis. Metabolic re-wiring is now considered to be one of the hallmarks of cancer. In this study, we studied the metabolic changes during EMT in three breast EMT cell models with a proteomic approach. The study showed well-known changes during EMT including CDH1, CDH2, VIM, LGALS1, SERPINE1 and PKP3. It also suggested a list of dysregulated metabolic enzymes: SORD, TSTA3, FDFT1 and UGDH. UGDH had the biggest change and is associated with patient survival. We further studied the role of UGDH in EMT and found out knockdown of UGDH with siRNA can decrease the intracellular glycerophosphocholine level and it can also slow cell proliferation and invasion in mesenchymal cells. Besides, knockdown of UGDH downregulated the expression of a well-known EMT marker, SNAI1. PDGFRB is highly expressed in mesenchymal cells and PDGFD is highly secreted from mesenchymal cells. Knockdown of PDGFRB with siRNA downregulated UGDH potentially via NFkB.

### Sample Protocol
After tryptic digestion peptides were desalted using STAGETIP as described in Rabbsilber et. al. Anal. Chem 2003. After desalting, peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analyzed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanospray ESI ion source (Proxeon, Odense). Peptides were injected into a C-18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and further separated on a C-18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 50 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a multistep gradient with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid): From 2-10% B in 10 min, 10-50% B in 130 min, 50-100% B in 20 min and 20min with 100% B. The HPLC were re-equilibrated with 2% B before next injection. The flow rate was 250 nl/min. Peptides eluted were analyzed on QExactive HF mass spectrometer operating in positive ion- and data dependent acquisition mode using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 29, automatic gain control target value of 3E6 for Orbitrap MS and 1E5 for MS/MS scans. Each MS scan (m/z 350–1650) was acquired at a resolution of 120000 FWHM, followed by 15 MS/MS scans triggered for AGC targets above 2E3, at a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms for MS and 100 ms for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified by processing MS data using Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ (http://www.thermoscientific.com/content/tfs/en/product/proteome-discoverer-software.html ) version 2.3 (PD) and MaxQuant (https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2016.136 ) v1.6.3.4 (MQ) software framework. Preview version 2.3.5 from Protein Metrics Incorporate (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ac200609a ) was used to inspect the raw files to determine optimal search criteria. Namely, the following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as Trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; Acetylation of Protein N-terminal including loss-of-Methionine, Oxidation of Methionine and Deamidation of Asparagine/Glutamine as dynamic post-translational modification while Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as static; Precursor mass-tolerance of 10 PPM while Fragment mass-tolerance of 0.02 Dalton. MQ which uses mass/charge and RT values to align raw files against each other was set up with one minute window match-between-run function and 20 mins overall sliding window using a clustering-based technique. PD’s node, Spectrum file RC, was set up to query the raw files against the Human proteome downloaded from UniProt https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640 ) in October 2018 with the static modification to recalibrate and detect features with the Minora node. Further MQ’s internal contaminants database was also queried along with the Human proteome using Andromeda (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/pr101065j ) and Sequest (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1016%2F1044-0305%2894%2980016-2 ) search engines available in MQ and PD respectively. For downstream analysis of these peptide-spectra-matches (PSM), both protein and peptide identifications/PSM false-discovery-rate (FDR) was set to 1% thus only unique peptides with high confidence were used for final protein group identification. Peak abundances were extracted by integrating the area under the peak curve. Each protein group abundance was normalized by the total abundance of all identified peptides at FDR < 1%. Summed up median values for all unique peptide ion abundances mapped to respective protein using label-free quantification algorithm (http://www.mcponline.org/content/13/9/2513.long ) and scaled on all average with Precursor Ion Quantifier node (http://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/posters/PN-64857-LC-MS-LFQ-Proteome-Discoverer-IMSC2016-PN64857-EN.pdf ) for MQ and PD respectively were used for that.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic rewiring is one of the indispensable drivers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) involved in breast cancer metastasis. In this study, we explored the metabolic changes during spontaneous EMT in three separately established breast EMT cell models using a proteomic approach supported by metabolomic analysis. We identified common proteomic changes, including the expression of CDH1, CDH2, VIM, LGALS1, SERPINE1, PKP3, ATP2A2, JUP, MTCH2, RPL26L1 and PLOD2. Consistently altered metabolic enzymes included the following: FDFT1, SORD, TSTA3 and UDP-glucose dehydrogenase (UGDH). Of these, UGDH was most prominently altered and has previously been associated with breast cancer patient survival. siRNA-mediated knock-down of UGDH resulted in delayed cell proliferation and dampened invasive potential of mesenchymal cells and downregulated expression of the EMT transcription factor SNAI1. Metabolomic analysis revealed that siRNA-mediated knock-down of UGDH decreased intracellular glycerophosphocholine (GPC), whereas levels of acetylaspartate (NAA) increased. Finally, our data suggested that platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB) signalling was activated in mesenchymal cells. siRNA-mediated knock-down of PDGFRB downregulated UGDH expression, potentially via NFkB-p65. Our results support an unexplored relationship between UGDH and GPC, both of which have previously been independently associated with breast cancer progression.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Breast, Upregulated, Cell model, Emt, Ugdh

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & The Center for Systems Biology University of Iceland Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik  Iceland.
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Óttar Rolfsson
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & The Center for Systems Biology University of Iceland Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik  Iceland.


