### Accession
PXD015749

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondrial protein complexes from patients with mutation in NDUFAF8 gene

### Description
NDUFAF8 is an assembly factor of the NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I). Here we used complexome profiling the functional consequences of NDUFAF8 mutations in patient fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of cultured cell pellets were essential done as described (Wittig et al. 2006). Briefly: Cells were collected by scraping and centrifugation, further disrupted using a pre-cooled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 2000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were centrifuged for 15 min at 600 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondrial membranes were sedimented by centrifugation of the supernatant for 15 min at 22´000g. Mitochondria enriched membranes from 20 mg cells were resuspended in 35 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 10 µl 20% digitonin (Serva). Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). In gel activity stains were performed as described in Wittig et al. 2007. Sample preparation for complexome profiling Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry for complexome profiling Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using an gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 50 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1) using default settings [Cox and Mann, 2008]. Proteins were identified using human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 71567 entries, released in 7/2017. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to the corresponding control set.  Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between control and patient. Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complex III dimer (483695 Da), Complex IV (220156 Da), complex V (618824Da) and respiratory supercomplex containing complex I, III dimer and one copy of complex IV (1663827Da) was used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA v0.5.8 [Giese et al. 2015] was used for hierarchical clustering.  Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Wittig I, Karas M, Schägger H. (2007) High resolution clear native electrophoresis for in-gel functional assays and fluorescence studies of membrane protein complexes. Mol Cell Proteomics. 6:1215-25.  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
Leigh syndrome is one of the most common neurological phenotypes observed in pediatric mitochondrial disease presentations. It is characterized by symmetrical lesions found on neuroimaging in the basal ganglia, thalamus, and brainstem and by a loss of motor skills and delayed developmental milestones. Genetic diagnosis of Leigh syndrome is complicated on account of the vast genetic heterogeneity with &gt;75 candidate disease-associated genes having been reported to date. Candidate genes are still emerging, being identified when "omics" tools (genomics, proteomics, and transcriptomics) are applied to manipulated cell lines and cohorts of clinically characterized individuals who lack a genetic diagnosis. NDUFAF8 is one such protein; it has been found to interact with the well-characterized complex I (CI) assembly factor NDUFAF5 in a large-scale protein-protein interaction screen. Diagnostic next-generation sequencing has identified three unrelated pediatric subjects, each with a clinical diagnosis of Leigh syndrome, who harbor bi-allelic pathogenic variants in NDUFAF8. These variants include a recurrent splicing variant that was initially overlooked due to its deep-intronic location. Subject fibroblasts were found to express a complex I deficiency, and lentiviral transduction with wild-type NDUFAF8-cDNA ameliorated both the assembly defect and the biochemical deficiency. Complexome profiling of subject fibroblasts demonstrated a complex I assembly defect, and the stalled assembly intermediates corroborate the role of NDUFAF8 in early complex I assembly. This report serves to expand the genetic heterogeneity associated with Leigh syndrome and to validate the clinical utility of orphan protein characterization. We also highlight the importance of evaluating intronic sequence when a single, definitively pathogenic variant is identified during diagnostic testing.

### Keywords
Oxidative phosphorylation system, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Complex i assembly

### Affiliations
Head, NHS Highly Specialised Mitochondrial Diagnostic Laboratory and Professor of Mitochondrial Pathology, Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle University, UK
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Taylor
Head, NHS Highly Specialised Mitochondrial Diagnostic Laboratory and Professor of Mitochondrial Pathology, Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle University, UK


