### Accession
PXD002065

### Title
TK SILACepedia -  Reprogramming of the tyrosine kinase-regulated proteome in breast cancer by combined use of RNAi and SILAC quantitative proteomics

### Description
Tyrosine kinases (TKs) are central regulators in cellular activities and perturbations of TK signaling contribute to oncogenesis. However, less than half of the TKs have been thoroughly studied and a global functional analysis of their proteomic portrait is lacking. Here we conducted a combined approach of RNAi and stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics to decode the TK-regulated proteome and associated signaling dynamics. As a result, a broad proteomic repertoire modulated by TKs was revealed, upon silencing of the 65 TKs expressed in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. This yielded 10 new distinctive TK clusters according to similarity in TK-regulated proteome, each characterized by a unique signaling signature in contrast to previous classifications. We provide functional analyses and identify critical pathways for each cluster based on their common downstream targets. Analysis of different breast cancer subtypes demonstrated distinct correlations of each cluster with clinical outcome. From the significantly up- and down-regulated proteins, we identified a number of markers of drug sensitivity and resistance. These data supports the role of TKs in regulating major aspects of cellular activity, but also reveals redundancy in signaling, explaining why kinase inhibitors alone often fail to achieve their clinical aims. The TK-SILACepedia provides a comprehensive resource for studying the global function of TKs in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of protein from unlabelled and labelled samples were combined prior to protein digestion. Briefly, samples were reduced in 10 mM DTT and alkylated in 50 mM Iodoacetamide prior to boiling in loading buffer, and then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4-12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Invitrogen) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining (Novex, Invitrogen). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by formic acid (1%) and acetonitrile (CH3CN), lyophilized in a speedvac and resuspended in 1% formic acid.  Mass Spectrometry methods  Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) nanoflow LC system. On average 0.5 µg was loaded with a constant flow of 5 µl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 µm inner-diameter, 2 cm; Themro Scientific). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18 column (75 µm, 15 cm; Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2-40% solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid) over 65 min with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific) via a nano electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 1.2 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250 °C. Full-scan MS survey spectra (m/z 335-1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The fifteen most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; and activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ Orbitrap after the accumulation of 10,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 1,000 ms for the full scans and 150 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 180 seconds and a relative mass window of 15 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy (22). Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Equal amounts of protein from unlabelled and labelled samples were combined prior to protein digestion. Briefly, samples were reduced in 10 mM DTT and alkylated in 50 mM Iodoacetamide prior to boiling in loading buffer, and then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4-12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Invitrogen) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining (Novex, Invitrogen). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by formic acid (1%) and acetonitrile (CH3CN), lyophilized in a speedvac and resuspended in 1% formic acid.  Mass Spectrometry methods  Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) nanoflow LC system. On average 0.5 µg was loaded with a constant flow of 5 µl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 µm inner-diameter, 2 cm; Themro Scientific). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18 column (75 µm, 15 cm; Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2-40% solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid) over 65 min with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific) via a nano electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 1.2 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250 °C. Full-scan MS survey spectra (m/z 335-1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The fifteen most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; and activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ Orbitrap after the accumulation of 10,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 1,000 ms for the full scans and 150 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 180 seconds and a relative mass window of 15 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy (22). Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine kinases (TKs) are central regulators in cellular activities and perturbations of TK signaling contribute to oncogenesis. However, less than half of the TKs have been thoroughly studied and a global functional analysis of their proteomic portrait is lacking. Here we conducted a combined approach of RNA interference (RNAi) and stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics to decode the TK-regulated proteome and associated signaling dynamics. As a result, a broad proteomic repertoire modulated by TKs was revealed, upon silencing of the 65 TKs expressed in MCF7 breast cancer cells. This yielded 10 new distinctive TK clusters according to similarity in TK-regulated proteome, each characterized by a unique signaling signature in contrast to previous classifications. We provide functional analyses and identify critical pathways for each cluster based on their common downstream targets. Analysis of different breast cancer subtypes showed distinct correlations of each cluster with clinical outcome. From the significantly up- and down-regulated proteins, we identified a number of markers of drug sensitivity and resistance. These data supports the role of TKs in regulating major aspects of cellular activity, but also reveals redundancy in signaling, explaining why kinase inhibitors alone often fail to achieve their clinical aims. The TK-SILACepedia provides a comprehensive resource for studying the global function of TKs in cancer.

### Keywords
Silac tyrosine kinases breast cancer cell signaling

### Affiliations
Imperial College, London
Imperial College

### Submitter
Georgios Giamas

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios Giamas
Imperial College, London


