### Accession
PXD034397

### Title
Structure of Cancer Antigen Mesothelin and Its Complex with Therapeutic Antibodies

### Description
Mesothelin is a differentiation antigen expressed at high levels on the surface of many cancers; its interaction with cancer antigen CA-125 can lead to metastasis. Mesothelin has been the subject of intensive investigations as a potential cancer antigen for immunotherapy. Structures of a fragment of mesothelin, full-length mesothelin alone and in complex with the Fab fragment of the therapeutic antibody MORAb-009, as well as a complex of its C-terminal fragment containing the majority of the identified shedding sites, or the shedding-resistant fragment, with monoclonal antibody 15B6 were obtained. The glycosylation profile of mesothelin purified from A431/H9 cells and patient ascites were obtained by glycoproteomics

### Sample Protocol
Purified mesothelin was analyzed using nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS). Briefly, affinity-purified samples were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin., and analyzed via nano-LC-MS/MS. The samples were injected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer through a nano-LC system and the glycopeptides were fragmentated by HCD triggered CID program (based on glycan oxonium ions).

### Data Protocol
The data sets were processed by Byonic 2.9 software and further analyzed by manual annotation. For calculation of the relative abundances of glycans at each site, the area under the curve (AUC) of each glycopeptide-derived mass was divided by the sum of all glycopeptides AUC.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibody, Cancer marker, Molecular recognition, Mesothelin, Crystal structure

### Affiliations
Associate Director of Analytical Services, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
Complex Carbohydrate Research Center

### Submitter
Asif Shajahan

### Lab Head
Dr Parastoo Azadi
Associate Director of Analytical Services, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA


