### Accession
PXD012069

### Title
The FGF4-dependent phosphoproteome in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
Protein kinase signalling is a major mechanism by which embryonic stem cell pluripotency and differentiation is controlled. However, the pathways and components that regulate embryonic stem cell identity have not been systematically defined. Here, we employ FGF4 signalling as a model system to investigate phosphoproteome dynamics in differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells. We report identification and quantitation of more than 10,000 phosphopeptides, of which hundreds of phosphophoylation sites are regulated more than 2-fold by acute FGF4 stimulation. We hypothesise that phosphorylation sites in this dataset are relevant for regulating the transition of mouse embryonic stem cells from pluripotency towards lineage specific differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
THE mESC cells were lysed with 8 M Urea buffer containing protease inhibitor and phosphoatase inhibitors. The cell lysate were digested with Lys-C and trypsin. The phosphopeptide from cell lysate digest were enriched by TiO2 material and were then labelled with TMT tag. The TMT-labelled phosphopeptides were fractionated by basic reverse phase chromatography. The cotantented 20 fractions were analysed by orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
All the acquired LC-MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine. A maximum missed cleavages for trypsin digestion was set to 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT-10plex tags on N termini as well as lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Variable modifications were set as oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.966 Da). Data were searched against a complete UniProt mouse (17,00l entry downloaded at July 2018) with a 1% FDR using Percolator.  The phosphoRS[6] node was used to localize phosphorylation site with a probability at least 90% to be considered as a confident phosphorylation site localization. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Reporter ion abundances were corrected for isotopic impurities based on the manufacturer’s data sheets. Signal-to-noise (S/N) values were used to represent the reporter ion abundance with a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and above required for quantitation from each MS2 spectra to be used. The S/N value of each reporter ions from each PSM were used to represent the abundance of the localised phosphorylation sites. The precursor spectra with higher than 25% co-isolation were further manually checked. The median was used for the normalisation. The quantification were calculated by the average of three biological replicates values. The standard deviation of three biological replicates lower than 25% were used for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Embryonic Stem Cell (ESC) differentiation requires complex cell signalling network dynamics, although the key molecular events remain poorly understood. Here, we use phosphoproteomics to identify an FGF4-mediated phosphorylation switch centred upon the key Ephrin receptor EPHA2 in differentiating ESCs. We show that EPHA2 maintains pluripotency and restrains commitment by antagonising ERK1/2 signalling. Upon ESC differentiation, FGF4 utilises a bimodal strategy to disable EPHA2, which is accompanied by transcriptional induction of EFN ligands. Mechanistically, FGF4-ERK1/2-RSK signalling inhibits EPHA2 via Ser/Thr phosphorylation, whilst FGF4-ERK1/2 disrupts a core pluripotency transcriptional circuit required for Epha2 gene expression. This system also operates in mouse and human embryos, where EPHA receptors are enriched in pluripotent cells whilst surrounding lineage-specified trophectoderm expresses EFNA ligands. Our data provide insight into function and regulation of EPH-EFN signalling in ESCs, and suggest that segregated EPH-EFN expression coordinates cell fate with compartmentalisation during early embryonic development.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Kinase, Mouse embryonic stem cell, Growth factor

### Affiliations
The MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, The University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Houjiang Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Greg Findlay
The MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, The University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK


