### Accession
PXD038276

### Title
Circadian Proteomics Landscape of Mouse Livers Organized by Time-restricted Feeding: Proteomics

### Description
Meal timing is essential in synchronization of circadian rhythms in different organ systems through clock-dependent and -independent mechanisms. The liver is a critical metabolic organ whose circadian clock and transcriptome can be readily reset by meal timing. However, it remains largely unexplored how circadian rhythms in the liver are organized in time-restricted feeding that intervenes meal timing. Here, we applied data-independent acquisition proteomics to characterize circadian features associated with day/sleep- (DRF) and night/wake (NRF)-time restricted feeding in nocturnal female mice. The transcriptomics and metabolomics datasets are public (see www.circametdb.org.cn).

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated in the urea lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8), 8 M Urea and 0.2% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for 5 min on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at After centrifuging for 12,000 g for 15 min at 4℃, the supernatants were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Next, samples were completely mixed with 4X volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. After centrifugation, the pellet was washed twice with cold acetone, and dissolved by dissolution buffer，which containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Protein samples were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE, all of which showed no visible sign of degradation. 120 μg of each protein sample was taken and the volume was made up to 100 μL with dissolution buffer, 1.5 μg trypsin and 500 μL of 100 mM TEAB buffer were added, sample was mixed and digested at 37 °C for 4 h. And then, 1.5 μg trypsin and CaCl2 were added, sample was digested overnight. Formic acid was mixed with digested sample, adjusted pH under 3, and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing buffer (0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile) 3 times, then eluted by some elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were combined and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
DDA spectrum library construction: Mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide) and B (98% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide) were used to develop a gradient elution. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in solution A and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. The sample was fractionated using a C18 column (Waters BEH C18 4.6×250 mm, 5 μm) on a Rigol L3000 HPLC system, the column oven was set as 50°C. The eluates were monitored at UV 214 nm, collected for a tube per minute and combined into 10 fractions finally. All fractions were dried under vacuum, and then, reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water. For transition library construction, shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. 1 μg sample containing standard peptides was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (25 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution as listed in Table 2. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI), spray voltage of 2.5 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan ranges from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 120000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 80 ms. The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 5×104, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy of 27%, an intensity threshold of 1.1×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter of 20 s.  LC-MS/MS analysis in a DIA mode: Mobile phases A (0.1% FA in H2O) and B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) were used to develop a gradient elution. The lyophilized powder of each sample was dissolved in 12 μL of A solution, centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 ℃, and each supernatant was added to 0.4 μL of the standard peptide, and then 1 μg of the sample was injected into the EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with spray voltage of 2.5 kV, Nanospray Flex™ (ESI) and capillary temperature of 320°C. For DIA acquisition, the m/z range covered from 350 to 1500 with 36 scan windows. MS1 resolution was set to 60000 (at m/z 200), full scan AGC target value was 5×105, the maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. Peptides were fragmented by HCD in MS2, in which resolution was set to 30000 (at 200 m/z), AGC target value was 1×106, a normalized collision energy of 27%. Protein identification and quantification: DDA and DIA data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) platform, Biognosys Spectronaut version 9.0, and R against the UniProt database (Mus_musculus_uniprot_2019.01.18.fasta). DDA MS raw files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer, and peak lists were searched against protein database. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and was determined by searching a protein reverse database. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (enabling cleavage before proline), and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 10 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 10 ppm. MS1-based label free quantification (LFQ) was done using maxLFQ algorithm. MS2-based-label free quantification was carried out by analyzing DIA raw data using Biognosys Spectronaut (version 9.0) software. Data analysis was carried out as described (Bruderer et al., 2015) with minor modifications. Briefly, data extraction and extraction window were set to “dynamic” with correction factor 1, identification was set to “normal distribution p-value estimator” with q-value cutoff of 0.01. The profiling strategy was set to “iRT profiling” with qvalue cutoff of 0.01. Ultimately, protein inference was set to “from search engine”, protein quantity was set to “Average precursor quantity” and smallest quantitative unit was set to “Precursor ion” (summed fragment ions).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics; circadian rhythm; time-restricted feeding; inverted feeding; liver

### Affiliations
Southwest Hospital
epartment of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.

### Submitter
Min-Dian Li

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Dian Li
epartment of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.


