### Accession
PXD027788

### Title
Optimization of a Sample Preparation Workflow for Proteomics Analysis of the Mouse Feces

### Description
We evaluated different protein different extraction protocols (using different lysis buffers) and contaminant removal strategies during bottom-up proteomics analysis of mouse feces to maximize quantitative reproducibility and the number of identified proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Feces samples were prepared using different lysis buffers and contaminant removal protocols such as S-trap, FASP and SP3. Resulted peptides were analyzed using a nanoElute LC coupled to a timsTOF Pro equipped with a CaptiveSpray source (Bruker Scientific, Billerica, MA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were obtained via the Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v 1.4) using the Sequest search algorithm. False discovery rate (FDR) control was performed using Percolator at a threshold of 1% for peptide spectral match (PSM), peptide, and protein identifications. Protein groups were filtered to include peptides with 99% confidence and a minimum of two peptides per protein group. For statistical analysis, Proteome Discoverer outputs were further processed and summarized using Python scripts (v 3.7).

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics is a powerful method for the functional characterization of mouse gut microbiota. To date, most of the bottom-up proteomics studies of the mouse gut rely on limited amounts of fecal samples. With mass-limited samples, the performance of such analyses is highly dependent on the protein extraction protocols and contaminant removal strategies. Here, protein extraction protocols (using different lysis buffers) and contaminant removal strategies (using different types of filters and beads) were systematically evaluated to maximize quantitative reproducibility and the number of identified proteins. Overall, our results recommend a protein extraction method using a combination of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and urea in Tris-HCl to yield the greatest number of protein identifications. These conditions led to an increase in the number of proteins identified from gram-positive bacteria, such as Firmicutes and Actinobacteria, which is a challenging task. Our analysis further confirmed these conditions led to the extraction of non-abundant bacterial phyla such as Proteobacteria. In addition, we found that, when coupled to our optimized extraction method, suspension trap (S-Trap) outperforms other contaminant removal methods by providing the most reproducible method while producing the greatest number of protein identifications. Overall, our optimized sample preparation workflow is straightforward and fast, and requires minimal sample handling. Furthermore, our approach does not require high amounts of fecal samples, a vital consideration in proteomics studies where mice produce smaller amounts of feces due to a particular physiological condition. Our final method provides efficient digestion of mouse fecal material, is reproducible, and leads to high proteomic coverage for both host and microbiome proteins.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Filtration method, Optimization, Bottom-up proteomics, Lysis buffer

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
The Ohio State University

### Submitter
Maryam Baniasad

### Lab Head
Dr Vicki Wysocki
The Ohio State University


