### Accession
PXD031176

### Title
the secretome of Pseudoalteromonas prydzensis ACAM 620

### Description
Chitin-degrading enzymes secreted by Pseudoalteromonas prydzensis ACAM 620 were identified by proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Strain ACAM 620 was cultured in the minimal medium supplemented with 0.5% (w/v) colloidal chitin at 25°C for 24 h. The culture was centrifugated and the supernatant was collected. Label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS was performed to study the soluble extracellular proteins of strain ACAM 620. The extracellular proteins were precipitated in cold acetone solution containing 10 mM dithiothreitol at -20°C overnight. The precipitates were harvested by centrifugation for 20 min at 13,000 rpm and 4°C, washed twice by ice-cold acetone solution containing 10 mM dithiothreitol, and then dried. Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to determine the protein concentrations of samples. The protein sample (100 μg) was digested using 2 μg trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C overnight. Peptides in the sample were trapped and desalted on the C18 column using 80% acetonitrile/H2O containing 0.1% trifluoroethanoicacid as the eluent.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed by online nanospray LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM coupled to EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, USA). Protein searches against a target-decoy protein sequence database of strain ACAM 620 were performed using MaxQuant78 with a peptide level FDR (false discovery rate) set to 0.01. Abundance was calculated based on the proportion of the iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) of a protein in the sum of iBAQs of all proteins in the same sample and indicated by relative iBAQ (riBAQ) values.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative degradation of chitin, initiated by lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases (LPMOs), contributes to microbial bioconversion of crystalline chitin, the second most abundant biopolymer in nature. However, our knowledge of oxidative chitin utilization pathways, beyond LPMOs, is very limited. Here, we describe a complete pathway for oxidative chitin degradation and its regulation in a marine bacterium, Pseudoalteromonas prydzensis. The pathway starts with LPMO-mediated extracellular breakdown of chitin into C1-oxidized chitooligosaccharides, which carry a terminal 2-(acetylamino)-2-deoxy-D-gluconic acid (GlcNAc1A). Transmembrane transport of oxidized chitooligosaccharides is followed by their hydrolysis in the periplasm, releasing GlcNAc1A, which is catabolized in the cytoplasm. This pathway differs from the known hydrolytic chitin utilization pathway in enzymes, transporters and regulators. In particular, GlcNAc1A is converted to 2-keto-3-deoxygluconate 6-phosphate, acetate and NH<sub>3</sub> via a series of reactions resembling the degradation of D-amino acids rather than other monosaccharides. Furthermore, genomic and metagenomic analyses suggest that the chitin oxidative utilization pathway may be prevalent in marine Gammaproteobacteria.

### Keywords
Pseudoalteromonas prydzensis, Secretome, Chitin degradation

### Affiliations
Shandong University
Shandong Unversity

### Submitter
Ping-Yi Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhong Zhang
Shandong University


