### Accession
PXD024293

### Title
LC-MSMS of microplasts derived from macrophage conditioned medium treated breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7 cells. Pooja Kamal Melwani, M.Sc., Nishad S, PhD, Badri Narain Pandey, PhD, Radiation Signalling and Cancer Biology Section, Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India

### Description
Paracrine signals relayed between heterogenous cell types through small and large extracellular vesicles promote cancer cell growth, invasion and metastasis. Microplasts, also called as cytoplasts or cytokineplasts are large extracellular vesicles (0.5-11µm diameter) originating from migratory cells. Microplasts are known to be associated with invasive phenotypes of cancer cells and promote metastasis. Treatment with macrophage conditioned medium induces significant shedding of microplasts from MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells. To characterise microplasts and to study their potential role in intercellular communication in cancer, we isolated microplasts derived from macrophage conditioned medium treated MCF-7 cells and investigated their protein cargo through LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Macrophage conditioned medium was prepared as described in the paper. To stimulate microplasts formation, MCF-7 cells were cultured in 50% macrophage conditioned medium and 50% DMEM growth medium for 48 h. Cells and microplasts were harvested and resuspended in ice cold PBS. A multistep low-speed differential centrifugation protocol was used to isolate microplasts. Proteins were extracted from purified microplasts using ultrasonication. The protein samples (50 μg) were initially reduced with dithiothreitol followed by alkylation using iodoacetamide. Protein samples were then subjected to in-solution digestion with MS grade trypsin protease. The extracted peptides from samples were purified using Pierce C18 spin columns. Eluted peptides were analysed using Q-Exactive Plus tandem mass spectrometer (MS) connected to an EASY-nanoLC 1200 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw data files from all samples were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) software. SEQUEST search algorithms embedded in the software was used to identify protein by searching against the Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (Tax id 9606, entries: 42252). Maximum missed cleavage of two were allowed in the trypsin digests with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment tolerance 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as static modification, and oxidation (M) and acetyl (N-terminus) was set as dynamic modification. The peptide and protein identification false discovery rates were controlled at ≤ 1% using the target decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Microplasts are large extracellular vesicles originating from migratory, invasive, and metastatic cancer cells. Here, to gain insight into the role of microplasts in cancer progression, we performed a proteomic and transcriptomic characterization of microplasts isolated from MCF-7 breast cancer cells treated with macrophage-conditioned medium. These cells were found to be viable, highly migratory, and metabolically active, indicating that microplasts derived from these cells are not apoptotic bodies. Transcriptomic/proteomic analyses identified 10273 mRNAs and 821 proteins in microplasts. Interestingly, 377 microplast mRNAs coded for corresponding microplast proteins. Microplast mRNAs and proteins were mainly associated with binding and catalytic activities. Microplasts showed enrichment of mRNAs involved in transcription regulation and proteins involved in processes such as cell-cell adhesion and translation. Pathway analysis showed enrichment of ribosomes and carbon metabolism. These results suggest a close resemblance between microplasts and parent cells, with mRNA and protein cargo relevant in intercellular signaling.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Lc-msms, Cytoplasts, Microplasts, Breast cancer, Large extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Radiation Signalling and Cancer Biology Section, Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India
Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India

### Submitter
Pooja Melwani

### Lab Head
Dr Badri Narain Pandey, PhD
Radiation Signalling and Cancer Biology Section, Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400 085, India


