### Accession
PXD006504

### Title
Yellowstone National Park Mammoth Hot Spring-EDTA

### Description
The thermophilic Aquificales inhabit and play important biogeochemical roles in the geothermal environments globally. Although intensive studies on physiology, microbial ecology, biochemistry, metagenomics and metatranscriptomics of the Aquificales¬ species and Aquificales-containing environmental samples have been conducted, comprehensive understandings about their ecophysiology, especially in the natural niches have been limited. In the present study, an integrated suite of metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and metaproteomic analyses, for the first time, were conducted on a filamentous microbial community from the Apron and Channel Facies (ACF) of CaCO3 (travertine) deposition at Narrow Gauge, Mammoth Hot Springs, Yellowstone National Park.

### Sample Protocol
For the protein extraction method, the samples were washed with distilled water four times and centrifugation at 2,000 ×g.  The final pellet was suspended in 0.3 mL 0.5 N HCl for 5 minutes to help dissolve CaCO3. The acidified samples were promptly neutralized with 0.15 mL 1N NaOH and dialyzed against two changes of 1000 mL of 10 mM EDTA using an 8,000 MWCO dialysis membrane (BioDesign Inc. Carmel, NY) and lyophilized to dryness. The sample from the extraction procedure was purified using the Perfect-FOCUSTM kit (G-Biosciences, St. Louis, MO). The proteins were digested with mass spectrometry grade trypsin (G-Biosciences, St. Louis, MO) using a CEM Discover microwave digestor at 55 °C for 30 minutes. One microgram of the digested proteins was analyzed on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nano HPLC connected to a Thermo Fisher LTQ ETD Velos Pro Dual-Pressure Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer (LC/MS). The chromatography was from 100% Solution A (water + 0.1% formic acid) to 100% Solution B (acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) in 200 minutes at a flow rate of 0.3 uL/min. MS/MS was performed using CID (Collision Induced Dissociation).

### Data Protocol
The raw peptide data were processed using Mascot Distiller and Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK) (Ishihama et al, 2005) and the proteins predicted from the ACF Fettuccini metagenome were used as the search database.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily ancient Aquificales bacterium <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i> spp. dominates filamentous microbial mat communities in shallow, fast-flowing, and dysoxic hot-spring drainage systems around the world. In the present study, field observations of these fettuccini-like microbial mats at Mammoth Hot Springs in Yellowstone National Park are integrated with geology, geochemistry, hydrology, microscopy, and multi-omic molecular biology analyses. Strategic sampling of living filamentous mats along with the hot-spring CaCO<sub>3</sub> (<i>travertine</i>) in which they are actively being entombed and fossilized has permitted the first direct linkage of <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i> spp. physiology and metabolism with the formation of distinct travertine streamer microbial biomarkers. Results indicate that, during chemoautotrophy and CO<sub>2</sub> carbon fixation, the 87-98% <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i>-dominated mats utilize chaperons to facilitate enzyme stability and function. High-abundance transcripts and proteins for type IV pili and extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs) are consistent with their strong mucus-rich filaments tens of centimeters long that withstand hydrodynamic shear as they become encrusted by more than 5&#x2009;mm of travertine per day. Their primary energy source is the oxidation of reduced sulfur (<i>e.g.,</i> sulfide, sulfur, or thiosulfate) and the simultaneous uptake of extremely low concentrations of dissolved O<sub>2</sub> facilitated by bd-type cytochromes. The formation of elevated travertine ridges permits the <i>Sulfurihydrogenibium</i>-dominated mats to create a shallow platform from which to access low levels of dissolved oxygen at the virtual exclusion of other microorganisms. These ridged travertine streamer microbial biomarkers are well preserved and create a robust fossil record of microbial physiological and metabolic activities in modern and ancient hot-spring ecosystems.

### Keywords
Hot springs, Proteomics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

### Submitter
Yiran Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Yiran Dong
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign


