### Accession
PXD027892

### Title
HHbFPS1 may play an important role in the effect of tapping panel dryness on the natural rubber biosynthesis in Hevea brasiliensis latex

### Description
Tapping panel dryness (TPD) seriously affects the natural rubber (NR) production of Hevea brasiliensis (rubber tree). Several studies have speculated that TPD influences NR biosynthesis in the latex of rubber trees based on the expression changes of NR biosynthesis-related genes. In this study, iTRAQ analysis of latex were carried out to reveal the molecular mechanism of TPD affecting rubber trees NR biosynthesis activity and molecular weight.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, the latex taken from healthy trees with normal latex flow were designated as sample “H”, the latex taken from TPD-affected rubber trees with partial latex flow more than 3/4 of the tapping panel were designated as sample “T2” and latex flow less than 1/4 of the tapping panel were designated as sample “T4”.The latex immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen.The protein samples reduction and alkylation were performed as described previously (Dai et al. 2016). 100 μg protein per sample was digested with trypsin (AB Sciex, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h (20:1, protein: trypsin). The digested peptides were lyophilized and re-dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB solution. Peptide samples were labelled with iTRAQ 8-plex kits according to the manufacturer’s instruction (AB Sciex, USA). The sample H from healthy tree were labelled with iTRAQ tags 118, while the two samples (T2 and T4) from TPD trees were labelled with tags 119 and 121. The labelled peptide samples were dried by a rotary vacuum concentrator and combined to make three independent experiments.Peptides were separated using LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Japan) coupled with an Ultremex SCX column. Then, the eluted peptides were pooled as 20 fractions, desalted using Strata X C18 columns.Each fraction was resuspended in 30 μL mobile-phase solution (2% ACN and 0.1% FA in water) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min, then the supernatant was collected for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The protein functional categorization by GO was performed using Blast2GO software. The protein functional classification and pathway annotations were conducted against the COG database and the KEGG database. The differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) between the samples H and T2 or H and T4 were defined as the proteins with a fold-change of > 1.2 or < 0.85 (mean value of all compared groups) and a P value (t-test of all comparison groups) of < 0.05.The KEGG pathway enrichment analyses of DEGs and DAPs was performed as described previously (Li et al. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Tapping panel dryness (TPD) is a century-old problem that has plagued the natural rubber production of Hevea brasiliensis. TPD may result from self-protective mechanisms of H. brasiliensis in response to stresses such as excessive hormone stimulation and mechanical wounding (bark tapping). It has been hypothesized that TPD impairs rubber biosynthesis; however, the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. In the present study, we firstly verified that TPD-affected rubber trees exhibited lower rubber biosynthesis activity and greater rubber molecular weight compared to healthy rubber trees. We then demonstrated that HbFPS1, a key gene of rubber biosynthesis, and its expression products were downregulated in the latex of TPD-affected rubber trees, as revealed by transcriptome sequencing and iTRAQ-based proteome analysis. We further discovered that the farnesyl diphosphate synthase HbFPS1 could be recruited to small rubber particles by HbSRPP1 through protein-protein interactions to catalyze farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) synthesis and facilitate rubber biosynthesis initiation. FPP content in the latex of TPD-affected rubber trees was significantly decreased with the downregulation of HbFPS1, ultimately resulting in abnormal development of rubber particles, decreased rubber biosynthesis activity, and increased rubber molecular weight. Upstream regulator assays indicated that a novel regulator, MYB2-like, may be an important regulator of downregulation of HbFPS1 in the latex of TPD-affected rubber trees. Our findings not only provide new directions for studying the molecular events involved in rubber biosynthesis and TPD syndrome and contribute to rubber management strategies, but also broaden our knowledge of plant isoprenoid metabolism and its regulatory networks.

### Keywords
Hevea brasiliensis, Itraq, Latex, Tapping panel dryness

### Affiliations
Rubber Research Institute & Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Rubber trees, Ministry of Agriculture of China, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Zhiyi Nie

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiyi Nie
Rubber Research Institute & Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Rubber trees, Ministry of Agriculture of China, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences


