### Accession
PXD017170

### Title
Hepatocyte-specific knockout of Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase increases susceptibility for  liver fibrosis in mice

### Description
We investigated the plasma and liver proteome changes in liver fibrosis in mice induced by hepatocyte-specific knockout of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (Nampt) upon a low-methionine, choline-free 60% high-fat (MCD) diet at multiple time points. We also investigated whether supplementation with nicotinamide riboside could alleviate liver injury and how the liver proteome changes upon NR supplementation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis of plasma samples were performed according to the Plasma Proteme Profiling pipeline (Geyer, 2016). In brief, proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, digested and peptides purified on StageTips using reagents from the PreOmics ‘iST' Kit (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH). Purified peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. LC-MS instrumentation consisted of an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a nano-electrospray ion source and a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap (all Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Snap-frozen liver tissue samples were homogenized in 150 μl of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (PreOmics GmbH) using a polytron homogenizer. The homogenate were then heated at 95°C for 10 min, 1200 rpm on a thermos mixer (Eppendorf) to denature proteins, subsequently sonicated using a water bath sonicator (Diagenode Bioruptor®, Liège, Belgium) at full power for 30 cycles with 30s intervals. Protein content was determined by Tryptophan assay and a volume containing 50 μg of protein was digested overnight with trypsin and LysC (1:50, μg of enzyme : μg of protein) at 37°C, 1200rpm on a thermos mixer. Digestion mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench the digestion reaction. Peptide concentration was estimated using Nanodrop and 20 μg of peptide  mixture was purified by solid phase extraction in a Stage-Tip format (SDB-RPS material, two 14-gauge plugs), washed with isopropanol/1% TFA and 0.2% TFA (200 μl each, centrifuge at 1500 x g with 3D-printed centrifuge block). Peptides were eluted with 60 μl of 80% acetonitrile/1% ammonia and dried at 60°C using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Dried peptides were dissolved and sonicated in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Peptide concentration was measured using Nanodrop, and 500 ng of purified peptides were injected for LC-MS-MS analysis. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 350-1,650 m/z range (AGC target of 3 x106, maximum injection time of 60 ms) at a resolution of 60,000 and 32 DIA segments (Dataset EV1 , AGC target of 3 x106, maximum injection time of 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
The acquisition of samples was randomized to avoid bias. All raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X (verson 12.0 and 13.8 for two different experiments) with default settings except that “Quantification” data filtering parameter “Q-value” was set to “complete”. DIA hybrid spectra were searched against in-house generated libraries for plasma and liver using the same LC setup searching against mouse FASTA Uniprot database (version April, 2019 containing 61k entries).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, Liver, Nampt, Fibrosis, Dia

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark;  2Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; 1NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark;  Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany;

### Submitter
Lili Niu

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark;  2Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; 1NNF Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark;  Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany;


