### Accession
PXD008150

### Title
Cell shape information is transduced through tension-independent mechanisms

### Description
The shape of a cell within tissues can represent the history of chemical and physical signals that it encounters, but can information from cell shape regulate cellular phenotype independently? Using optimal control theory to constrain reaction-diffusion schemes that are dependent on different surface-to-volume relationships, we find that information from cell shape can be resolved from mechanical signals. We used microfabricated 3-D biomimetic chips to validate predictions that shape-sensing occurs in a tension-independent manner through β3 integrin signaling pathway in human kidney podocytes and smooth muscle cells. Differential proteomics and functional ablation assays indicate that β3 integrin is critical in transduction of shape signals through ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) family. We used experimentally determined diffusion coefficients and experimentally validated simulations to show that shape sensing is an emergent cellular property enabled by multiple molecular characteristics of β3 integrin. We conclude that 3-D cell shape information, transduced through tension-independent mechanisms, can regulate phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
First we performed in-gel tryptic digestion according to our standard procedures. Resulting peptides were fractionated by reversed phase chromatography and analyzed directly by LC/MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using Mascot search engine against UniProt protein database.Results from search engine were exported in Scaffold software to generate lists of non-redundant proteins. False discovery rate is set at ≤ 1.0% for both protein and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
The shape of a cell within tissues can represent the history of chemical and physical signals that it encounters, but can information from cell shape regulate cellular phenotype independently? Using optimal control theory to constrain reaction-diffusion schemes that are dependent on different surface-to-volume relationships, we find that information from cell shape can be resolved from mechanical signals. We used microfabricated 3-D biomimetic chips to validate predictions that shape-sensing occurs in a tension-independent manner through integrin &#x3b2;<sub>3</sub> signaling pathway in human kidney podocytes and smooth muscle cells. Differential proteomics and functional ablation assays indicate that integrin &#x3b2;<sub>3</sub> is critical in transduction of shape signals through ezrin-radixin-moesin (ERM) family. We used experimentally determined diffusion coefficients and experimentally validated simulations to show that shape sensing is an emergent cellular property enabled by multiple molecular characteristics of integrin &#x3b2;<sub>3</sub>. We conclude that 3-D cell shape information, transduced through tension-independent mechanisms, can regulate phenotype.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Rutgers University
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Department of Pharmacological Sciences New York, NY 10029

### Submitter
Tong Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ravi Iyengar
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Department of Pharmacological Sciences New York, NY 10029


