### Accession
PXD008651

### Title
SWATH mass spectrometry as a tool for quantitative profiling of the matrisome

### Description
Proteomic analysis of extracellular matrix (ECM) and ECM-associated proteins, collectively known as the matrisome, is a challenging task due to its inherent complexity and insolubility. Here we present sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH MS) as a tool for the quantitative analysis of matrisomal proteins in both non-enriched and ECM enriched tissue without the need for prior fractionation. Utilising a spectral library containing 201 matrisomal proteins, we compared the performance and reproducibility of SWATH MS over conventional data-dependent analysis mass spectrometry (DDA MS) in unfractionated murine lung and liver tissues. SWATH MS conferred a 15-20% increase in reproducible peptide identification across replicate experiments in both tissue types and identified 54% more matrisomal proteins in the liver over DDA MS. We further use SWATH MS to evaluate the quantitative changes in matrisome content that accompanies ECM enrichment. Our data shows that ECM enrichment led to a systematic increase in core matrisomal proteins that was accompanied by significant losses in specific matrisome-associated proteins including the cathepsins and proteins of the S100 family.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were cut into small pieces, weighed and placed into precooled tubes containing PBS solution with 10 KIU/ml aprotinin. Samples were washed for 30 min at 4 °C to remove excess blood. Samples were then transferred into homogenization buffer at 4 ml per g of tissue. The homogenization buffer is comprised of Tris-HCl (50mM, pH 7.4), 0.25% CHAPS, 25mM EDTA, 3M NaCl and 10 KIU/ml aprotinin. Tissue was homogenized 2 x 30 sec on ice and then placed on a rotator (20 rpm) for 20 min at 4 °C. The resulting homogenate was split and subjected to one of two procotols as follows:  a) Non-enriched samples: 1/3 of the homogenate was subjected to acetone precipitation by mixing with 4 volumes of ice cold acetone, vortexed and incubated 2 h at -20 °C to precipitate proteins. The precipitate was spun. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 0.3 ml of urea buffer consisting of 8M urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25mM TCEP and stored at -80 °C.  b) ECM enrichment: 2/3 of the homogenate was subjected to ECM enrichment. The homogenate was spun and supernatant removed. The pellet was resuspended in 0.5 ml of the fresh homogenization buffer and washed for two additional times in this buffer on a rotator. The pellet after the third wash was directly resuspended in 0.3 ml of urea buffer and stored at -80 °C. The samples used for generation of the spectral library were not split after homogenization and the acetone precipitation protocol was applied to the whole tissue.   Protein digestion and sample preparation 400 µg of protein for spectral library generation or 100 μg of protein for all other experiments was reduced with 20mM DTT, at 56 °C for 40 min and alkylated with 30mM  IAA at 25 °C for 25 min in the dark. To remove CHAPS, gel-assisted digestion was performed. Gel was cut into small cubes and sequentially dehydrated with 50% ACN in 50mM ABC and 100% ACN. A solution with the concentration of trypsin of 25ng/ml in 100mM ABC was added to the dry gel cubes and incubated for 30 min at 4 °C followed by addition of 100mM ABC to suspend all the gel cubes. Proteins were left to digest overnight at 37 °C, peptides extracted and extracts were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and desalted with OPTI trap cartridges. Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography 400 μg of the digested samples were resuspended in 20 μl of Buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 20% ACN, pH 2.65) and loaded on a 2.1 x 100 mm Polysulfoethyl A column with 5 μm, 200 Å particles (PolyLC Inc.) for SCX fractionation. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min by Buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4, 500mM NaCl in 20% ACN, pH 2.65) with a gradient of 0-10% of B for 2.5 min, 10-50% of B for 20 min, 50-100% B for 7.5 min followed by 10 min elution with 100% B. 12 fractions were collected over 39 min with fraction 1 collected from 0 to 12 min and fraction 12 from 32 to 39 min. The remaining 10 fractions were collected at 2 min intervals between 12 to 32 min. All SCX fractions were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator, then resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18 OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies). DDA MS data acquisition For liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, non-enriched unfractionated samples and SCX fractions were dissolved in Buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA), spiked with iRT calibration mix (Biognosys AG) and analyzed on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer with NanoSource III (AB SCIEX). 1 μg of peptides for each sample was loaded onto a ZORBAX C18 (Agilent Technologies) trap column and separated on a 75 μm x 15 cm long analytical column with an integrated manually pulled tip packed with Reprosil Pur C18AQ beads (3 μm, 120 Å particles, Dr. Maisch) with a linear gradient of 2-40% of Buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 90 min and a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Full profile MS scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 340-1500 in positive ion mode. The top 20 most intense ions with charge state from 2+ to 5+ were selected for fragmentation and MS/MS scans were acquired in mass range of m/z 100-1500. Maximum filling time for MS scans was 250 ms, for MS/MS scans 100 ms and dynamic exclusion of fragmented ions was set to 12 s. SWATH MS data acquisition SWATH MS data for both non-enriched and enriched unfractionated samples were acquired on the same MS instrument using the identical LC conditions. Full profile MS scans were acquired in mass range of m/z 340-1400 in positive ion mode. 8 data points per elution peak were set-up for calculation of 31 precursor isolation windows with a fixed size of 25 Da across the mass range of m/z 350-1250 with 1 Da overlap. MS/MS scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 100-1500. Maximum filling time for MS scans was 250 ms and for MS/MS scans 100 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library generation The 2 liver and 2 lung samples that were fractionated by SCX were used for building the spectral library. Acquired DDA datasets were searched by ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software (AB SCIEX) against a Uniprot mouse database (downloaded on 20/10/2017) with added iRT sequence. Each dataset comprised of 12 DDA runs for 12 individual SCX fractions which were combined during the search. Overall 4 datasets were searched, 2 each for liver and lung. The Spectronaut 11 software (Biognosys AG) [19] was used to generate four spectral libraries from the resulting ProteinPilot .group files using following settings: maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as fixed modification, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and oxidation of methionine, lysine and proline were set as variable modifications, precursor charge state from 2+ to 5+, 99% confidence of the correct peptide identification. Other parameters were used in default settings. The generated libraries were then merged into a final spectral library containing 41741 precursors from 5050 protein groups.  Data processing and statistical analysis DDA data for non-enriched samples were searched by ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software (AB SCIEX) against a Uniprot mouse database (downloaded on 20/10/2017) with added iRT sequence. The search parameters were as follows: maximum 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as fixed modification, biological modification, urea denaturation and collagen emphasis in ProteinPilot were selected as variable modifications. Proteins identified with a local false discovery rate (FDR) value of below 5% were considered for further analysis. For comparison with SWATH, only peptides with 99% confidence of the correct identification were selected for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic analysis of extracellular matrix (ECM) and ECM-associated proteins, collectively known as the matrisome, is a challenging task due to the inherent complexity and insolubility of these proteins. Here we present sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH MS) as a tool for the quantitative analysis of matrisomal proteins in both non-enriched and ECM enriched tissue without the need for prior fractionation. Utilising a spectral library containing 201 matrisomal proteins, we compared the performance and reproducibility of SWATH MS over conventional data-dependent analysis mass spectrometry (DDA MS) in unfractionated murine lung and liver. SWATH MS conferred a 15-20% increase in reproducible peptide identification across replicate experiments in both tissue types and identified 54% more matrisomal proteins in the liver versus DDA MS. We further use SWATH MS to evaluate the quantitative changes in matrisome content that accompanies ECM enrichment. Our data shows that ECM enrichment led to a systematic increase in core matrisomal proteins but resulted in significant losses in matrisome-associated proteins including the cathepsins and proteins of the S100 family. Our proof-of-principle study demonstrates the utility of SWATH MS as a versatile tool for in-depth characterisation of the matrisome in unfractionated and non-enriched tissues. SIGNIFICANCE: The matrisome is a complex network of extracellular matrix (ECM) and ECM-associated proteins that provides scaffolding function to tissues and plays important roles in the regulation of fundamental cellular processes. However, due to its inherent complexity and insolubility, proteomic studies of the matrisome typically require the application of enrichment workflows prior to MS analysis. Such enrichment strategies often lead to losses in soluble matrisome-associated components. In this study, we present sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH MS) as a tool for the quantitative analysis of matrisomal proteins. We show that SWATH MS provides a more reproducible coverage of the matrisome compared to data-dependent analysis (DDA) MS. We also demonstrate that SWATH MS is capable of accurate quantification of matrisomal proteins without prior ECM enrichment and fractionation, which may simplify sample handling workflows and avoid losses in matrisome-associated proteins commonly linked to ECM enrichment.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Dia ms, Extracellular matrix, Swath ms, Matrisome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research Division of Molecular Pathology 237 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6JB

### Submitter
Lukas Krasny

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
The Institute of Cancer Research Division of Molecular Pathology 237 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6JB


