### Accession
PXD039672

### Title
Molecular chaperone Hsp90 supports adaptive cell size increase in response to chronic stress

### Description
Hsf1, well known for its role in acute stress responses, is required for the cell size increase, and that the molecular chaperone Hsp90 is essential for coupling the cell size increase to augmented translation through a translational "rewiring stress response". We propose that this protective process of chronic stress adaptation contributes to the increase in size as cells get older, and that its failure promotes aging.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion Replicate samples were digested according to a modified version of the iST method (Kulak et al., 2014) (named miST method). Briefly, frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 3 ml miST lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate, 100mM Tris pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT ) by vortexing. Resuspended samples were sonicated and heated at 95°C for 5min. After quantifcation with tryptophan fluorescence (Wiśniewski et al, 2015), 100 ug of samples in 50ul buffer were diluted 1:1 (v:v) with water. Reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding ¼ vol of 160 mM chloroacetamide (final 32 mM) and incubating at 25°C for 45min in the dark. Samples were adjusted to 3 mM EDTA and digested with 1.0 μg Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega #V5073) for 1 hour at 37°C, followed by a second 1 hour digestion with a second aliquot of 0.5 ug trypsin. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added to the digests, and the samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol/1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 200ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia. Peptide fractionation for library construction  After redissolution of samples in 1.0 ml of loading bufer (2% acetonitrile with 0.05 % TFA), aliquots (10ul) of samples were pooled and separated into 6 fractions by off-line basic reversed-phase (bRP) using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fractions were collected in 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5 and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1 % triethylamine (~pH 10). Dried bRP fractions were redissolved in 40ul loading buffer, and 4ul were injected for LC-MS/MS analyses. Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry analyses LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out on a TIMS-TOF Pro (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer interfaced through a nanospray ion source (“captive spray”) to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) at a flow rate of 0.250 ul/min with a 2-27% acetonitrile gradient in 93 min followed by a ramp to 45% in 15 min and to 90% in 5 min  (all solvents contained 0.1% formic acid). Identical LC gradients were used for DDA and DIA measurements.   For creation of the spectral library, data-dependent acquisitions (DDA) were carried out on the 6 bRP fractions of both pools using a standard TIMS PASEF method (Meier et al 2018) with ion accumulation for 100 ms for each survey MS1 scan and the TIMS-coupled MS2 scans. Duty cycle was kept at 100%. Up to 10 precursors were targeted per TIMS scan. Precursor isolation was done with a 2 Th or 3 Th windows below or above m/z 800, respectively. The minimum threshold intensity for precursor selection was 2500.  If the inclusion list allowed it, precursors were targeted more than one time to reach a minimum target total intensity of 20’000. Collision energy was ramped linearly based uniquely on the 1/k0 values from 20 (at 1/k0=0.6) to 59 eV (at 1/k0=1.6). Total duration of a scan cycle including one survey and 10 MS2 TIMS scans was 1.16 s. Precursors could be targeted again in subsequent cycles if their signal increased by a factor 4.0 or more.  After selection in one cycle, precursors were excluded from further selection for 60s. Mass resolution in all MS measurements was approximately 35’000.  The data-independent acquisition (DIA) used mostly the same instrument parameters as the DDA method and was as reported previously (Meier et al 2020). Per cycle, the mass range 400-1200 m/z was covered by a total of 32 windows, each 25 Th wide and a 1/k0 range of 0.3. Collision energy and resolution settings were the same as in the DDA method. Two windows were acquired per TIMS scan (100ms) so that the total cycle time was 1.7 s. Kulak, N. A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014). Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nature Methods, 11(3), 319–24. J.R. Wiśniewski, F.Z. Gaugaz, Fast and sensitive total protein and Peptide assays for proteomic analysis., Anal. Chem. 87 (2015) 4110–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac504689z. Meier, F., Brunner, A., Koch, S., Koch, H., Lubeck, M., Krause, M., Mann, M. (2018). Online Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) with a Novel Trapped Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometer. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 17(12), 2534–2545.  Meier, F., Brunner, A.-D., Frank, M., Ha, A., Bludau, I., Voytik, E., Mann, M. (2020). diaPASEF: parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation combined with data-independent acquisition.  Nature Methods 17(12), 1229–1236.

### Data Protocol
Library creation  Raw Bruker MS data were processed directly with Spectronaut 15.4 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). A library was constructed from the DDA bRP fraction data by searching the reference human proteome (www.uniprot.org) database of September 3rd, 2020 (75’796 sequences). For identification, peptides of 7-52 AA length were considered, cleaved with trypsin/P specificity and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed), methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation (variable) were the modifications applied. Mass calibration was dynamic and based on a first database search. The Pulsar engine was used for peptide identification. Protein inference was performed with the IDPicker algorithm. Spectra, peptide and protein identifications were all filtered at 1% FDR against a decoy database.  Specific filtering for library construction removed fragments corresponding to less than 3 AA and fragments outside the 300-1800 m/z range. Also, only fragments with a minimum base peak intensity of 5% were kept.  Precursors with less than 3 fragments were also eliminated and only the best 6 fragments were kept per precursor. No filtering was done on the basis of charge state and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Shared (non proteotypic) peptides were kept.   The library created contained 119’573 precursors mapping to 91’154  stripped sequences, of which 35’119 were proteotypic. These corresponded to 8’632 protein groups (12’252 proteins). Of these, 959 were single hits (one peptide precursor).  In total 701’091 fragments were used for quantitation. DIA quantitation Peptide-centric analysis of DIA data was done with Spectronaut 15.4 using the library described above. Single hits proteins (defined as matched by one stripped sequence only) were kept in the Spectronaut analysis. Peptide quantitation was based on XIC area, for which a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 3 (the 3 best) precursors were considered for each peptide, from which the median value was selected.  Quantities for protein groups were derived from inter-run peptide ratios based on MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al 2014). Global normalization of runs/samples was done based on the median of peptides.  Data processing and statistical tests All subsequent analyses were done with the Perseus software package (version 1.6.15.0)  (Tyanova et al 2016). Intensity values were log2-transformed, and after assignment to groups, t-tests were carried with permutation-based FDR correction for multiple testing (Q-value threshold <0.01). The difference of means obtained from the tests were used for 1D enrichment analysis on associated GO/KEGG annotations as described (Cox and Mann, 2012). The enrichment analysis was also FDR-filtered (Benjamini-Hochberg , Q-val<0.02).   Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., et al. (2016) The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature Methods 13(9):731–740.

### Publication Abstract
Cells are exposed to a wide variety of internal and external stresses. Although many studies have focused on cellular responses to acute and severe stresses, little is known about how cellular systems adapt to sublethal chronic stresses. Using mammalian cells in culture, we discovered that they adapt to chronic mild stresses of up to two weeks, notably proteotoxic stresses such as heat, by increasing their size and translation, thereby scaling the amount of total protein. These adaptations render them more resilient to persistent and subsequent stresses. We demonstrate that Hsf1, well known for its role in acute stress responses, is required for the cell size increase, and that the molecular chaperone Hsp90 is essential for coupling the cell size increase to augmented translation. We term this translational reprogramming the 'rewiring stress response', and propose that this protective process of chronic stress adaptation contributes to the increase in size as cells get older, and that its failure promotes aging.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Chronic stress, Senescence, Translation, Proteostasis, Hsf1, Stress adaptation, Aging, Cell size, Cytoplasmic density

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Departement of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Picard
Departement of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


