### Accession
PXD000754

### Title
Human Placenta profilling LTQ-OrbiTrap

### Description
Profilling normal human placantal proteomes using LTQ-OrbiTrap

### Sample Protocol
We used human placental tissue from healthy patients for the entire study. The use and acquisition of these clinical samples complied with guidelines set by the local Institutional Review Board. For proteomic profiling, tryptic-digested placental tissue proteins were fractionated using three different methods, including hydrophilic interaction chromatography, strong cationic exchange chromatography, and OFFGEL electrophoresis according to the manufacturers’ protocols (Agilent Technology).

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were extracted and searched using MASCOT software (version 2.2.04, http://www.matrixscience.com/) against human sequences from UniProt (Jun 2012 release; 86 875 sequences). The search parameters were: (1) enzyme specificity: trypsin; (2) two maximum missed cleavages; (3) carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; (4) acetyl (K), acetyl (protein N-term), and oxidation (M) as variable modification; (5) peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm; (6) MS/MS mass tolerance of 1.2 Da; PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet were used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). We identified proteins using two or more unique peptides with an FDR < 1% at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
As a starting point of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP), we established strategies of genome-wide proteomic analysis, including protein identification, quantitation of disease-specific proteins, and assessment of post-translational modifications, using paired human placental tissues from healthy and preeclampsia patients. This analysis resulted in identification of 4239 unique proteins with high confidence (two or more unique peptides with a false discovery rate less than 1%), covering 21% of approximately 20, 059 (Ensembl v69, Oct 2012) human proteins, among which 28 proteins exhibited differentially expressed preeclampsia-specific proteins. When these proteins are assigned to all human chromosomes, the pattern of the newly identified placental protein population is proportional to that of the gene count distribution of each chromosome. We also identified 219 unique N-linked glycopeptides, 592 unique phosphopeptides, and 66 chromosome 13-specific proteins. In particular, protein evidence of 14 genes previously known to be specifically up-regulated in human placenta was verified by mass spectrometry. With respect to the functional implication of these proteins, 38 proteins were found to be involved in regulatory factor biosynthesis or the immune system in the placenta, but the molecular mechanism of these proteins during pregnancy warrants further investigation. As far as we know, this work produced the highest number of proteins identified in the placenta and will be useful for annotating and mapping all proteins encoded in the human genome.

### Keywords
Human, Placenta, C-hpp, Normal

### Affiliations
Yonsei Proteome Research Center, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea
Info team

### Submitter
SK Jeong

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Ki Paik
Yonsei Proteome Research Center, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea


