### Accession
PXD016321

### Title
Mitochondrial Proteome of Affected Neurons in a Mouse Model of Leigh Syndrome

### Description
Defects in mitochondrial function lead to severe neuromuscular orphan pathologies known as mitochondrial disease. Among them, Leigh Syndrome is the most common pediatric presentation, characterized by symmetrical brain lesions, hypotonia, motor and respiratory deficits, and premature death. Mitochondrial diseases are characterized by a marked anatomical and cellular specificity. However, the molecular determinants for this susceptibility are currently unknown, hindering the efforts to find an effective treatment. Due to the complex crosstalk between mitochondria and their supporting cell, strategies to assess the underlying alterations in affected cell types in the context of mitochondrial dysfunction are critical. Here, we developed a novel virus-based tool, the AAV-mitoTag viral vector, to isolate mitochondria from genetically-defined cell types. Administration of the AAV-mitoTag in the vestibular neurons of a mouse model of Leigh Syndrome lacking the complex I subunit Ndufs4 allowed us to assess the proteome and acetylome of susceptible neurons in a well characterized model recapitulating the human disease. Our results show a marked reduction of complex-I N-module subunit abundance and an increase in the levels of the assembly factor NDUFA2.  Transiently-associated non-mitochondrial proteins such as PKCδ, and the complement subcomponent C1Q were also increased in Ndufs4-deficient mitochondria. Furthermore, lack of Ndufs4 induced pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) subunit hyperacetylation, leading to decreased PDH activity. We provide novel insight on the pathways involved in mitochondrial disease, which could underlie potential therapeutic approaches for these pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion: Mitochondria from glutamatergic neurons in the vestibular nucleus were immunocaptured and then suspended in lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) and incubated at 95ºC for 5 min. Protein extracts were quantified using RC-DCTM Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). Three biological replicates from Vglut2:Ndufs4cCT and Vglut2:Ndufs4cKO mice mitochondria were processed. Protein was digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) using the FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) digestion protocol19. Tryptic peptides were eluted by the addition of 3 × 100 μL of 200 mM TEAB followed by a centrifugation at 14,000 ×g for 15 min at 13 °C.  Peptide labeling by isobaric tandem mass tag: Each tryptic peptide mixture obtained from 150 μg of protein extract was isotopically labeled with the corresponding TMT6plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Sci.) based on the standard procedure. TMT-labeled peptide mixtures were combined in a low-bind 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, evaporated, and desalted using a C18 SPE cartridge (Agilent Technologies). The SPE eluates were evaporated and resuspended in 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl.  Acetylated Peptide Enrichment: The TMT-labeled peptide mixtures (900 μg) were enriched for acetylated peptides by immunoaffinity purification using an anti-acetyl lysine antibody following the PTMScan® Pilot Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) protocol (Cell Signaling Technologies). Peptides eluted from the enrichment were desalted directly using PolyLC C18 tips (PolyLC Inc., MD, USA), and resuspended in 5% methanol (1% formic acid) for mass spectrometry analysis.  LC–MSn Analysi: Peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Sci.) equipped with a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 ultrahigh-pressure chromatographic system (Thermo Fisher Sci.) and Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences Inc.) as the nanospray interface. Peptide mixtures were loaded to a μ-precolumn Acclaim C18 PepMap100 (100 μm inside diameter × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å, C18 Trap column; Thermo Fisher Sci.) at a flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated using a C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper). Separations were done at 200 nL/min using a linear ACN gradient from 0 to 40% B in 240 min (solvent A = 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was set up in the positive ion mode and the analysis was performed in an automatic data dependent mode (a full scan followed of 10 HCD scan for the most abundant signals).

### Data Protocol
Database search was done using Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo-Instruments) with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and the UniProt 2018-10 database restricted to Mus musculus (mouse) and contaminants. Search parameters were parent and fragment tolerance, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, TMTsixplex (N-terminal, K), carbamidomethyl (C); and variable modifications, oxidation (M). For proteomic data analysis, DanteR20 was used for relative quantification. Only unique peptides were considered for the analysis. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reporter intensity data were normalized using the QuantileN method and ANOVA analysis was performed. In the acetylome quantification, the ratio of the quantified peptides was normalized using the ratio of the corresponding protein. Differential proteins and peptides were selected using a p-value cutoff of 0.05 and a fold change lower than 0.7 (down) or higher than 1.3 (up).

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial deficits in energy production cause untreatable and fatal pathologies known as mitochondrial disease (MD). Central nervous system affectation is critical in Leigh Syndrome (LS), a common MD presentation, leading to motor and respiratory deficits, seizures and premature death. However, only specific neuronal populations are affected. Furthermore, their molecular identity and their contribution to the disease remains unknown. Here, using a mouse model of LS lacking the mitochondrial complex I subunit <i>Ndufs4</i>, we dissect the critical role of genetically-defined neuronal populations in LS progression. <i>Ndufs4</i> inactivation in Vglut2-expressing glutamatergic neurons leads to decreased neuronal firing, brainstem inflammation, motor and respiratory deficits, and early death. In contrast, <i>Ndufs4</i> deletion in GABAergic neurons causes basal ganglia inflammation without motor or respiratory involvement, but accompanied by hypothermia and severe epileptic seizures preceding death. These results provide novel insight in the cell type-specific contribution to the pathology, dissecting the underlying cellular mechanisms of MD.

### Keywords
Animal models, Neuroscience, Leigh syndrome, Proteomics, Mitochondrial isolation, Cell type-specific

### Affiliations
Institut de Neurociencies, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain
1) 1Mitochondrial Neuropathology laboratory, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain 2) Department of Cellular Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.

### Submitter
Alejandro Gella

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Quintana
1) 1Mitochondrial Neuropathology laboratory, Institut de Neurociències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain 2) Department of Cellular Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.


