### Accession
PXD035484

### Title
Transcription factors harbor functional RNA-binding domains

### Description
Transcription factors (TFs) orchestrate the gene expression programs that define each cell’s identity, and the canonical TF accomplishes this with two functional domains1–7. The DNA-binding domain interacts with specific genomic sequences, and the effector domain binds coactivators or co-repressors that contribute to transcriptional regulation. We report here that TFs also frequently contain an RNA-binding domain and that this also contributes to gene regulation. Nearly half of TFs in human cells show evidence of RNA-binding and their affinities for RNA are similar to those of well-studied RNA-binding proteins. The RNA-binding sites of TFs have sequence and functional features analogous to the arginine-rich motif of the HIV transcriptional activator Tat8,9. RNA-binding contributes to TF function by promoting the dynamic association of TFs with chromatin. We conclude that the canonical definition of transcription factors is incomplete, and that the ability of many TFs to bind DNA, RNA and protein is fundamental to gene regulation.

### Sample Protocol
K562 cells were cultured in suspension flasks containing culture medium [RPMI-1640 medium with GlutaMAX™ (ThermoFisher Cat. 72400047) supplemented with 10% FBS (ThermoFisher Cat. 10437028), 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich Cat. G7513), 50 U/mL penicillin and 50 μg/mL streptomycin]. For each biological replicate of RBR-ID, 4 million K562 cells from actively proliferating cultures were aliquoted into 2x T25 flasks. 4-thiouridine (4SU) was added to one of the two flasks for each replicate at a final concentration of 500 µM and incubated for 2 hrs at 37˚C. Cells from each flask were collected and resuspended in 600 μL 1x PBS [137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4] and transferred to 6-well plates. Plates were placed on ice  with their lids removed and protein–RNA complexes were crosslinked with 1 J/cm2 UVB (312 nm) light. Cells were lysed in Buffer A (10 mM Tris pH 7.94˚C, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF) with 0.2% IGEPAL CA-630 for 5 min at 4˚C, then centrifuged  at 2,500 g for 5 min at 4˚C to pellet nuclei. Nuclei were washed 3x with 1 mL cold Buffer A (without IGEPAL) and lysed at room temperature in 100 μL denaturing lysis buffer [9 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8RT, 1x complete protease inhibitor, EDTA free (Roche Cat. 4693132001)]. Lysates were sonicated using a BioRuptor instrument (Diagenode) as follows: (energy: high, cycle: 15 sec ON, 15 sec OFF, duration: 5 min), centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min and supernatant was collected. Extracts were quantified using Pierce BCA assay kit (ThermoFisher Cat. 23225). 5 mM DTT was added to extracts and incubated at room temperature for one hr to reduce proteins, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for one hr. Samples were then diluted to 1.5 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and treated with 1 μL of 10,000U/μL molecular grade benzonase (Millipore Sigma Cat. E8263) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega Cat. V5117) was then added to samples at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin:protein) by mass and incubated at room temperature for 16 hrs. The digested samples were loaded onto Hamilton C18 spin columns, washed twice with 0.1% formic acid, and eluted in 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were dried using a speed vacuum apparatus and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, then measured via A230 quantification and diluted to 0.333 µg/µL.  Peptide samples were batch randomized and separated using a Thermo Fisher Dionex 3000 nanoLC with a binary gradient consisting of 0.1% formic acid aqueous for mobile phase A and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for mobile phase B. 3 µL of each sample were injected onto a Pepmax C18 trap column and washed with a 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid 2% acetonitrile loading buffer. The linear gradient was 3 minutes until switching the valve at 2% mobile phase B and increasing to 25% by 90 minutes and 45% by 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Peptides were separated on a laser-pulled 75 µm ID and 30 cm length analytical column packed with 2.4 µm C18 resin. Peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Fisher QE HF using a DIA method. The precursor scan range was a 385 to 1015 m/z window at a resolution of 60k with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 106 and a maximum inject time (MIT) of 60 ms. The subsequent product ion scans were 25 windows of 24 m/z at 30k resolution with an AGC target of 106 and MIT of 60 ms and fragmentation of 27 normalized collision energy (NCE). All samples were acquired by LC-MS/MS in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Thermo .raw files were converted to indexed mzML format using ThermoRawFileParser utility (https://github.com/compomics/ThermoRawFileParser). To detect and quantify peptides raw files from each set of technical replicates were searched together using Dia-NN v1.8.1 (PMID 31768060) against a FASTA file of the Homo sapiens UniProtKB database (release 2022_02, containing Swiss-Prot + TrEMBL and alternative isoforms). Precursor and fragment m/z ranges of 300-1800 and 200-3000 were considered, respectively with peptides lengths from 6-40. Fixed and variable modifications included carbamidomethyl, N-term acetylation and methionine oxidation. A 0.01 q value cutoff was applied, and the options --peak-translation and --peak-center were enabled, while all other Dia-NN parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factors (TFs) orchestrate the gene expression programs that define each cell's identity. The canonical TF accomplishes this with two domains, one that binds specific DNA sequences and the other that binds protein coactivators or corepressors. We find that at least half of TFs also bind RNA, doing so through a previously unrecognized domain with sequence and functional features analogous to the arginine-rich motif of the HIV transcriptional activator Tat. RNA binding contributes to TF function by promoting the dynamic association between DNA, RNA, and TF on chromatin. TF-RNA interactions are a conserved feature important for vertebrate development and disrupted in disease. We propose that the ability to bind DNA, RNA, and protein is a general property of many TFs and is fundamental to their gene regulatory function.

### Keywords
Tfs, Human, Rbr-id, K562, Rna-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
Octant Bio

### Submitter
Robert Warneford-Thomson

### Lab Head
Dr Roberto Bonasio
Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania


