### Accession
PXD012790

### Title
JASPer controls interphase histone H3S10 phosphorylation by chromosomal kinase JIL-1 in Drosophila

### Description
In Drosophila the chromosomal kinase JIL-1 is responsible for most interphase histone H3S10 phosphorylation and has been proposed to protect active chromatin from acquiring heterochromatic marks, like dimethylated histone H3K9 (H3K9me2) and HP1. Here, we show that JIL-1’s targeting to chromatin depends on a PWWP domain-containing protein JASPer (JIL-1 Anchoring and Stabilizing Protein). The JASPer-JIL-1 (JJ)-complex is the major form of the kinase in vivo and is targeted to active genes and telomeric transposons via binding of the PWWP domain of JASPer to H3K36me3 nucleosomes, where the complex modulates the transcriptional output. JIL-1 and JJ-complex depletion in cycling cells lead to small changes in H3K9me2 distribution at active genes and telomeric transposons. Finally, we identify several interactors of the endogenous JJ-complex and propose that JIL-1 not only prevents heterochromatin formation but also coordinates chromatin-based regulation in the transcribed part of the genome.

### Sample Protocol
For IP-MS analysis, IP’s have been performed from 2 independent nuclear embryo extracts 0-12h preparations with 2 different -b-JIM polyclonal Sera (GP13 and GP14) and 2 different monoclonal antibodies (6F7 and 4D8), as negative a non-specific serum or culture medium was used. In brief, 400 µg of extract was used per IP and pre cleared with 10 µL Protein G beads (GE Healthcare). For immunoprecipitation, the extract was added to 25 µL Protein G beads pre coupled with antibodies and incubated with end over end rotation for 3-4h at 4°C. Beads were washed and the whole IP has been used trypsin digestion and mass spectrometry analysis. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, Nat Biotech 2008) was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, UP000000803_7227_Drome_20160809; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. The resulting “proteinGroups.txt” file was used for further downstream analysis using the DEP package (Zhang et al., 2018) and MSnbase package (Gatto and Lilley, 2012). First, reverse proteins and potential contaminants were removed. The data was filtered for missing values allowing maximally one missing value in at least one condition by calling the function filter_missval (R) (parameter thr = 1). Missing values in the input samples were considered as missing not at random and imputed using the QRILC method by calling the function impute (R) (parameter method = "QRILC"). Missing values in the IP samples were considered as missing at random and imputed using the knn method by calling the function impute (R) (parameter method = "knn"). To test for statistically significant differentially enriched proteins, the function test_diff (R) was called including sample variables as random effect.

### Publication Abstract
In flies, the chromosomal kinase JIL-1 is responsible for most interphase histone H3S10 phosphorylation and has been proposed to protect active chromatin from acquiring heterochromatic marks, such as dimethylated histone H3K9 (H3K9me2) and HP1. Here, we show that JIL-1's targeting to chromatin depends on a PWWP domain-containing protein JASPer (JIL-1 Anchoring and Stabilizing Protein). JASPer-JIL-1 (JJ)-complex is the major form of kinase in vivo and is targeted to active genes and telomeric transposons via binding of the PWWP domain of JASPer to H3K36me3 nucleosomes, to modulate&#xa0;transcriptional output. JIL-1 and JJ-complex depletion in cycling cells lead to small changes in H3K9me2 distribution at active genes and telomeric transposons. Finally, we identify interactors of the endogenous JJ-complex and propose that JIL-1 not only prevents heterochromatin formation but also coordinates chromatin-based regulation in the transcribed part of the genome.

### Keywords
Dpy30-l1, Chromatin, Jil-1, Bod1, Pwwp, Set1, H3k36me3, B-jim, H3s10ph, Compass

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biomedical Center Munich Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Phone: (089) 2180 71602

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Catherine Regnard
Biomedical Center Munich Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  Phone: (089) 2180 71602


