### Accession
PXD037895

### Title
A Selective Small-Molecule STAT5 PROTAC Degrader Capable of Achieving Tumor Regression In Vivo

### Description
The signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) is an attractive therapeutic target but successful targeting of STAT5 has proved to be difficult. We report herein the development of AK-2292 as a first, potent and selective small-molecule degrader of both STAT5A and STAT5B isoforms. AK-2292 induces degradation of STAT5A/B proteins with an outstanding selectivity over all other STAT proteins and >6,000 non-STAT proteins, leading to selective inhibition of STAT5 activity in cells. AK-2292 effectively induces STAT5 depletion in normal mouse tissues and human chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) xenograft tissues and achieves tumor regression in two CML xenograft mouse models at well-tolerated dose-schedules. AK-2292 is not only a powerful research tool with which to investigate the biology of STAT5 and therapeutic potential of selective STAT5 protein depletion and inhibition in vitro and in vivo, but also a promising lead compound toward ultimate development of a STAT5-targeted therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic profiling was performed as described previously [21]. Cells were collected, washed in PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer (Sigma, #R0278). Cell lysis samples (75 μg/condition) were proteolysed and labeled with TMT 10-plex essentially by following manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher).  Briefly, upon reduction (5 mM DTT, for 30 min at 45 ⁰C) and alkylation (15 mM 2-chloroacetamide, for 30 min at room temperature) of cysteines, the proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice cold acetone followed by overnight incubation at -20 °C.  The precipitate was spun down, and the pellet was allowed to air dry.  The pellet was resuspended in 0.1M TEAB and overnight (~16 h) digestion with trypsin/Lys-C mix (1:25 protease:protein; Promega) at 37 °C was performed with constant mixing using a thermomixer.  The TMT 10-plex reagents were dissolved in 41 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile and labeling was performed by transferring the entire digest to TMT reagent vial and incubating at rt for 1 h.  Reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and a further 15 min incubation.  Labeled samples were mixed together, and dried using a vacufuge.  An offline fractionation of the combined sample (~200 µg) into 8 fractions was performed using high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce; Cat #84868). Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 9 µl of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile in preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. In order to obtain high accuracy in quantitation, we employed multinotch-MS3 [48] which minimizes the reporter ion ratio distortion resulting from fragmentation of co-isolated peptides during MS analysis. Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC (Dionex) was used to acquire the data. The sample (2 μl) was resolved on a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the flow-rate of 300 nl/min using 0.1% HCOOH/CH3CN gradient system (2–22% CH3CN in 150 min; 22–32% CH3CN in 40 min; 20 min wash at 90% followed by 50 min re-equilibration) and direct spray into the mass spectrometer using EasySpray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was set to collect one MS1 scan (Orbitrap; 60K resolution; AGC target 2×105; max IT 100 ms) followed by data-dependent, “Top Speed” (3 sec) MS2 scans (collision induced dissociation; ion trap; NCD 35; AGC 5×103; max IT 100 ms). For multinotch-MS3, top 10 precursors from each MS2 were fragmented by HCD followed by Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55; 60K resolution; AGC 5×104; max IT 120 ms, 100–500 m/z scan range).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for data analysis. MS2 spectra were searched against SwissProt human protein database using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamido-methylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤1% FDR threshold. Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 10 and <50% isolation interference).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stat5, Protac, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
2Departments of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI 48109, USA.

### Submitter
Longchuan  Bai

### Lab Head
Dr Shaomeng Wang
2Departments of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI 48109, USA.


