### Accession
PXD007114

### Title
The RNA Polymerase II factor RPAP1 is critical for Mediator-driven transcription and cell identity

### Description
The RNA Polymerase II Associated Protein 1 (RPAP1) is conserved across metazoa and critical for stem cell differentiation in plants, however, very little is known about its mechanism of action or its role in mammalian cells.  Here, we report that RPAP1 is essential for the expression of lineage specifying factors and for viability.  Accordingly, inhibition of RPAP1 triggers somatic cell de-differentiation and facilitates reprogramming into pluripotent stem cells.  Conversely, interfering with RPAP1 in ES cells severely impairs their differentiation capacity.  Mechanistically, we show that RPAP1 is essential for the interaction between Pol II and Mediator, as well as for the recruitment of important regulators, such as the Mediator-specific Pol II factor POLR2M/Gdown1 and the CTD phosphatase RPAP2.  In agreement, depletion of RPAP1 disturbs the loading of Pol II and Pol II Ser5 phosphorylation levels and impairs expression of super-enhancer-driven genes.  We conclude that Mediator-RPAP1-Pol II is an ancient module, conserved from plants to mammals, critical for establishing and maintaining cell identity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were eluted with 8M Urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH=8.0 and digested by  FASP. Peptides were further pre-fractionated into five fractions using high pH reverse phase micro-columns.  The five fractions of the eight different samples were analyzed by RP chromatography using a nanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent), directly coupled with a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo) via nanoESI. Peptides were loaded onto a Reprosil-Pur C18 column (3 µm, 400x0.075 mm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen Germany), with a trapping column (Prot Trap Column 0.3 x 10 mm, ReproSil C18-AQ, 5 μm), for 10 min with a flow rate of 2.5 ul/min of loading buffer (0.1% FA). Elution was performed with a 120 min linear gradient (buffer A: 2% ACN, 0.1%FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1%FA) at 300 nL/min. Peptides were directly electrosprayed at 1.4 kV spray voltage with a heated capillary temperature of 325°C and S-Lens of 60%. Mass spectra were acquired in a datadependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 60000 (FWHM) at 400 m/z in the Orbitrap, scanning a mass range between 350 and 1500 m/z (AGC = 1e6, Max IT = 500 ms). Peptide fragmentation was performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with read out in the ion trap (AGC = 5e3, Max IT = 100 ms) and a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Forty raw files (i.e. two experiments “SCR-Pol II vs SCR-IgG” and “shRPAP1-Pol II vs shRPAP1-IgG” with two biological replicates each and fractionated into five fractions), were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 against a Mus musculus database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 43,539 sequences). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal were included as variable modifications.  Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm for the first search, and 4.5 ppm for the main search.  Fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da.  Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages were allowed.  Peptide and protein FDR were set at 1%.  Afterwards, the “protein-group” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.1.6) and the LFQ values were used to determine changes in the interactomes.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA polymerase II-associated protein 1 (RPAP1) is conserved across metazoa and required for stem cell differentiation in plants; however, very little is known about its mechanism of action or its role in mammalian cells. Here, we report that RPAP1 is essential for the expression of cell identity genes and for cell viability. Depletion of RPAP1 triggers cell de-differentiation, facilitates reprogramming toward pluripotency, and impairs differentiation. Mechanistically, we show that RPAP1 is essential for the interaction between RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) and Mediator, as well as for the recruitment of important regulators, such as the Mediator-specific RNA Pol II factor Gdown1 and the C-terminal domain (CTD) phosphatase RPAP2. In agreement, depletion of RPAP1 diminishes the loading of total and Ser5-phosphorylated RNA Pol&#xa0;II on many genes, with super-enhancer-driven genes among the most significantly downregulated. We conclude that Mediator/RPAP1/RNA Pol II is an&#xa0;ancient module, conserved from plants to mammals, critical for establishing and maintaining cell identity.

### Keywords
Cell identity, Rpap1, Mediator, Rna pol ii

### Affiliations
Cnio
CNIO

### Submitter
Nuria Ibarz

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Munoz
CNIO


