### Accession
PXD014579

### Title
Cell-derived extracellular vesicles can be used as a biomarker reservoir for glioblastoma tumor subtyping

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most aggressive solid tumors for which treatment options and biomarkers are limited. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) produced by both GBM and stromal cells are central in the inter-cellular communication that is taking place in the tumor bulk. As tumor sEVs are accessible in biofluids, recent reports have suggested that sEVs contain valuable biomarkers for GBM patient diagnosis and follow-up. The aim of the current study was to describe the protein content of sEVs produced by different GBM cell lines and patient-derived stem cells.  Our results revealed that the content of the sEVs mirrors the phenotypic signature of the respective GBM cells, leading to the description of potential informative sEV-associated biomarkers for GBM subtyping, such as CD44. Overall, these data could assist future GBM in vitro studies and provide insights for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic methods as well as personalized treatment strategies.

### Sample Protocol
In order to elucidate the protein content of the GBM cell-derived sEVs, mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed. To do so, a Bradford assay was performed to determine the protein concentration of each sEV sample and 100ng was then loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel for protein separation. Following Coomassie blue staining, 5 slices/lane were then cut out of the gel and further processed for in-gel trypsin digestion and mass spectrometry run. De-staining was performed through 3 changes/washes with 50% acetonitrile (MeCN), 25mM NH4HCO3, with 5 minutes shaking between each change. Reduction and alkylation were performed respectively with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (45min at 50°C) and 50mM chloracetamide, 25mM NH4HCO3 (45 minutes in the dark at room temperature). Subsequently, 12.5ng µ-1L trypsin (in 25mM NH4HCO3) was added to the samples, followed by an overnight incubation at 37°C. The digest solution was then transferred to clean tubes. Next, 70% acetonitrile/5% trifluoroacetic acid was added to the gel pieces. Following 5min shaking, the supernatant was transferred to the corresponding clean tubes. A similar further extraction was repeated another two times in order to completely dehydrate the gel pieces and consequently recover the rest of the peptides. Sample volume was reduced to 20µL using a vacuum concentrator. Samples were then processed through a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex NCP-3200 nanoLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched using Maxquant (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) against a SwissProt database (Proteome ID: UP000005640, Taxonomy: 9606 - Homo sapiens). The following settings were used: trypsin was the enzyme with up to two missed cleavages, oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids, maximum peptide mass was 4600Da, minimum and maximum peptide length for unspecific search was 8 and 25 amino acids respectively, peptides and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were both 0.01 and minimum razor + unique peptides was set to 1 (minimum of 1 peptide for protein identification). Finally, results (‘protein groups’) were exported to Microsoft Office Excel and further processed. The MS analysis was repeated at least 3 times for each GBM cell lines/stem lines, using independent samples. Through comparison of independent experiments for each cell line/stem cell, we described as ‘hits’ the identified proteins that appeared in at least 2 independent identifications. Obvious contaminants (keratins) were removed from the protein group lists.  In addition, proteomic data were further deciphered by loading the gene symbols identified from the MS data in Functional Enrichment Analysis Tool (FunRich) for gene enrichment analysis of ‘Biological pathways’, ‘Biological process’, ‘Cellular component’ and ‘Pairwise comparison diagram’. The InteractiVenn (www.interactivenn.net) online software was used to make Venn diagrams.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most aggressive solid tumors for which treatment options and biomarkers are limited. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) produced by both GBM and stromal cells are central in the inter-cellular communication that is taking place in the tumor bulk. As tumor sEVs are accessible in biofluids, recent reports have suggested that sEVs contain valuable biomarkers for GBM patient diagnosis and follow-up. The aim of the current study was to describe the protein content of sEVs produced by different GBM cell lines and patient-derived stem cells. Our results reveal that the content of the sEVs mirrors the phenotypic signature of the respective GBM cells, leading to the description of potential informative sEV-associated biomarkers for GBM subtyping, such as CD44. Overall, these data could assist future GBM in vitro studies and provide insights for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic methods as well as personalized treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Glioblastoma, Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
University of Sussex
Giamas Lab School of Life Sciences University of Sussex

### Submitter
Thomas Simon

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Georgios Giamas
Giamas Lab School of Life Sciences University of Sussex


