### Accession
PXD019549

### Title
SWATH-MS based proteomic profiling of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma tumours reveals the interplay between the extracellular matrix and related intracellular pathways

### Description
Pancreatic cancer accounts for 2.8% of new cancer cases worldwide and is projected to become by 2030 the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths. Patients of African ancestry appear to be at an increased risk for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), with worse severity and outcomes. The purpose of this study was to map the proteomic and genomic landscape of a cohort of PDAC patients of African ancestry. Thirty tissues (15 tumours and 15 normal adjacent tissues) were obtained from consenting South African PDAC patients. Optimisation of the sample preparation method allowed for the simultaneous extraction of high-purity protein and DNA for SWATH-MS and OncoArray SNV analyses.  We quantified 3402 proteins with 49 upregulated and 35 downregulated proteins at a minimum 2.1 fold change and FDR adjusted p-value (q-value) ≤ 0.01 when comparing tumour to normal adjacent tissue. Many of the upregulated proteins in the tumour samples are involved in extracellular matrix formation (ECM) and related intracellular pathways. Proteins such as EMIL1, ZCCHV and KBTB2 involved in the regulation of ECM proteins were observed to be dysregulated in pancreatic tumours. Approximately 11% of the dysregulated proteins, including ISLR, BP1, PTK7 and OLFL3, were predicted to be secretory proteins. Additionally, we identified missense mutations in some upregulated proteins, such as MYPN, ESTY2 and SERPINB8. These findings help in further elucidating the biology of PDAC and may aid in identifying future plausible markers for the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were thawed and 20μg per sample was reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (VWR Pennsylvania, United States) at 37°C for 30 min and alkylated with 40mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The samples were then purified of detergents and salts using MagReSyn™ HILIC microparticles (ReSyn Biosciences Edenvale, South Africa) in a 96 deep-well plate for automated sample preparation of 12 samples in parallel using the KingFisher Duo™ system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described (Buthelezi et al., 2018). Briefly, magnetic hydrophilic affinity microparticles (20μl, 200μg) were equilibrated in 200μl of 100mM ammonium acetate pH 4.5 containing 15% acetonitrile (MeCN). Microparticles were then transferred to 100μl of protein binding solution (each protein sample topped-up to 50μl using 4% SDS and added to 50ul of 200mM ammonium acetate pH 4.5 containing 30% MeCN) and mixed for 30 min at room temperature. The captured proteins were washed twice in 200μl of 95% MeCN and transferred to 200μl of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 2μg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) and mixed for 4 hrs digestion at 37C. The automated on-bead protein capture, clean-up and digest protocol was programmed using BindIt software v4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and is available upon request (info@resynbio.com) and further described in Figure S1. Resultant peptides were dried and stored at -80°C before Liquid Chromatography-MS analysis. Approximately 1ug of tryptic peptides per sample was analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to an AB Sciex 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Massachusetts, USA). For data-dependent acquisition (DDA, used for spectral library building), tumour and normal samples were each pooled in their respective groups and spiked with Biognosys iRT retention time peptide standards. Four injection replicates of each group were acquired (n = 8). For SWATH, each sample was injected once. Peptide samples were inline de-salted using an Acclaim PepMap C18 trap column (75μm × 2cm; 2 min at 5μl.min 1 using 2% ACN/0.2% FA). Trapped peptides were gradient eluted and separated on an Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLC column (75μm × 15cm, 2µm particle size) at a flow-rate of 0.5µl.min 1 with a gradient of 4-40% B over 60 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN/0.1% FA). For DDA, precursor (MS) scans were acquired from m/z 400-1500 (2+-5+ charge states) using an accumulation time of 250ms followed by 80 fragment ion (MS/MS) scans, acquired from m/z 100-1800 with 25ms accumulation time each. For SWATH, precursor scans ranged from m/z 400 to 900 using 100 variable-width windows that overlapped by 0.5 Da, and fragment ions were acquired from m/z 100-1800 with 25ms accumulation time per window.

### Data Protocol
Raw DDA files (.wiff), n = 8, were included in a combined search using Protein Pilot software v5.0.2.0 (AB Sciex, Massachusetts, USA), against a database of human reference proteome contained in SwissProt (Accessed 9 June 2019) supplemented with sequences of common contaminants and iRT peptide retention time standards (Biognosys Schlieren, Switzerland). This searched data file was imported into Skyline software v19.1 (Maclean et al., 2010) with peptide features extracted to build a spectral library. A cut-off score of 0.994 (from Protein Pilot report) corresponding to 1% local peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was applied for a library building, with fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable N-terminal acetylation being the only allowable modifications. The minimum peptide length was 7 and the maximum 36 amino acids and enzyme for digestion set as trypsin with one allowable missed cleavage. The built spectral library contained 141 775 transitions matching to 19 861 peptides and 3413 proteins. Decoy entries were generated by shuffling the peptide sequence, with 141 775 decoy transitions and 19 861 decoy peptides added. SWATH data files (.wiff), n = 30, were centroided and converted to mzML format using the msconvert tool in the ProteoWizard software suite (Chambers et al., 2012). The converted data files were imported into Skyline and matched to the spectral library for correct assignment of the mass spectra. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5m/z was employed for library matching, with a minimum of three and maximum of six of the most intense product ions being selected. The b and y ions with +1 and +2 charge states matching to peptides with +2, +3 and +4 charge states were allowed and product ions from b3 to the last ion were allowed for selection. The iRT peptides were used to align retention times across the dataset using the score to run a regression. A 2 min window around the predicted retention time was used to assist in identification. A peak scoring model was trained using mProphet and the decoy peptides generated from the spectral library.  All peaks were re-integrated using this model. The MSstats (Choi et al., 2014) group comparison plugin was implemented within Skyline to perform quantitative analysis. A normalisation method (equalise medians) was applied for the comparisons across the experimental groups. The MSstats design sample size plugin was used to determine the statistically significant fold change that could be observed based on the desired power, sample number and variability of the dataset. The filtered list of dysregulated proteins was manually inspected within Skyline to verify the quality of the precursors and transitions used for quantitation. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using the peptide-level quantification of each sample within Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer, Extracellular matrix, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
NextGen Health, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, South Africa
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research

### Submitter
Previn Naicker

### Lab Head
Dr Stoyan Stoychev
NextGen Health, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, South Africa


