### Accession
PXD036636

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the p.G849D variant in neurexin 2 alpha may reveal insight into Parkinson’s disease pathobiology

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD), the fastest growing neurological disorder globally, has a complex etiology. A previous study by our group identified the p.G849D variant in neurexin 2 (NRXN2), encoding the synaptic protein, NRXN2α, as a possible causal variant of PD. Therefore, we aimed to perform functional studies using proteomics in an attempt to understand the biological pathways affected by the variant.  We hypothesized that this may reveal insight into the pathobiology of PD. Wild-type and mutant NRXN2α plasmids were transfected into SH-SY5Y cells. Thereafter, total protein was extracted and prepared for mass spectrometry using a Thermo Scientific Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. The data was then interrogated against the UniProt H. sapiens database and afterwards, pathway and enrichment analyses were performed using in silico tools. Overexpression of the wild-type protein led to the enrichment of proteins involved in neurodegenerative diseases, while overexpression of the mutant protein led to the decline of proteins involved in ribosomal functioning. Thus, we concluded that the wild-type NRXN2α may be involved in pathways related to the development of neurodegenerative disorders, and that biological processes related to the ribosome, transcription and tRNA, specifically at the synapse, could be an important mechanism in PD. Future targeted studies translation at the synapse in PD could therefore provide further information on the pathobiology of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y cells were grown in sterile 25 cm3 flasks until 70% confluent and transfected using Lipofectamine3000 (Invitrogen) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of four treatment groups were used for the analysis: (1) non-transfected cells (NT), (2) cells transfected with the wild-type plasmid (WT), (3) cells transfected with the mutant plasmid (MUT) and (4) cells transfected with the empty vector (EV). All treatments were performed in triplicate. Cells were detached using Trypsin-EDTA and centrifuged at 2739 x g for 5 minutes to collect cell pellets. Cell pellets were stored at -80 °C until required.  The pellets were then thawed in 100 mM Tris buffer pH 8 containing 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma), 100 mM NaCl (Sigma), 5 mM triscarboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP, Sigma), protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher) and 2 mM EDTA (Thermo Fisher). Once thawed, the pellets were submerged in an ice-cold sonic bath for 30 seconds prior to vortexing for 30 seconds. This cycle was repeated three times and the pellets were completely dissolved. Extraction reagents were then removed using a chloroform-methanol-water liquid-liquid extraction method. Mass spectrometry was performed by Stellenbosch University’s Central Analytical Facilities (CAF) using a Thermo Scientific Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. The sample was introduced through a stainless-steel emitter. Data was collected in positive mode with spray voltage set to 1.8 kV and ion transfer capillary set to 280 °C. Spectra were internally calibrated using polysiloxane ions at m/z = 445.12003 and 371.10024. MS1 scans were performed using the orbitrap detector set at 120 000 resolution over the scan range 350-1650 with automatic gain control (AGC) target at 3 E5 and maximum injection time of 40 milliseconds. Data was acquired in profile mode. MS2 acquisitions were performed using monoisotopic precursor selection for ion with charges +2 - +7 with error tolerance set to +/- 10 ppm. Precursor ions were excluded from fragmentation once for a period of 60 seconds. Precursor ions were selected for fragmentation in higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) mode using the quadrupole mass analyzer with HCD energy set to 32.5%. Fragment ions were detected in the orbitrap mass analyzer set to 30 000 resolution. The AGC target was set to 5E4 and the maximum injection time to 80 milliseconds. The data was acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated by the mass spectrometer were imported into Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher) and processed using the SequestHT algorithm. Database interrogation was performed against the UniProt H. Sapiens database concatenated with the cRAP contaminant protein database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap). Semi-tryptic cleavage with 2 missed cleavages was allowed for. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. Demamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) was allowed as dynamic modifications and thiomethyl of C as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using the Target-Decoy PSM validator node. The results files were imported into Scaffold 1.4.4 (Searle, 2010) and identified peptides validated with X!Tandem and the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms included in Scaffold. Quantitation was performed by Scaffold after a one-way ANOVA and Student’s t-test was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD), the fastest-growing neurological disorder globally, has a complex etiology. A previous study by our group identified the p.G849D variant in <i>neurexin 2</i> (<i>NRXN2</i>), encoding the synaptic protein, NRXN2&#x3b1;, as a possible causal variant of PD. Therefore, we aimed to perform functional studies using proteomics in an attempt to understand the biological pathways affected by the variant. We hypothesized that this may reveal insight into the pathobiology of PD. Wild-type and mutant NRXN2&#x3b1; plasmids were transfected into SH-SY5Y cells. Thereafter, total protein was extracted and prepared for mass spectrometry using a Thermo Scientific Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. The data were then interrogated against the UniProt <i>H. sapiens</i> database and afterward, pathway and enrichment analyses were performed using <i>in silico</i> tools. Overexpression of the wild-type protein led to the enrichment of proteins involved in neurodegenerative diseases, while overexpression of the mutant protein led to the decline of proteins involved in ribosomal functioning. Thus, we concluded that the wild-type NRXN2&#x3b1; may be involved in pathways related to the development of neurodegenerative disorders, and that biological processes related to the ribosome, transcription, and tRNA, specifically at the synapse, could be an important mechanism in PD. Future studies targeting translation at the synapse in PD could therefore provide further information on the pathobiology of the disease.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial dysfunction, Neurexin 2α (nrxn2), Synaptic translation, Ribosomal functioning, Pg849d, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa
Stellenbosch University

### Submitter
Katelyn Cuttler

### Lab Head
Dr Soraya Bardien
Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa


