### Accession
PXD006812

### Title
PDGF-hSyn Synaptosomes (vGlut FASS) nanoLC-MS/MS

### Description
This project studies the differential abundance of proteins at excitatory synapses of PDGF-hSyn mice (Masliah et al., 2000, Science), which are a model for Parkinson’s disease/dementia with Lewy bodies. The mice overexpress human alpha synuclein under the human PDGF promoter. Synapses were purified from animals expressing fluorescently tagged vGlut1 (vGlut1-Venus) using fluorescence activated synapse sorting (FASS; cf. Biesemann et al., 2014, EMBO J).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from purified synapses were deposited onto preparative SDS-PAGE. After staining with colloidal Coomassie, unique band was cut. Bands were processed for in-gel tryptic digestion, including treatment with DTT and iodoacetamide. Tryptic peptides were extracted with formic acid and acetonitrile, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide mixture was analyzed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 25-cm C18 Pep-Map column (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 108 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.0 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-2000) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 1 x 10e6 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was et to 30 s and top 15 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 10e5 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 120 ms and a resolution of R = 35000. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath nor auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 260°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 25% and an isolation width of 3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against the Mus musculus Reference Proteome Set (Uniprot version 2015-08; 46432 entries) added with human synuclein sequence (P37840). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da), propionamide (+71 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) were considered as variable modifications. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm [L Käll, J Canterbury, J Weston, W S Noble and M J MacCoss. Semi-supervised learning for peptide identification from shotgun proteomics datasets, Nature Methods 4:923 – 925, November 2007] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Cognitive decline and dementia in neurodegenerative diseases are associated with synapse dysfunction and loss, which may precede neuron loss by several years. While misfolded and aggregated &#x3b1;-synuclein is recognized in the disease progression of synucleinopathies, the nature of glutamatergic synapse dysfunction and loss remains incompletely understood. Using fluorescence-activated synaptosome sorting (FASS), we enriched excitatory glutamatergic synaptosomes from mice overexpressing human alpha-synuclein (h-&#x3b1;S) and wild-type littermates to unprecedented purity. Subsequent label-free proteomic quantification revealed a set of proteins differentially expressed upon human alpha-synuclein overexpression. These include overrepresented proteins involved in the synaptic vesicle cycle, ER-Golgi trafficking, metabolism and cytoskeleton. Unexpectedly, we found and validated a steep reduction of eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha (eEF1A1) levels in excitatory synapses at early stages of h-&#x3b1;S mouse model pathology. While eEF1A1 reduction correlated with the loss of postsynapses, its immunoreactivity was found on both sides of excitatory synapses. Moreover, we observed a reduction in eEF1A1 immunoreactivity in the cingulate gyrus neuropil of patients with Lewy body disease along with a reduction in PSD95 levels. Altogether, our results suggest a link between structural impairments underlying cognitive decline in neurodegenerative disorders and local synaptic defects. eEF1A1 may therefore represent a limiting factor to synapse maintenance.

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Vglut, Parkinson’s diseas, Excitatory synapse, Lewy body

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians; University Munich; Germany
LMU Munich

### Submitter
Mario Dorostkar

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Dorostkar
Ludwig-Maximilians; University Munich; Germany


