### Accession
PXD011327

### Title
Actinobaculum massiliense proteome profiled in polymicrobial urethral catheter biofilms

### Description
Actinotignum massiliense, a Gram-positive, facultatively anaerobic coccoid rod, is a rare human pathogen able to infect the urinary tract and belongs to the order of Actinomycetales. We identified A. massiliense as a resident of microbial biofilms growing on indwelling urethral catheter surfaces that were isolated from two patients with neurogenic bladders. These catheter biofilms (CBs) also harbored common uropathogens such as Proteus mirabilis and Aerococcus urinae, supporting the notion that A. massiliense depends on other co-colonizing microbes for survival. We isolated the bacterium from an anaerobically grown culture of a clinical sample, identified the species by 16S rRNA gene sequencing and verified this result via shotgun proteomics. Bacterial proteomes were profiled from the in vitro grown strain and four clinical ‘in vivo’ samples. The quantified proteomes allowed us to infer metabolic pathways and virulence/survival factors of importance in the CB milieu. Two putative subtilisin-like proteases, two Rib/Esp surface antigen repeat-containing proteins, a papain-like cysteine protease and a metal/heme/oligopeptide uptake system were highly expressed in vivo, but less so in vitro. We predict these proteins to be critical for adhesion and growth in CBs attacked by the host’s innate immune system or to improve bacterial fitness. Mixed acid fermentation following uptake and metabolism of xylose and glucuronate, sugars highly represented in proteoglycans and glycoglycerolipids of the urothelial mucosa and, in the case of glucuronate, shed into urine via renal xenobiotic conjugates, is inferred to be a major pathway for A. massiliense to generate energy under microaerobic conditions in CBs. The bacteria also appear to have active pathways for storage and utilization of glycogen as a carbon resource. Finally, we identified a putative polyketide synthase which may generate a secondary metabolite that interacts with either the host or co-colonizing organisms to enable A. massiliense survival in CBs.

### Sample Protocol
Catheter biofilms were lysed using SED buffer (2% SDS, 50mM DTT, 20mM EDTA), and digested using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) approach. The protein digestions were desalted using StageTip, and analyzed using nanoLC-MS/MS (Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4) software.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Actinobaculum massiliense</i>, a Gram-positive anaerobic coccoid rod colonizing the human urinary tract, belongs to the taxonomic class of Actinobacteria. We identified <i>A. massiliense</i> as a cohabitant of urethral catheter biofilms (CB). The CBs also harbored more common uropathogens, such as <i>Proteus mirabilis</i> and <i>Aerococcus urinae</i>, supporting the notion that <i>A. massiliense</i> is adapted to a life style in polymicrobial biofilms. We isolated a clinical strain from a blood agar colony and used 16S rRNA gene sequencing and shotgun proteomics to confirm its identity as <i>A. massiliense</i>. We characterized this species by quantitatively comparing the bacterial proteome derived from in vitro growth with that of four clinical samples. The functional relevance of proteins with emphasis on nutrient import and the response to hostile host conditions, showing evidence of neutrophil infiltration, was analyzed. Two putative subtilisin-like proteases and a heme/oligopeptide transporter were abundant in vivo and are likely important for survival and fitness in the biofilm. Proteins facilitating uptake of xylose/glucuronate and oligopeptides, also highly expressed in vivo, may feed metabolites into mixed acid fermentation and peptidolysis pathways, respectively, to generate energy. A polyketide synthase predicted to generate a secondary metabolite that interacts with either the human host or co-colonizing microbes was also identified. The product of the PKS enzyme may contribute to <i>A. massiliense</i> fitness and persistence in the CBs.

### Keywords
Urethral catheter, Biofilm, Proteome, Uti, Actinobaculum massiliense

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute


