### Accession
PXD038414

### Title
Peptide-mediated inhibition of the transcriptional regulator Elongin BC induces apoptosis in cancer cells

### Description
Inhibiting protein-protein interactions via designed peptides is a suitable strategy to block the function of important proteins in cells. The Elongin BC heterodimer (ELOB/C) is involved in transcription elongation and protein turnover. It interacts with target proteins via a so-called BC-box to modulate their functions. ELOB and ELOC are commonly upregulated in cancer and are essential for cancer cell growth, making them attractive drug targets. However, currently, no strategy has been established to inhibit the function of ELOB/C in cells. Here, we show that peptides that mimic the high-affinity BC-box of EPOP can block the interaction of ELOB/C with its target proteins, both in vitro and in the cellular environment. Cancer cells treated with BC-box peptides, but not with the mutated control, show decreased cell viability, altered cell cycle and increased apoptosis, demonstrating a biological impact by inhibiting ELOB/C in vivo. Together our work suggests that targeting the BC-box binding pocket of ELOB/C is a feasible strategy to impair the function of the ELOB/C heterodimer and to inhibit cancer cell growth.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-HA-tagged human EPOP wildtype, L40A mutant, CTR as wells as FLAG-HA-GFP as a control were stably expressed in HEK293 cells. Whole cell extracts were prepared from around 1 x 108 cells with NP-40 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 300 mM KCl, 12.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 % NP-40, 10 % glycerol, and protease inhibitors). Immunoprecipitation was performed using Flag M2 agarose beads (Sigma) with around 5 mg of total protein per IP in NP-40 lysis buffer containing 150 mM KCl and 0.25% NP-40 for 3 hours at 4°C. After 3 washes with TBS, 0.25% NP-40, bound proteins were eluted by addition of Laemmli buffer or 0.2 mg/mL FLAG peptide and subsequently analyzed by western blotting or silver staining. For mass spectrometric analysis, beads were washed additional 3 times with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and precipitated proteins were identified via LC-MS/MS. Four biological replicates were performed for each protein. For mass spectrometric analysis, beads were washed additional 3 times with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin after reduction and alkylation. For LC-MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a home-packed 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID, 2.4μm Reprosil C18, Dr Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_UP000005604_Hsapiens_20191107.fasta; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Results were analyzed in Perseus 1.6.7.0 with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Inhibition of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) via designed peptides is an effective strategy to perturb their biological functions. The Elongin BC heterodimer (ELOB/C) binds to a BC-box motif and is essential for cancer cell growth. Here, we report a peptide that mimics the high-affinity BC-box of the PRC2-associated protein EPOP. This peptide tightly binds to the ELOB/C dimer (k<sub>D</sub>&#xa0;= 0.46&#xa0;&#xb1; 0.02&#xa0;nM) and blocks the association of ELOB/C with its interaction partners, both in&#xa0;vitro and in the cellular environment. Cancer cells treated with our peptide inhibitor showed decreased cell viability, increased apoptosis, and perturbed gene expression. Therefore, our work proposes that blocking the BC-box-binding pocket of ELOB/C is a feasible strategy to impair its function and inhibit cancer cell growth. Our peptide inhibitor promises novel mechanistic insights into the biological function of the ELOB/C dimer and offers a starting point for therapeutics linked to ELOB/C dysfunction.

### Keywords
Peptide inhibition, Prc2, Elongin bc, Epop, Cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg, 35043, Germany
University Marburg

### Submitter
Robert Liefke

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Liefke
Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg, 35043, Germany


