### Accession
PXD010319

### Title
Targeting the Scaffold Protein Plectin by an Organometallic as a Strategy to Inhibit Tumour Invasiveness- whole cell lysate of HCT 116 epithelial cells, Ru-OH-2 competitive pull down 4h

### Description
The inability of determining direct molecular targets of metal-based therapeutic agents beyond the platinum class is one of the major bottlenecks in their development. Here, we employ an integrated chemical proteomics and response profiling approach to identify and validate plestatins, based on an organometallic ruthenium(II) scaffold, as selective plectin-targeting agents. Plectin is a giant scaffold protein involved in controlling cytoarchitecture. Subcytotoxic concentrations of plestatins induce drastic morphological phenotypes on the microtubule (MT) network accompanied by a global down-regulation of translational activity. Plecstatins possess anti-invasive properties in tumour spheroids and also display tumour-inhibiting effects in vivo after oral administration. The ability of plecstatins to alter the MT network via plectin represents a unique mechanism to target MTs and shows promise as an anticancer strategy. Ru-OH-2 is an analogue of plecstatin-3 displaying an ancillary hydrogen bond donor instead of a hydrogen bond acceptor.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysate of HCT 116 epithelial cells, Ru-OH-2 competitive pull down 4h HCT116 cells (kindly provided by Brigitte Marian, Institute of Cancer Research, Medical University of Vienna, Austria) were cultivated to approximately 108 cells per flask for pull-down experiments using the afore-mentioned McCoy’s 5A modified medium and supplemented with penicillin, streptamycin and 10% heat-inactivated fetal-calf serum. The cells were washed twice with PBS and were pelleted by centrifugation (2300 g, 4 °C, 5 min). Cell pellets were suspended in non-denaturing lysis buffer (1.5 mL) and homogenized by passing through a gauge syringe twenty times. The suspension was centrifuged (3500 rpm, 5 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was collected yielding a soluble protein amount of at least 15 mg/sample. The HCT116 whole cell lysate was treated with Ru-OH-1 for 30min and exposed to the immobilized Ru-OH-2 for 4h on Pierce Streptavidin UltraLink resins (100 nmol/pull-down, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The beads were then transferred into spin columns and washed with non-denaturing lysis buffer and HEPES buffer. Proteins were eluted with 250 µL elution buffer (formic acid 50%, urea 2 M) and stored at –20 °C. The complete work flow with cell lysates was performed at 4 °C. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories). In-solution digestions were performed with 25µg of protein. The samples were pre-concentrated on 10kDa filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH), reduced with DTT (56°C, 30 min) and carbamidomethylated with iodacetamide (45 min in the dark). To receive peptides, samples were digested with a trypsin/lys-c mixture (Promega, Germany) for 18h at 37°C. Eluates were dried and stored at -20°C until analysis. For analysis a nanoLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Austria) was coupled to a high resolution QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Austria). Dried samples were resolved in 5µL 30% formic acid (FA) containing four synthetic peptides (10fmol each) and diluted with 40µL mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Each sample was recorded twice, 5µL were injected per analysis. Chromatographic separation was run with a Pepmap100 precolumn (2 cm x 75 µm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Pepmap100 analytical column (50 cm x 75 µm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The flow rate of the loading and the separation precesses were 10 µL/min and 300 nL/min, respectively. The chromatographic method consisted of a 38 min stepped gradient from 7–35% B and a 85 min total run time. The resolution set to 70000 and 17500, maximum injection time to 50ms and 75ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively. M/z was scanned from 400-1400 and a top 6 method was chosen for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) including the Andromeda search engine for label-free quantification. We allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages and at least two unique peptide for identifications. The first search peptide tolerance was 20 ppm and the main search tolerance was set to 5 ppm on Orbitrap instrument type. Protein and peptide false-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. We included N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. The minimum score was set to 40. Proteins were searched against the human UniProtKB/SwissProt database. Protein isoforms were combined into protein groups. Data sets were analyzed with Perseus (Version 1.5.1.6). After log(2) transformation of the LFQ-values, rows were filtered based on valid values with a minimum number of 6 values in at least one group. The log-transformed LFQ-intensities of each protein group were then tested for significant changes between the untreated and treated cells using a two-sided t-test, an FDR of 0.05 (permutation-based with 250 permutations) and S0 = 0.5 (hyperbolic conversion). A significant protein regulation is obtained when the permutation-based multi-parameter corrected P-value of the LFQ-intensities of a given protein between treated and untreated samples is <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Organometallic metal(arene) anticancer agents require ligand exchange for their anticancer activity and this is generally believed to confer low selectivity for potential cellular targets. However, using an integrated proteomics-based target-response profiling approach as a potent hypothesis-generating procedure, we found an unexpected target selectivity of a ruthenium(arene) pyridinecarbothioamide (plecstatin) for plectin, a scaffold protein and cytolinker, which was validated in a plectin knock-out model in&#x2005;vitro. Plectin targeting shows potential as a strategy to inhibit tumor invasiveness as shown in cultured tumor spheroids while oral administration of plecstatin-1 to mice reduces tumor growth more efficiently in the invasive B16&#x2005;melanoma than in the CT26&#x2005;colon tumor model.

### Keywords
Ruthenium, Response profiling, Organometallics, Plectin, Target identification, Metallodrugs, Mechanism of action, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry ( lab head )
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry ( lab head )


