### Accession
PXD009877

### Title
HiRIEF-LC-MS based proteomics on Small Intestinal Neuroendocrine Tumors (SI-NET) and SI-NET cell lines

### Description
Part I - SI-NET tumors High Resolution Isoelectric Focusing (HiRIEF) LC-MS and relative quantification by iTRAQ 8-plex was used to analyze 14 small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs). The data was obtained from two separate TMT10plex sets and linked by a single internal pooled standard. The internal pooled standard was made by combining equal aliquots of the tryptic peptide mixtures from each of the 14 tissue samples. iTRAQ set1 was composed of 7 SI-NET samples, all from different individuals, and internal pooled standard labelled as follows: Channel 113 (sample Screen-1 with liver metastasis), Channel 114 (sample Screen-8 with liver metastasis), Channel 115 (sample Screen-3 with liver metastasis), Channel 116 (sample Screen-2 with liver metastasis), Channel 117 (sample Screen-5 no liver metastasis), Channel 118 (sample Screen-4 no liver metastasis), Channel 119 (sample Screen-10 no liver metastasis), Channel 121 (internal pooled standard). iTRAQ set2 was composed of 7 SI-NET samples, all from different individuals, and internal pooled standard labelled as follows: Channel 113 (sample Screen-7 with liver metastasis), Channel 114 (sample Screen-11 with liver metastasis), Channel 115 (sample Screen-13 with liver metastasis), Channel 116 (sample Screen-6 no liver metastasis), Channel 117 (sample Screen-12 no liver metastasis), Channel 118 (sample Screen-9 no liver metastasis), Channel 119 (sample Screen-14 no liver metastasis), Channel 121 (internal pooled standard).  Part II - time course profiling in cell lines High Resolution Isoelectric Focusing (HiRIEF) LC-MS and relative quantification by TMT 10-plex was used to analyze cellular response to the neddylation inhibitor pevonedistat (MLN4924) at different timepoints in two SI-NET (small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors) cell lines. The data was obtained from two separate TMT 10-plex experiments. TMT set1 includes a time course experiment upon pevonedistat treatment of CNDT2 cells with harvests at 2h, 6h, 12h and 24h after treatment as well as of untreated control cells. Isobaric tag labelling of peptide samples with TMT10plex was used as follows. Biological duplicate controls (TMT channels 126, 127N), duplicate 2h (127C, 128N), duplicate 6h (128C, 129N), duplicate 12h (129C, 130N) and duplicate 24h (130C, 131) samples were employed.  TMT set2 includes a time course experiment upon pevonedistat treatment of HC45 cells with harvests at 2h, 6h, 12h and 24h after treatment as well as of untreated control cells. Isobaric tag labelling of peptide samples with TMT10plex was used as follows. Biological duplicate controls (TMT channels 126, 127N), duplicate 2h (127C, 128N), duplicate 6h (128C, 129N), duplicate 12h (129C, 130N) and duplicate 24h (130C, 131) samples were employed.

### Sample Protocol
Part I - SI-NET tumors SI-NET tumor samples were first homogenized by sonication. Proteins were then extracted from homogenate using SDS buffer (4%, 1mM DTT, 25mM HEPES) and heating to 95 degrees for 5 min followed by sonication. Proteins were digested to peptides using trypsin and the FASP protocol. Peptides from each sample were then individually labelled by iTRAQ 8plex, pooled and cleaned up by SCX. Peptides were then prefractionated using HiRIEF method with the IPG strip of pH range 3.7-4.9 into 72 fractions that were individually analyzed by LC-MS.  Part II - time course profiling in cell lines Proteins were extracted from cells using SDS buffer (4%, 1mM DTT, 25mM HEPES) and heating to 95 degrees for 5 min followed by sonication. Proteins were digested to peptides using trypsin and the FASP protocol. Peptides from each sample were then individually labelled by TMT10plex, pooled and cleaned up by SCX. Peptides were then prefractionated using HiRIEF method with the IPG strip of pH range 3-10 into 72 fractions that were individually analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
For SI-NET tumor samples, all MS/MS spectra was searched with Sequest/Percolator under the software platform Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Scientific) against the human protein Ensembl database (version 70, with 85056 protein entries). Settings used were: trypsin with 1 missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation on cysteine and iTRAQ-8 plex on lysine and N-terminal as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine or tyrosine as variable modifications. Results were limited to ≥ 1 high-confident unique peptide for quantification using a false discovery rate of <1 % at the peptide level.  For the cell line analysis, Raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msconvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite. Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) and Percolator (v2.08), where 8 subsequent search results were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. The reference database used was the human protein subset of ENSEMBL 80. MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Peptide and PSM FDR (false discovery rate) were recalculated after merging the percolator groups of 8 search results into one result per TMT set. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer10 (v2.0). PSMs found at PSM- and peptide-level 1% FDR  was used to infer gene identities, which were quantified using the medians of per-channel median-normalised PSM quantification ratios. Inferred gene identity false discovery rates where calculated using the picked-FDR method (Savitski et al MCP 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Patients with small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) frequently develop spread disease; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease progression are not known and effective preventive treatment strategies are lacking. Here, protein expression profiling was performed by HiRIEF-LC-MS in 14 primary SI-NETs from patients with and without liver metastases detected at the time of surgery and initial treatment. Among differentially expressed proteins, overexpression of the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8 was identified in samples from patients with liver metastasis. Further, NEDD8 correlation analysis indicated co-expression with RBX1, a key component in cullin-RING ubiquitin ligases (CRLs). In vitro inhibition of neddylation with the therapeutic agent pevonedistat (MLN4924) resulted in a dramatic decrease of proliferation in SI-NET cell lines. Subsequent mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis of pevonedistat effects and effects of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib revealed stabilization of multiple targets of CRLs including p27, an established tumor suppressor in SI-NET. Silencing of NEDD8 and RBX1 using siRNA resulted in a stabilization of p27, suggesting that the cellular levels of NEDD8 and RBX1 affect CRL activity. Inhibition of CRL activity, by either NEDD8/RBX1 silencing or pevonedistat treatment of cells resulted in induction of apoptosis that could be partially rescued by siRNA-based silencing of p27. Differential expression of both p27 and NEDD8 was confirmed in a second cohort of SI-NET using immunohistochemistry. Collectively, these findings suggest a role for CRLs and the ubiquitin proteasome system in suppression of p27 in SI-NET, and inhibition of neddylation as a putative therapeutic strategy in SI-NET.

### Keywords
Human, Pevonedistat, Mln4924, Clinical, Si-net, Timecourse, Cancer

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden


