### Accession
PXD032072

### Title
The PripA-TbcrA complex-centered Rab GAP cascade facilitates macropinosome maturation in Dictyostelium

### Description
Macropinocytosis, an evolutionarily conserved mechanism mediating nonspecific bulk uptake of extracellular fluid, has been ascribed diverse functions. How nascent macropinosomes mature after internalization remains largely unknown. By searching for proteins that localize on macropinosomes during the Rab5-to-Rab7 transition stage in Dictyostelium, we uncover a complex composed of two proteins, which we name PripA and TbcrA. We show that the Rab5-to-Rab7 conversion involves fusion of Rab5-marked early macropinosomes with Rab7-marked late macropinosomes. PripA links the two membrane compartments by interacting with PI(3,4)P2 and Rab7. In addition, PripA recruits TbcrA, which acts as a GAP, to turn off Rab5. Thus, the conversion to Rab7 is linked to inactivation of the upstream Rab5. Consistently, disruption of either pripA or tbcrA impairs Rab5 inactivation and macropinocytic cargo processing. Therefore, the PripA-TbcrA complex is the central component of a Rab GAP cascade that facilitates programmed Rab switch and efficient cargo trafficking during macropinosome maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each gel lane was cut into three slices and digested with trypsin. Liquid chromatography–tandem MS analysis of the resulting peptides was conducted on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an Easy-nLC1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a precolumn (75 µm internal diameter, 6 cm long, packed with ODS-AQ 120 Å–10 µm beads from YMC Co., Ltd.) and separated on an analytical column (75 µm internal diameter, 13 cm long, packed with Luna C18 1.8 µm 100 Å resin from Welch Materials) using an 0%−30% (vol/vol) acetonitrile gradient over 120 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min, with 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid added to the mobile phase throughout. The top 15 most intense precursor ions from each full scan (resolution 70,000) were isolated for HCD MS2 (resolution 17,500; NCE 27), with a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s. Precursors with unassigned charge states or charge states of 1+, 8+, or >8+ were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Dictyostelium_discoideum protein database using the SEQUEST search engine with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required, the max. two missed cleavage was allowed, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as the fixed modifications, oxidation on methionine was set as the variable modification, precursor-ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all mass spectrometry acquired in an Orbitrap mass analyzer and the fragment-ion-mass tolerance was set to 0.2 Da for all MS/MS spectra acquired. Peptide spectral matches were validated using the Fixed Value PSM Validator provided by Proteome Discoverer software based on the q values at a 1% false discovery rate. Proteomic analysis was carried out in biological triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rab7, Rab5, Pripa, Tbcra, Macropinocytosis

### Affiliations
Insititute of Biophysics
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Hui Tu

### Lab Head
Dr Huaqing Cai
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


