### Accession
PXD018774

### Title
Modulation of immune cell reactivity with cis-binding Siglec-9 agonists

### Description
Primary inflammatory pathologies caused by phagocytes lead to numerous debilitating conditions, ranging from chronic pain to permanent blindness. Siglec-9 is an immunoinhibitory receptor expressed on many types of phagocytes and is a promising target for anti-inflammatory therapeutics. We developed a lipid-tethered glycopolypeptide that spontaneously inserts into cell membranes and specifically binds Siglec-9 in cis on the surface of cells. We demonstrate that when inserted in a cell membrane and cis-binding, but not as a soluble trans-binding agent, this glycopolypeptide and agonizes Siglec-9, inhibiting inflammatory activity in reporter systems, phagocytic cell lines, and primary human macrophages. Thus, membrane-tethered cis-agonists of Siglec-9 are a new modality for therapeutic suppression of immune cell reactivity.

### Sample Protocol
CMAS KO THP-1 macrophages were cultured and labeled with glycopolypeptide (500 nM) in serum free media for 3 h. At this point, media and either vehicle or LPS (100 pg/mL) were added and cells were stimulated for 5 min. Cells were then lysed in cold RIPA buffer with benzonase, pelleted by centrifugation (18000 rcf, 15 min, 4 °C), and supernatant protein concentrations were quantitated by BCA. Digestion was performed on 100 ug protein using a mini S-trap protocol provided by the manufacturer (Protifi). Here, proteins were reduced and alkylated with 20 mM TCEP and 30 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes each at 60 °C and at room temperature in the dark, respectively. The lysate was then acidified with phosphoric acid, brought to approximately 80-90% methanol with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, and loaded onto the S-trap column. Following washing with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, trypsin (Promega) was added to the S-trap at a 20:1 protein:protease ratio for 90 minutes at 47 °C. Peptides from each lysate were labeled with 10-plex TMT (Tandem Mass Tags, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 hours at room temperature using recently published protocols. Labeling schemes for the resting and activated studies comparing pS9L-sol and pS9L-lipid to vehicle were: vehicle replicates in channels 126C, 127C, and 128C; pS9L-sol replicates in 127N, 128N, and 129N; pS9L-lipid replicates in 130N, 130C, and 131N. For the pLac control experiment, the labeling scheme was: vehicle replicates in channels 126C, 127C, and 128C; pLac replicates in 128N, 130N, and 131N. A test mix was run to confirm >99% labeling efficiency and even distribution of signal across all channels prior to quenching of the TMT labeling reaction (0.5 uL 50% hydroxylamine reacted for 15 min). Peptides from each channel were then combined prior to phosphopeptide enrichment, which was performed as previously described. Briefly, 100 µL magnetic titanium(IV) immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (Ti(IV)-IMAC, ReSyn Biosciences) beads were washed three times with 1 mL 80% acetonitrile/6% TFA (all washes were 1 mL).8 Peptides were dissolved in 1 mL 80% acetonitrile/6% TFA and gently vortexed with the TI(IV)-IMAC beads for 45 minutes.  Unbound peptides were kept as flow through for total protein analysis, followed by three 80% acetonitrile/6% TFA, one 80% acetonitrile, one 0.5 M glycolic acid/80% acetonitrile, and two 80% acetonitrile washes. Peptides were eluted with 500 µL 50% acetonitrile, 1% ammonium hydroxide. Both eluate and flow through were dried down in a speed vac and further cleaned up on Strata-X SPE cartridges (Phenomenex) by conditioning the cartridge with 1 mL ACN followed by 1 mL 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water. Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% FA in water and then loaded on to the cartridge, followed by a 1 mL wash with 0.2% FA in water. Peptides were eluted with 400 uL of 0.2% FA in 80% ACN, were dried via lyophilization.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched with the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant using the entire human proteome downloaded from Uniprot (reviewed, 20428 entries). Each separate TMT experiment (resting, activated, and pLac control) was searched separately, with the flow through/total protein triplicate injections labeled as Group0 and False under “PTM” and phosphopeptide enriched triplicate injections labeled as Group1 and True under “PTM”. Group0 had cleavage specificity set to Trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavage allowed and variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus with 4 maximum modifications per peptide. Group1 had cleavage specificity set to Trypsin/P with 3 missed cleavage allowed and variable modifications of phosphorylation on serine/threonine/tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus with 4 maximum modifications per peptide. The experiment type for both Group0 and Group1 was set to Reporter ion MS2 and only TMT channels used (as described above) were selected to be included. The reporter ion mass tolerance was set to 0.3 Da and the minimum reporter PIF score was set to 0.75. Defaults were used for the remaining settings, including PSM and protein FDR thresholds of 0.01 and 20 ppm, 4.5 ppm, and 20 ppm for first search MS1 tolerance, main search MS1 tolerance, and MS2 product ion tolerance, respectively. Match between runs was not enabled. Quantified phosphosites were then processed in Perseus. Contaminants and reverse hits were removed, results were filtered for phosphosites that had localization probabilities > 0.75, and signal in all relevant TMT channels was required. Significance testing was performed using a two-tailed t-test with 250 randomizations, an FDR of 0.01, and an S0 value of 2. Black lines on volcano plots indicate this calculated significance threshold for each experiment, and all further graphing and processing was performed in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammatory pathologies caused by phagocytes lead to numerous debilitating conditions, including chronic pain and blindness due to age-related macular degeneration. Many members of the sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin (Siglec) family are immunoinhibitory receptors whose agonism is an attractive approach for antiinflammatory therapy. Here, we show that synthetic lipid-conjugated glycopolypeptides can insert into cell membranes and engage Siglec receptors in <i>cis</i>, leading to inhibitory signaling. Specifically, we construct a <i>cis</i>-binding agonist of Siglec-9 and show that it modulates mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling in reporter cell lines, immortalized macrophage and microglial cell lines, and primary human macrophages. Thus, these <i>cis</i>-binding agonists of Siglecs present a method for therapeutic suppression of immune cell reactivity.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University


