### Accession
PXD004429

### Title
Role of proteins belonging to the OMP biogenesis machinery for virulence of Yersinia enterocolitica

### Description
The outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria acts as a physical barrier protecting Gram-negative species from harmful environmental influences. At the same time it facilitates the import of nutrients, the export of proteins, the passage of signaling molecules and also harbors proteins associated with virulence. Transmembrane traffic particularly is facilitated by membrane-integral proteins. In order to insert these into the OM, an essential oligomeric membrane-associated protein complex, the beta-barrel assembly machinery (BAM) is required. Being essential for the biogenesis of outer membrane proteins (OMPs) the BAM and also periplasmic chaperones (termed the OMP biogenesis machinery as an entity herein) may serve as attractive targets to develop novel antimicrobial or antiinfective agents. We aimed to elucidate which proteins belonging to the OMP biogenesis machinery have the most important function in granting bacterial fitness, facilitating biogenesis of dedicated virulence factors and determination of overall virulence. To this end we used the enteropathogen Yersinia enterocolitica (Ye) as a model system. We individually knocked out all non-essential components of the BAM (BamB, C and E) as well as the periplasmic chaperones DegP, SurA and Skp. In summary, we found that the most profound phenotypes were produced by the loss of BamB or SurA with both knockouts resulting in significant attenuation or even avirulence of Ye in a mouse infection model. Thus, both BamB and SurA are promising targets for the development of new antimicrobials in the future.

### Sample Protocol
For OM preparation 50 ml of bacterial culture grown at 37°C for 4 h with matched numbers of bacteria cells were used. Cells were harvested and resuspended in 500 µl resuspension buffer (0.2 M Tris, 1 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8). Then 500 µg lysozyme (20 units/µg; MSB) and 3.2 ml water were added and the samples were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. After the addition of lysis buffer (2 % Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris, 10 mM MgCl2, pH8) protoplasts were lysed. Released DNA was digested with 50 µg DNaseI (10 mg/ml, Roche Applied Science). Outer membranes were pelleted by centrifugation at 77.100 x g for 45 min at 4°C. After three washing steps with water, the membranes were resuspended in SDS sample buffer. The OM proteins in the samples were visualized by staining SDS gels with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (Bio-Rad) for 1 h followed by destaining. For recording of images the Odyssey imaging system (Li-Cor Biosciences) was used. Lanes were cut into three slices of comparable size and digested in gel with trypsin. Peptide mixtures were separated on the EasyLC nano-HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Binding and chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed on a 15 cm fused silica emitter with an inner diameter of 75 µm (Proxeon Biosystems),  in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptide mixtures were injected in HPLC solvent A (0.5 % acetic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with an 127 minute segmented gradient of 5–33-50-90 % of HPLC solvent B (80 % acetonitrile in 0.5 % acetic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions were acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 2000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60.000. Accumulation target value of 106 charges was set and the lock mass option was used for internal calibration. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (CID) at the ion accumulation target value of 5000 and default CID settings. The ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 90 s. The resulting peptide fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 55 with integrated Andromeda search engine 56. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Ye serotype O:8 database obtained from Uniprot, containing 4172 protein entries, and 245 commonly observed contaminants. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as the protease with a maximum missed cleavage of two. Oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was defined as a fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (for the survey scan) and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions. A false discovery rate of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein level. The label-free algorithm was enabled, as was the “match between runs” option 57. MaxQuant output table was filtered for OM proteins (lipoproteins and ß-barrel proteins). Fourty-six OM proteins could be identified and were kept for further analysis. Perseus software (version 1.5.0.15), a module from the MaxQuant suite 55, was used for calculation of the significance B (psigB) for each protein ratio (calculated based on averaged LFQ intensities) with respect to the distance of the median of the distribution of all protein ratios as well as its LFQ intensity. All proteins with psigB < 0.05 in a pairwise comparison were considered to be differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence of multiresistant Gram-negative bacteria requires new therapies for combating bacterial infections. Targeting the biogenesis of virulence factors could be an alternative strategy instead of killing bacteria with antibiotics. The outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria acts as a physical barrier. At the same time it facilitates the exchange of molecules and harbors a multitude of proteins associated with virulence. In order to insert proteins into the OM, an essential oligomeric membrane-associated protein complex, the &#xdf;-barrel assembly machinery (BAM) is required. Being essential for the biogenesis of outer membrane proteins (OMPs) the BAM and also periplasmic chaperones may serve as attractive targets to develop novel antiinfective agents. Herein, we aimed to elucidate which proteins belonging to the OMP biogenesis machinery have the most important function in granting bacterial fitness, OM barrier function, facilitating biogenesis of dedicated virulence factors and determination of overall virulence. To this end we used the enteropathogen Yersinia enterocolitica as a model system. We individually knocked out all non-essential components of the BAM (BamB, C and E) as well as the periplasmic chaperones DegP, SurA and Skp. In summary, we found that the most profound phenotypes were produced by the loss of BamB or SurA with both knockouts resulting in significant attenuation or even avirulence of Ye in a mouse infection model. Thus, we assume that both BamB and SurA are promising targets for the development of new antiinfective drugs in the future.

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Outer membrane protein biogenesis, Cell surface molecules

### Affiliations
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Universitätsklinikum Tübingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6 72076 Tübingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Monika Schütz
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Universitätsklinikum Tübingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6 72076 Tübingen Germany


