### Accession
PXD022719

### Title
The tricuspid valve also maladapts as shown in sheep with biventricular heart failure

### Description
Over 1.6 million Americans suffer from significant tricuspid valve leakage. In most cases this leakage is designated as secondary. Thus, valve dysfunction is assumed to be due to valve extrinsic factors. We challenge this paradigm and hypothesize that the tricuspid valve maladapts in those patients rendering the valve at least partially culpable for its dysfunction. As a first step in testing this hypothesis, we set out to demonstrate that the tricuspid valve maladapts in disease. To this end, we induced biventricular heart failure in sheep that developed tricuspid valve leakage. In the anterior leaflets of those animals, we investigated maladaptation on multiple scales. We demonstrated alterations on the protein and cell-level, leading to tissue growth, thickening, and stiffening. These data provide a new perspective on a poorly understood, yet highly prevalent disease. Our findings may motivate novel therapy option for many currently untreated patients with leaky tricuspid valves.

### Sample Protocol
We used TVAL fragments without consideration of localization/region for high-throughput mass spectrometry analyses. We finely minced the tissues and lysed cells at 4 oC in a buffering solution containing 50 mmol/L HEPES (pH=7.4) supplemented with 150 mmol/L sodium chloride, 2 mmol/L dithiothreitol, 1% Igepal and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Active Motif, 100546). We incubated a total of six samples (3 CTL and 3 TIC) with mild agitation at 4 oC for 2 hours. We determined the total protein concentration of each sample by bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo, PI-23252). After quantification, we ethanol precipitated 50 μg of protein from each sample. After precipitation, we re-dissolved the proteins in Laemmli buffer for one-dimensional gel electrophoresis, Coomassie blue staining and in-gel digestion, following a previously published protocol.55 We dehydrated the gel pieces successively in 50% and 100% acetonitrile, and digested the proteins overnight in 0.1 μg sequencing-grade trypsin contained in 50 uL total volume. Finally, we extracted the peptides twice in 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, which we dried to completion in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
We submitted the dried peptides to the University of Texas at Austin CBRS Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility for protein identification by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using the Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC coupled to the Thermo Orbitrap Fusion.56 Prior to HPLC separation, we desalted the peptides using Millipore U-C18 ZipTip pipette tips following the manufacturer’s protocol. We performed a C18 trap column, followed by a 75 µm I.D. x 25 cm long analytical column packed with C18 3 µm material (Thermo Acclaim PepMap 100) running a gradient from 5 - 35% acetonitrile. With a Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry resolution of 120,000, and a 3 second cycle time, we acquired MS/MS in HCD ion trap mode. We uploaded the LC−MS/MS mzXML files MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany) and searched against a protein database of Ovis aries downloaded from UniProt. We used default search parameters in MaxQuant for label-free quantification with a 1% false discovery rate. We selected only the proteins which had at least two replicates of intensity values across all treatment groups for the remaining analyses. With this, we confidently identified a total of 2457 proteins. We normalized intensity values per total protein content, and we set a fold-change of two prior to analysis in the Multi-Experiment Viewer (MeV, TM4 Microarray Software Suite). Using the non-parametric Wilcoxon Rank Sum statistical test to compare proteins in the two groups, we identified 247 significant differentially expressed proteins. We uploaded this list of proteins onto STRING v11 (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins, STRING Consortium) for the generation of protein interaction maps. We further used the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships, http://www.pantherdb.org/) classification system for the identification of Gene Ontologies (GO, http://www.geneontology.org). Refer to Supplementary Table 1 for all protein identifiers, protein family descriptions, and ontology classifications.

### Publication Abstract
Over 1.6 million Americans suffer from significant tricuspid valve leakage. In most cases this leakage is designated as secondary. Thus, valve dysfunction is assumed to be due to valve-extrinsic factors. We challenge this paradigm and hypothesize that the tricuspid valve maladapts in those patients rendering the valve at least partially culpable for its dysfunction. As a first step in testing this hypothesis, we set out to demonstrate that the tricuspid valve maladapts in disease. To this end, we induced biventricular heart failure in sheep that developed tricuspid valve leakage. In the anterior leaflets of those animals, we investigated maladaptation on multiple scales. We demonstrated alterations on the protein and cell-level, leading to tissue growth, thickening, and stiffening. These data provide a new perspective on a poorly understood, yet highly prevalent disease. Our findings may motivate novel therapy options for many currently untreated patients with leaky tricuspid valves.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tricuspid valve

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University
University of Texas Austin

### Submitter
Carla Lacerda

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Rausch
University of Texas Austin


