### Accession
PXD037572

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Eya3 binding partners

### Description
Eyes absent homolog 3 (EYA3) is a transcriptional cofactor that is known to partner with the sine oculis homeobox (SIX) family to regulate gene expression. In this study, we characterized a novel splice isoform of EYA3, including the alternative cassette exon 7 (EYA3+ex7), that becomes more highly expressed compared to the isoform lacking exon 7 (EYA3Δex7) during muscle cell differentiation and muscle development. This developmentally-regulated splicing pattern was evolutionarily conserved in humans, mice, rats, chickens, and zebrafish. We found that EYA3 isoforms are vital to proliferation and differentiation of myoblasts in a cell culture model of myogenesis. To understand the underlying mechanism, we defined the transcriptional networks controlled by EYA3 through RNA-sequencing of EYA3 depleted cells. We then hypothesized that binding partners of EYA3+ex7 and EYA3Δex7 might contribute to the mechanism by which they regulate transcription. An affinity-purification mass spectrometry approach was used to identify binding partners of EYA3 isoforms by heterologous expression of hemagglutinin (HA) tagged isoforms in HEK293T cells. 26 binding partners (defined as those with log2(FC) > 1 and p < 0.05 compared to HA epitope tag control) were shared among the EYA3 isoforms, including five transcription factors: zinc finger and BTB domain containing 1 (ZBTB1), tumor protein p53 (TP53), SIX5, SIX2, and SIX4. We next demonstrated that ZBTB1 and SIX4 share overlapping transcriptional targets with EYA3, indicating that EYA3 partners with ZBTB1 or SIX4 to regulate gene expression. Three and thirteen unique binding partners were discovered for EYA3Δex7 and EYA3+ex7, respectively. Therefore, inclusion of Eya3 exon 7 may allow for unique interactions and contribute to functions of EYA3+ex7 that are distinct from EYA3Δex7. This dataset includes affinity purified data for Eya3 isoforms in HEK293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated protein samples were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion as previously described (Rank et al. 2021). Briefly, after the last wash buffer step during affinity purification, beads were resuspended in 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8). On-bead digestion was performed by adding 1 µg trypsin and incubating, while shaking, overnight at 37°C. The next day, 0.5 µg trypsin was added and incubated at 37°C for an additional 3 h. Beads were pelleted, and supernatants transferred into fresh tubes. The beads were washed twice with 100 µL LC-MS grade water, and washes added to the original supernatants. Samples were acidified by adding formic acid to final concentration of 2%. Peptides were desalted using peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), lyophilized, and stored at -80°C until further analysis.  The peptide samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated over a 2 h method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–45% mobile phase B at a 250 nL/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN). The QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode where the 15 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 300–1600) was set to 120,000, while MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000. The normalized collision energy was set to 27% for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Peptide match was set to preferred, and precursors with unknown charge or a charge state of 1 and ≥ 7 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0) and searched against the reviewed human database (containing 20,203 entries), appended with a contaminants database, using Andromeda within MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed, and methionine oxidation and N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used to filter all data. Match between runs was enabled (5 min match time window, 20 min alignment window), and a minimum of two unique peptides was required for label-free quantitation using the label-free quantitation LFQ intensities. Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) was used for further processing (Tyanova et al. 2016). Only proteins with >1 unique+razor peptide were used for LFQ analysis. Proteins with 50% missing values were removed and missing values were imputed. Log2(FC) ratios were calculated using the averaged log2(LFQ) intensities and students t-test performed for each pair-wise comparison. To control for the pull down of peptides that interact with beads or the HA tag, we performed pull downs on cells transfected with an identical plasmid backbone but containing the HA tag alone (control samples). Proteins with p-value < 0.05 and log2(FC) > 1 compared with those detected in the control samples, and with < 2 hits in the contaminant repository for affinity purification database were considered interactors. Samples 1, 4, 7 = HA Control IP Samples 2, 5, 8 = Eya3 short IP Samples 3, 6, 9 = Eya3 long IP

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Transcription, Eya3, Myogenesis

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, McAllister Heart Institute, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Christine Mills

### Lab Head
Dr Jimena Giudice
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, McAllister Heart Institute, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


