### Accession
PXD016962

### Title
Genome-scale transcription-translation mapping reveals features of Zymomonas mobilis transcription units and promoters

### Description
Limited functional annotation of the Z. mobilis genome is a current barrier to both basic studies of Z. mobilis and its development as a synthetic-biology chassis. To gain insight, we collected sample-matched multiomics data including RNA-seq, transcription start site sequencing (TSS-seq), termination sequencing (term-seq), ribosome profiling, and label-free shotgun proteomic mass spectrometry across different growth conditions to improve annotation and assign functional sites in the Z. mobilis genome. Proteomics and ribosome profiling informed revisions of protein-coding genes, which included 44 start codon changes and 42 added proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 5 minutes at 4C. Cell pellets were lysed by suspension in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl), followed by addition of methanol to 90%. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 5 min at 4 degrees C. Supernatants were discarded and pellets were allowed to air dry for ~5 min. Pellets were resuspended in 200 µL 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP), and 40 mM chloroacetamide, then diluted to 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8. Trypsin was added at an estimated 50:1 ratio, and samples were incubated overnight at ambient temperature.  Each sample was desalted over a PS-DVB solid phase extraction cartridge and dried in vacuo. Peptide mass was assayed with the peptide colorimetric assay. 2 µg of peptides were loaded onto a 75 µm i.d. 30 cm long capillary with an imbedded electrospray emitter and packed with 1.7 µm C18 BEH stationary phase.  The mobile phases used were A: 0.2% formic acid and B: 0.2% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile.  Peptides were eluted with an increasing gradient of acetonitrile from 0% to 53% B over 75 minutes followed by a 5-minute 100% B wash and a 10-minute equilibration in 0% B.  Eluting peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed at R = 240,000 with wide isolation analysis of 300-1,350 mz. Data dependent top speed (1 seconds) MS/MS sampling of peptide precursors was enabled with dynamic exclusion set to 20 s on precursors with charge states 2 to 4. MS/MS sampling was performed with 1.6 Da quadrupole isolation, fragmentation by HCD with NCE of 25, analysis in the ion trap with maximum injection time of 10 msec, and AGC target set to 3 x 104.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4. Spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against a default contaminant database and from revised proteins-coding annotation from our study which were used to update the following Z. mobilis ZM4 GenBank records: CP023715.1, CP023716.1, CP023717.1, CP023718.1, CP023719.1. Label free quantitation (LFQ) and match between runs were toggled on, and ion trap tolerance was set to 0.4 Da.  All other parameters were set by default. Peptides were grouped into subsumable protein groups and filtered to 1% FDR, based on target decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Multiomics, Shotgun proteomics, Zymomonas mobilis

### Affiliations
Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Bacteriology University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 Dept. of Energy Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53726

### Submitter
Jessica Vera

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Landick
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Bacteriology University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706 Dept. of Energy Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53726


