### Accession
PXD008677

### Title
The fourth instar in the silk gland of silkworm LC-MSMS

### Description
In the present study, the silk gland proteomes of the fourth instar and fourth molt were analyzed using liquid chromatography−tandem mass spectrometry. In total, 2654 proteins were identified from the silk gland. High abundance of ribosomal proteins and RR-motif chitin-binding proteins were identified during day 2 of the fourth instar (IV-2) larval developmental stage, and the expression of cuticular proteins analogous to peritrophin (CPAP)-motif chitin-binding proteins was higher during the fourth molt (IV-M). In all, nine enzymes were found to be involved in the chitin regeneration pathway in the silk gland. Among them, two chitinase and two chitin deacetylases were identified as CPAP-motif proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of silk glands were extracted using 9 M LiSCN and then shocked with micro tube mixer for 30 min. The supernatant was recovered by centrifugation (12 000 × g, 10 min, and 4 °C). The extracted protein samples were placed in an ultrafiltration tube (MWCO 10 000; Millipore, USA) and centrifuged at 12 000 × g and 4 °C for 20 min and replaced with urea (8 M). Subsequently, the protein samples were reduced with 1 M dithiotreitol for 120 min at 37 °C, and then alkylated with 1 M iodoacetamide for 60 min in the dark. The protein samples were washed with 8 M urea and then replacemented with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 4 times each. Proteins were digested with trypsin (1/50 μg protein) overnight at 37 °C in 150 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3. Tryptic peptides were obtained by centrifugation and concentrated to dryness and then resuspended in 1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were separated using the Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-Spray column on the Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system. The instrument parameters for MS2 and full MS scans were, respectively, as follows: the resolution was 17,500 and 70,000; the automatic gain control target was 1E6 and 3E6; and the maximum ion injection time was 60 and 20 ms. Three biological replicates were used in this study.The resulting raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.1) [15]. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Uniprot silkworm protein database (http://www.uniprot.org/) containing 18,234 protein sequences. The Andromeda search algorithms were used to perform peptide searches as reported previously [16]. Iodoacetamide derivatives of oxidation and cysteines of methionines were designated as variable modifications. All common reverse hits and contaminants were removed. Based on the sum of peak intensities, the iBAQ algorithm in MaxQuant was used to calculate the protein abundances. To find proteins that were differentially expressed between IV-2 and IV-M, unpaired t tests were used with a signifcance level set at P < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The silk gland of silkworm produces silk proteins during larval development. Many studies have long focused on the silk gland of the fifth instar larvae, but few have investigated this gland at other larval stages. In the present study, the silk gland proteomes of the fourth instar and fourth molt are analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. In total, 2654 proteins are identified from the silk gland. A high abundance of ribosomal proteins and RR-motif chitin-binding proteins is identified during day 2 of the fourth instar (IV-2) larval developmental stage, and the expression of cuticular proteins analogous to peritrophin (CPAP)-motif chitin-binding proteins is higher during the fourth molt (IV-M). In all, nine enzymes are found to be involved in the chitin regeneration pathway in the silk gland. Among them, two chitinase and two chitin deacetylases are identified as CPAP-motif proteins. Furthermore, the expression of CPAP3-G, the most abundant CPAP-motif cuticular protein in the silk gland during the IV-M stage, is investigated using western blot and immunofluorescence analyses; CPAP3-G shows a reverse changing trend with chitin in the silk gland. The findings of this study suggest that CPAP-motif chitin-binding proteins are involved in the degradation of the chitin layer in the silk gland. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008677.

### Keywords
Silkworm，silk gland，lc-msms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology，Southwest  University 

### Submitter
Xiaolu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Qingyou Xia
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing 400716, China


