### Accession
PXD024698

### Title
PROTEOME IMPACT ON MAIZE SILKS UNDER PRIMING STATE INDUCED BY TRICHODERMA ROOT COLONIZATION

### Description
Trichoderma species can stimulate local and distant immune responses in colonized plant tissues to prevent future pathogenic attacks. Priming of plant defenses is characterized by changes on transcriptional, metabolic, and epigenetic states after stimulus perception. We have previously investigated the transcriptional reprogramming in silk tissues from maize plants inoculated with Trichoderma atroviride and challenged with Fusarium verticillioides (Agostini et al 2019). To better understand about the molecular changes induced by T. atroviride in maize, a proteomic approach was conducted in this instance. Several proteins belonging to different metabolic categories were detected as priming involved proteins. However, we detected a very low correlation with those priming-modulated transcripts suggesting the importance of regulatory events posteriori of transcriptional stage to accomplish the final goal of blocking the pathogen entrance. Specifically, we focused on phenylpropanoid pathway; since we detected several proteins that are upregulated in priming state might explain the cell wall reinforcement and, the increase in the content of flavonoids and lignin in silks of maize plants after induced systemic resistance activation.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred microgram of each protein crude extract was precipitated with 1:5 vol of 100% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 hours at 20 ºC, and then centrifuged at maximum speed for 20 min. Pelleted proteins were dissolved in 50 µl of 8 M urea. Denatured proteins were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (45 min at 56 ºC) and treated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (60 min at room temperature in the dark) to prevent disulfide bonds reformation and finally precipitated with TCA (1/5 100 % P/V). Precipitated proteins were set to Center of Biological and Chemical Studies by Mass Spectroscopy (CEQUIBIEM Buenos Aires, Argentina), for further protein identification and quantification. 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8 was used to suspend the proteins that were then digested overnight with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega). Zip-Tip C18 (Merck Millipore) columns were used for desalting. Peptides were separated in a nano-HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000, ThermoScientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer with Orbitrap technology (Q-Exactive with High Collision Dissociation cell and Orbitrap analyser, ThermoScientific). Peptides were ionized by electrospray (ThermoScientific, model EASY-SPRAY).

### Data Protocol
UniprotKB accession number (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/), score, coverage, peptides used for identification, description, area in each biological repetition; as well as other parameters from of each protein obtained from the Proteome Discoverer software. Perseus 1.5.8.5 software was used for statistical analysis of proteomics data. Data were normalized and subjected to manually missing-value imputation. When at least two of the three replicates were missing/zero, they were replaced by the minimum value detected by the mass spectrometer (considered as the detection limit). Instead, when the peptide was detected in two of the three replicates the missing/zero values were left blank. Label-free quantification (LFQ) protein intensities were log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Trichoderma activates plant proteins to counteract Fusarium infection. Comparison between proteomic and transcriptomic data suggests differential response regulation. Proteins from the phenylpropanoid pathway are activated to quickly respond to pathogen attack. Trichoderma species can stimulate local and distant immune responses in colonized plant tissues to prevent future pathogenic attacks. Priming of plant defenses is characterized by changes in transcriptional, metabolic, and epigenetic states after stimulus perception. We have previously investigated transcriptional reprogramming in silk tissues from maize plants inoculated with Trichoderma atroviride and challenged with Fusarium verticillioides (Agostini et al., Mol Plant-Microbe In 32:95-106, 2019). To better understand the molecular changes induced by T. atroviride in maize, a proteomic approach was conducted in this instance. Several proteins belonging to different metabolic categories were detected as priming-involved proteins. However, we detected a very low correlation with those priming-modulated transcripts suggesting the importance of regulatory events a posteriori of the transcriptional process to accomplish the final goal of blocking pathogen entry. Specifically, we focused on the phenylpropanoid pathway, since we detected several proteins that are upregulated in the priming state and might explain cell wall reinforcement as well as the increase in flavonoid and lignin content in maize silks after activation of induced systemic resistance.

### Keywords
Trichoderma, Fusarium, Maize, Induced systemic response

### Affiliations
CEFOBI
Centro de Estudios Fotosintéticos y Bioquímicos (CEFOBI) - Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Tecnológicas (CONICET) - Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Suipacha 531, S2002LRK, Rosario Santa Fe -Argentina

### Submitter
Mariano Alberto Torres Manno

### Lab Head
Dr Valeria A. Campos-Bermudez
Centro de Estudios Fotosintéticos y Bioquímicos (CEFOBI) - Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Tecnológicas (CONICET) - Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Suipacha 531, S2002LRK, Rosario Santa Fe -Argentina


