### Accession
PXD016155

### Title
Optimal Processing for Proteomic Genotyping of Single Human Hairs

### Description
The human hair proteome offers new insight in the field of human identification. Hair often contains DNA that has been degraded due to the process of cornification. The smaller fragments of DNA present a challenge for obtaining useful information concerning the identity of the donor. Proteomic genotyping offers an alternative approach which starts with protein, a biomolecule abundant in the hair shaft. Nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms may be detected in the sequence of these proteins, allowing the inference of SNP genotypes. Population genetics-based information from these genotypes may be used to calculate random match probability or even infer ancestry. The current challenge of this research is to optimize processing chemistry in order to maximize genetic information from a single human hair shaft. Results indicate that optimal conditions for proteomic analysis of a single human hair include 6 hrs of reduction with 100 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature, alkylation with 200 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min, and 6 hrs of digestion with two 1:50 (enzyme:protein) additions of stabilized trypsin at room temperature, with stirring incorporated into all three steps. Our final conditions using optimized temperatures and incubation times for disulfide reduction and protein digestion produced random match probabilities of up to 1 in 624 million from a single hair with a median value of 1 in 1.1 million, compared to a maximum random match probability of 1 in 1380 and a median value of 1 in 24 for the original processing method.

### Sample Protocol
The chemistry for proteomic processing of human hair employs a 14 hr protocol. In this method, 100 μL of a solution of 2% sodium dodecanoate + 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate + 100 mM dithiothreitol was added to each LoBind tube with 2 cm of prepared and cut hair. A cleaned magnetic stir flea was added to the tube and stirred at medium speed for 6 hrs at room temperature. Free thiols were then alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 200 mM, and the solution was stirred in the dark for 45 min. The sample was then acidified to a pH of ~2 using 2 μL of trifluoroacetic acid to precipitate the detergent. Detergent extraction was achieved using three consecutive additions of 175 μL of ethyl acetate. For each extraction, the sample was vortexed and then centrifuged for 3 min at 14000 rcf to minimize the interphase containing denatured protein and/or fragmented hair before pipetting off the upper organic phase. The pH was then adjusted to ~8 using 6.3 μL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and 0.6 μL of ammonium hydroxide. Two 1:50 (enzyme:protein) additions of reductively methylated trypsin were added to the sample, with one addition every 3 hrs, for a total digestion time of 6 hrs. Digests were then centrifuged at 14000 rcf for 15 min, and the supernatant was collected for mass spectral analysis. Samples were analyzed using a ThermoScientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer with builtin Proxeon nanospray and Proxeon Easy-nLC II HPLC. A sample (10 μL) containing 0.75 μg of digested peptide material was loaded on a 100 μm × 25 mm Magic C18 100 Å 5 U reverse phase trap, desalted online and separated over 120 min gradient using a 75 μm × 150 mm Magic C18 200 Å 3 U reverse phase column at 300 nL/min flow rate. The solvent gradient for the elution of peptides began with 5% acetonitrile and increased linearly to 20% acetonitrile at 92 minutes, 32% acetonitrile at 112 minutes, and 80% acetonitrile at 119 minutes. The 80% acetonitrile solvent ratio was maintained for 10 minutes, reduced to 5% at 130 minutes, and held for 10 minutes. MS survey was conducted at the m/z range of 350-1600, and the 15 most abundant ions from the spectra were subjected to higher-energy C-trap dissociation to fragment the precursor peptides and obtain MS/MS spectra. Precursor ions selected in a 1.6 m/z isolation mass window were fragmented via 27% normalized collision energy. A 15 s duration was used for dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted into mzML format using MsConvert GUI software (Proteowizard 2.1, http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net). Files were converted using numpress linear compression and numpress short logged float compression along with peak picking with vendor algorithm for all ms levels. These mzML files were then analyzed using GPM Fury software (X!Tandem Alanine (2016.10.15.2)) using the advanced search option. Default search settings were chosen except for exclusion of prokaryotes and viruses in the taxon heading, peptide and protein log(e) score minimum of -1 and -1 respectively, fragment mass error of 20 ppm, parent mass error of ± 100 ppm, and inclusion of point mutations under the refinement specification heading. A spreadsheet, termed GVP Finder (v1.1), was created to search for GVPs and calculate random match probabilities (RMPs). This spreadsheet can be obtained from the resources menu of https://www.parkerlab.ucdavis.edu. In short, GVPs were searched for by exporting each sample peptide spreadsheet in the GPM Fury software and then were bioinformatically extracted from the list of total identified peptide spectral matches. These GVPs were prescreened to eliminate those that were not unique, defined as not sharing the amino acid sequence from another gene product in the human proteome including variants. Unique sequences that correspond to GVPs were searched for, along with chemical modifications or single amino acid polymorphisms. Genotypic frequencies from the five major populations of the 1000 genomes consortium were consulted to calculate RMP. When combining datasets from three biological replicates of a sample, presence of a GVP was determined by detection in any of the datasets, with no additional weighting for the second identification. RMPs from combined datasets are reported as averaged and not a cumulative probability with higher discrimination.

### Publication Abstract
The use of hair evidence for human identification is undergoing considerable improvement through the adoption of proteomic genotyping. Unlike traditional microscopic comparisons, protein sequencing provides quantitative and empirically based estimates for random match probability. Non-synonymous SNPs are translated as single amino acid polymorphisms and result in genetically variant peptides. Using high resolution mass spectrometry, these peptides can be detected in hair shaft proteins and used to infer the genotypes of corresponding SNP alleles. We describe experiments to optimize the proteomic genotyping approach to individual identification from a single human scalp hair 2&#x202f;cm in length (&#x223c;100&#x202f;&#x3bc;g). This is a necessary step to develop a protocol that will be useful to forensic investigators. To increase peptide yield from hair, and to maximize genetically variant peptide and ancestral information, we examined the conditions for reduction, alkylation, and protein digestion that specifically address the distinctive chemistry of the hair shaft. Results indicate that optimal conditions for proteomic analysis of a single human hair include 6&#x202f;h of reduction with 100&#x202f;mM dithiothreitol at room temperature, alkylation with 200&#x202f;mM iodoacetamide for 45&#x202f;min, and 6&#x202f;h of digestion with two 1:50 (enzyme:protein) additions of stabilized trypsin at room temperature, with stirring incorporated into all three steps. Our final conditions using optimized temperatures and incubation times increased the average number of genetically variant peptides from 20&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;5 to 73&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;5 (p&#x202f;=&#x202f;1&#x202f;&#xd7;&#x202f;10<sup>-13</sup>), excluding intractable hair samples. Random match probabilities reached up to 1 in 620 million from a single hair with a median value of 1 in 1.1 million, compared to a maximum random match probability of 1 in 1380 and a median value of 1 in 24 for the original hair protein extraction method. Ancestral information was also present in the data. While the number of genetically variant peptides detected were equivalent for both European and African subjects, the estimated random match probabilities for inferred genotypes of European subjects were considerably smaller in African reference populations and vice versa, resulting in a difference in likelihood ratios of 6.8 orders of magnitude. This research will assure uniformity in results across different biogeographic backgrounds and enhance the use of novel peptide analysis in forensic science by helping to optimize genetically variant peptide yields and discovery. This work also introduces two algorithms, GVP Finder and GVP Scout, which facilitate searches, calculate random match probabilities, and aid in discovery of genetically variant peptides.

### Keywords
Hair, Proteomic genotyping, Sample processing, Forensic science, Genetically variant peptides

### Affiliations
Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, USA
UC Davis

### Submitter
Glendon Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Glendon John Parker
Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, USA


