### Accession
PXD011278

### Title
Lactobacillus Membrane Vesicles

### Description
Bacterial membrane vesicles have been implicated in a broad range of functions in microbial communities from pathogenesis to gene transfer. Though first thought to be a phenomenon associated with Gram-negative bacteria, vesicle production in Staphylococcus aureus, Lactobacillus plantarum, and other Gram-positives has recently been described. Here we characterize MVs from three different Lactobacillus species (L. acidophilus, L. casei, and L. reuteri), determining that the size and protein composition of Lactobacillus-derived MVs have both similarities and differences with those produced by Gram-negative bacteria. Using proteomics, we identified more than 80 protein components from Lactobacillus-derived MVs, including some that were enriched in the vesicles themselves. For each species, vesicular proteins were categorized based on biological pathway and examined for subcellular localization signals in an effort to identify possible sorting mechanisms for MV proteins. Additionally, differences between MVs of other Lactobacillus species and Gram positive bacteria were highlighted. Information in this study will assist in elucidation of the formation and functions of MVs, as well as the development of therapeutic tools for vaccines, diagnosis, and therapeutic delivery.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate biological samples of MVs and bacterial pellets from L. acidophilus, L. casei, and L. reuteri were harvested at 60 h. Pellets were lysed using OneShot (Constant Systems Ltd., Daventry, UK) at 40 kpsi pressure in 10% n-propanol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in a 10 mL suspension. The instrument was then washed with 10 mL ABC, the lysate and wash were combined, and then evaporated via speed-vac. Samples were normalized by total protein content to 100 µg prior digestion using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). All samples were digested in solution with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a 1:30 w/w enzyme to substrate ratio in a barocycler (Pressure Biosciences Inc., Easton, MA) for 90 min (90 cycles: 50 s on at 20 kpsi, 10 s off). Digested samples (150 µL) were evaporated via speed-vac. MVs were solubilized in 10% n-propanol, digested in solution and dried as described above for pellets. All dried samples were stored at -20 °C until they were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Immediately prior to analysis, samples were solubilized in solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in HPLC grade water) and 10 µL of sample (~50 µg of total protein) was injected into the LC-MS/MS system (Tempo-MDLC coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer - Sciex, Foster City, CA). Peptides were loaded for 15 min in 5% solvent B ((0.1% FA in acetonitrile) and 95% solvent A, separated on two eksigent C18 Chrom XP columns (150 x 0.3 mm, 120 A) connected in a row using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B in the rate of 0.52% per minute. The 180 min LC method also included 10 min column wash at 80% B and re-equilibration of the columns with the starting condition at 5% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Quantitative analysis (t-test and fold change calculation) was done in Scaffold using weighted spectra as an input. Only spectra satisfying the probability settings were considered for the analysis (lower scoring matches and probabilities <5% were not included). More detailed methods for Proteomics analysis are provided in Supplemental Information. In order to avoid divide-by-zero errors caused the absence of proteins in the MVs or pellet in fold change calculations, we set missing values to 0.3, as previously described. t-test, fold change, and other calculations were performed on normalized weighted spectral counts using Scaffold and in-house R and Python scripts were used for principal component analysis, database mining, and annotation.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial membrane vesicles have been implicated in a broad range of functions in microbial communities from pathogenesis to gene transfer. Though first thought to be a phenomenon associated with Gram-negative bacteria, vesicle production in Staphylococcus aureus, Lactobacillus plantarum, and other Gram-positives has recently been described. Given that many Lactobacillus species are Generally Regarded as Safe and often employed as probiotics, the engineering of Lactobacillus membrane vesicles presents a new avenue for the development of therapeutics and vaccines. Here we characterize and compare the membrane vesicles (MVs) from three different Lactobacillus species (L. acidophilus ATCC 53544, L. casei ATCC 393, and L. reuteri ATCC 23272), with the aim of developing future strategies for vesicle engineering. We characterize the vesicles from each Lactobacillus species comparing the physiochemical properties and protein composition of each. More than 80 protein components from Lactobacillus-derived MVs were identified, including some that were enriched in the vesicles themselves suggesting vesicles as a vehicle for antimicrobial delivery. Additionally, for each species vesicular proteins were categorized based on biological pathway and examined for subcellular localization signals in an effort to identify possible sorting mechanisms for MV proteins.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Lactobacillus

### Affiliations
Center for Bio/Molecular Science & Engineering (Code 6900), US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington DC, USA
Naval Research Laboratory

### Submitter
Scott Dean

### Lab Head
Dr Scott A. Walper
Center for Bio/Molecular Science & Engineering (Code 6900), US Naval Research Laboratory, Washington DC, USA


