### Accession
PXD023506

### Title
Sexual dimorphism in zebrafish heart associated proteins

### Description
In the present study we used a proteomic approach to identify and quantify protein abundance differences between male and female zebrafish heart to explore, at the molecular level, any possible sex-biased differences in the heart as the central part of the cardiovascular system for this model organism. The results from the study provide a novel and wide proteome resource, which could be further used to study the role of the identified proteins in the cardiovascular system in both sexes. Furthermore, we hope that this study may open a new window towards the development of sex and gender-based drugs and it establishes sex as a factor to be considered when designing toxicological experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Two years old cohort adult male and female zebrafish Danio rerio (wild type AB line) were used. Fish were placed in an aquarium containing 60 L freshwater with continuous aeration and consistent temperature for two weeks. Fish were fed with a commercial diet (Tetra Werke, Melle, Germany) supplemented with frozen live feed.  Fish were anaesthetized in ice water, killed by severing the spinal cord, dissected and hearts, consisting of bulbous arteriosus, ventricle, and atrium, were removed. Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen (-196 °C) and stored at -80 °C until further proteomics analysis.  Protein extraction and in-gel digestion: Samples were homogenized in 1% SDS on ice using a probe sonicator (Branson Ultrasound Corporation, USA). Samples were centrifuged at 16100 rcf for 30 min and supernatants were separated and kept at -80°C. Protein concentration was determined using Micro-Lowry Assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich, USA).   One hundred micrograms of protein from each sample was individually mixed with Laemmli sample buffer (BioRAD, USA) mixed with 5% beta-mercaptoethanol and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Samples were run as long as needed to allow them to pass the stacking gel and to enter into the running gel  (12% SDS-PAGE, Criterion Precast TGX Gels, BioRad, USA). After gel staining, using GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Scientific, Germany), lanes were cut into fragments, destained (50% acetonitrile (ACN), 25 mM NH4HCO3), and dried using a Speed-Vac (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 56 °C for 1 h and 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at room temperature in darkness, respectively. Gels were washed 3 times using 100 mM NH4HCO3 followed by ACN and then dried in Speed-Vac. Porcine modified trypsin (Promega, USA) at a concentration of 12.5 ng/μl in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the gel pieces. Samples were kept for 30 min at 4°C prior to overnight incubation at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by 30 min incubation in 5% formic acid (FA) and 70% ACN at room temperature for 3 times. A fourth extraction was performed using 100% ACN for 10 min. All four extracts were combined together, and each sample volume was reduced to dryness using speed-vac.  Mass spectrometry: Samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA and loaded onto an EASY-nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The analytical column was 15 cm long fused silica capillary (75 μm* 16 cm Pico Tip Emitter, New Objective, USA) packed in house with C18 material ReproSil-Pur 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated using an 80 min gradient from 5% to 90% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The nanoLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) operated in positive ion mode for data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The Orbitrap acquired the full MS scan with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3x106 ions and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Each MS scan was acquired at high-resolution (120,000 full width half maximum (FWHM)) at m/z 200 in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 375-15000 Da. The 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation (collision energy: 34V) with dynamic exclusion for 40 seconds. Fragmentation was performed at high resolution (15,000 FWHM) for a target of 1x105 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The Xcalibur software v3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) controlled the nanoLC system, the mass spectrometer and was used to acquire the raw data.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to mzML (Chambers et al., 2012) and MGF  (http://www.matrixscience.com) format using Proteowizard version 3.0.11841. MS features were detected using Dinosaur version 1.1.3, (Teleman et al., 2016) and the files were uploaded to Proteios Software Environment version 2.20-dev, build 4643 (Häkkinen et al., 2009) for further processing. MS/MS peptide identification was performed using MS-GF+ (v2016.06.29) and X!Tandem (Alanine 2017.2.1.4, http://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/) and the results were combined and filtered in Proteios. Search settings were precursor tolerance 7 ppm, and fragment tolerance 0.02 Da. Target database was the UniProt Zebrafish proteome as of 26th November 2018, expanded with an equal number decoy (reverse) protein entries. Modifications were: fixed Carbamidomethylation of C and variable oxidation of M and acetylation of protein N-termini. Identifications passing a peptide-spectrum-match false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.002 in any of the sample files were matched to features if the MS/MS identification passed FDR<0.1 in the present file. Feature identities were subsequently matched between runs and propagated using default settings. The table with identified peptide features was exported and used for protein roll-up using a python implementation of RRollup (Karpievitch et al., 2009). One of the female samples was discarded before subsequent quantitative analyses due to potential contamination, leaving 6 vs 5 samples for further analyses. Protein abundance values were normalized and log2 transformed using Cyclic Loess normalisation in NormalyzerDE (version 1.1.13) (Wilforss et al., 2019). The transformed data was used for empirical bayes moderated t-test (LIMMA) between the male and female samples in NormalyzerDE, with Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment of p-values which will be referred as q-value hereafter.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Proteomics, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice

### Submitter
Hamid Niksirat

### Lab Head
Dr Fredrik Levander
Department of Immunotechnology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


