### Accession
PXD010367

### Title
Cell wall proteome of wheat developing grain

### Description
The aim of this project is to highlight cell wall proteome of wheat developing at a key stage of its development (=250 GDD, start of grain filling with storage compounds).  It's the first study in which endosperm were separated of outer layers in order to gain more information about the mechanisms of cell wall assembly and remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Grains were harvested at 250 GDD and dissected by hand in order to separate endosperm from outer layers. Protein extracts were obtained following a protocol based on two steps : first, the sub-cellular fractionation of cell walls by centrifugation in increasing sucrose gradient. Second, the extraction of proteins by successive washes in acetate buffer pH 4.6 supplemented with 0.2 M CaCl2 or 2 M LiCl. After that protein extracts were loaded on 1DE precast gels (12%) and briefly separated. Then, each lane was cut in five fragments prior to an “in-gel” tryptic digestion. MS/MS acquisition were performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap VELOS mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoscale LC system.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using X!Tandem pipeline to do the inference of proteins.  The Uniprot databank restricted to "Triticum aestivum" was used to do proteins identification. To identify cell wall proteins (CWPs) the pipeline "ProtAnnDB" was used (http://www.polebio.lrsv.ups-tlse.fr/ProtAnnDB/). This pipeline gather several softwares to annotate proteins as "SignalP" or "TargetP" and "PFAM" or "Interpro".

### Publication Abstract
The remodeling of cell wall polysaccharides is controlled by cell wall proteins (CWPs) during the development of wheat grain. This work describes for the first time the cell wall proteomes of the endosperm and outer layers of the wheat developing grain, which have distinct physiological functions and technological uses. Altogether 636 nonredundant predicted CWPs are identified with 337 proteins in the endosperm and 594 proteins in the outer layers, among which 295 proteins are present in both tissues, suggesting both common and tissue specific remodeling activities. These proteins are distributed into eight functional classes. Approximatively a quarter of them were predicted to act on cell wall polysaccharides, with many glycosylhydrolases and also expansin, lyases, and carbohydrate esterases. Therefore, these results provide crucial data to go further in the understanding of relationship between tissue-specific morphogenesis and cell wall remodeling in cereals. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010367.

### Keywords
Wheat grain, Cell wall

### Affiliations
INRA
INRA Département CEPIA Unité BIA Equipe PVPP

### Submitter
Mehdi CHERKAOUI

### Lab Head
Dr Fabienne GUILLON
INRA Département CEPIA Unité BIA Equipe PVPP


