### Accession
PXD005732

### Title
Gram negative promiscuous lipoproteins keep surface topology when transplanted from one species to another and can deliver foreign polypeptides to the bacterial surface

### Description
In Gram negative bacteria outer membrane-associated lipoproteins caneither face the periplasm orprotrude out of the bacterial surface. The mechanisms involved in lipoprotein transport through the outer membrane are not fully elucidated. A group of lipoproteins reach the surface by using species-specific transport machineries. By contrast, a still poorly characterized group, we referred to as “promiscuous lipoproteins”, appears to cross the outer membrane using transport systems conserved among diderms. To provide further evidence of the existence of promiscuous lipoproteins,we tested the expression and compartmentalization in E. coli of three surface-exposed lipoproteins, twofrom Neisseria meningitidis (Nm-fHbp and NHBA) andone fromAggregatibacteractinomycetemcomitans (Aa-fHbp). We found that the three lipoproteins werelipidated and compartmentalized in E. coliouter membrane and in Outer Membrane Vesicles (OMVs). Furthermore, FACS analysis,proteolytic surface shaving, and confocal microscopy revealed that the three proteins were also exposed on the external side of the outer membrane. Removal or substitution of the first four amino acids following the lipidated Cysteine residue and extensive deletions of the C-terminal regions in Nm-fHbp did not prevent the protein from reaching the external side of the outer membrane. Heterologous polypeptides fused to the C termini of the proteins are efficiently transported to the E. coli surface and efficiently compartmentalized in OMVs. These data indicate that promiscuous lipoproteins travel from the cytoplasm to the cell surface using conserved mechanisms and when transplanted from one species to another they maintain their natural topology without the need of ancillary transport machineries. Furthermore such proteins can be exploited in biotechnological applications requiring the decoration of Gram negative bacterial surface with foreign polypeptides.

### Sample Protocol
OMVs samples were resuspended in denaturaturing buffer containing 7M Urea, 2M Tiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 1% (w/v) DTE, and 2% (v/v) TritonX100, then precipitated in cold acetone (1:4) overnight at -20°C.  After centrifugation at 15000 xg at 4°C for 15 min protein pellets were resuspended in 350 μl of denaturation buffer and 2% (v/v) carrier ampholyte and separated by 2-DE. Protein identification was carried out by peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF). Spots of interest were manually excised from silver stained MS-preparative gels, destained, and acetonitrile dehydrated. After spot rehydration in trypsin solution (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), in-gel protein digestion was performed by an overnight incubation at 37 °C. 0.75 μl of each protein digestion was directly spotted onto the MALDI target and air-dried. Then, 0.75 μl of matrix solution (a solution of 5mg/ml alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycynnamic acid in 50% v/v acetonitrile and 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) was added to the dried samples and allowed to dry again. Mass spectra were acquired using an Ultraflex III MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA), equipped with a 200 Hz smartbeam™ I laser, in reflector positive mode with a laser frequency set to 100 Hz.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed by Flex Analysis software v.3.0. Calibration of acquired spectra was provided using, as internal standard, the 842.509 and 2211.105 m/z peptides originating from trypsin autoproteolysis. The resulting mass lists were filtered for contaminant removal: mass matrix-related ions, trypsin auto-lysis and keratin peaks. PMF searching was carried out in Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL database (version 2016_07; 551705 sequences; 197114987 residues) set for Escherichia coli using Mascot (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK, http://www.matrixscience.com) on-line available software. The experimental and theoretical peptide fingerprinting patterns Δmass was less than 100 ppm, and trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme with one allowed missed cleavage. Alkylation of cysteine by carbamidomethylation was assumed as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine as possible modification. The parameter used to accept identifications was the probabilistic score greater than 56 (p<0.05). The number of matched peptides and the extend of sequence coverage were considered to evaluate the presence of protein fragments (N-, C-, or central fragment)

### Publication Abstract
In Gram-negative bacteria, outer membrane-associated lipoproteins can either face the periplasm or protrude out of the bacterial surface. The mechanisms involved in lipoprotein transport through the outer membrane are not fully elucidated. Some lipoproteins reach the surface by using species-specific transport machinery. By contrast, a still poorly characterized group of lipoproteins appears to always cross the outer membrane, even when transplanted from one organism to another. To investigate such lipoproteins, we tested the expression and compartmentalization in <i>E. coli</i> of three surface-exposed lipoproteins, two from <i>Neisseria meningitidis</i> (Nm-fHbp and NHBA) and one from <i>Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans</i> (Aa-fHbp). We found that all three lipoproteins were lipidated and compartmentalized in the <i>E. coli</i> outer membrane and in outer membrane vesicles. Furthermore, fluorescent antibody cell sorting analysis, proteolytic surface shaving, and confocal microscopy revealed that all three proteins were also exposed on the surface of the outer membrane. Removal or substitution of the first four amino acids following the lipidated cysteine residue and extensive deletions of the C-terminal regions in Nm-fHbp did not prevent the protein from reaching the surface of the outer membrane. Heterologous polypeptides, fused to the C termini of Nm-fHbp and NHBA, were efficiently transported to the <i>E. coli</i> cell surface and compartmentalized in outer membrane vesicles, demonstrating that these lipoproteins can be exploited in biotechnological applications requiring Gram-negative bacterial surface display of foreign polypeptides.

### Keywords
2d-page, Escherichia coli, Proteomics, Omv, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Dept. Life Sciences, University of Siena,
Italy
Lab. Functional Proteomics, Dept Life Sciences, University of Siena, Italy

### Submitter
Luca Bini

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Bini
Lab. Functional Proteomics, Dept Life Sciences, University of Siena, Italy


