### Accession
PXD032160

### Title
Mitochondrial dynamics in ovarian granulosa cells during follicular growth and in human KGN cells

### Description
In the ovary, proliferation and differentiation of granulosa cells (GCs) drive the growth of follicles. This is, in part, dependent on gonadotropins. Our immunohistochemical studies provided hints of mitochondrial biogenesis and intracellular redistribution in GCs of growing follicles. A cellular model, human KGN cells (granulosa cell tumor cells, derived from growing follicles) was used to study aspects of mitochondrial dynamics. To elevate cAMP and thereby mimic gonadotropin actions, forskolin (FSK) was used, which increased KGN cell size and mitochondrial DNA within 24 h. MitoTracker experiments and ultrastructural 3D reconstruction revealed that FSK treatment induced the formation of elaborate mitochondrial networks. H89, a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor, reduced network formation. A proteomic analysis indicated that FSK among others elevated levels of regulators of the cytoskeleton and the steroidogenic enzyme CYP11A1, located in mitochondria, was more than 3-fold increased, implying that cAMP/PKA-associated structural changes go in parallel with the acquisition of steroidogenic competence of mitochondria in KGN cells. In summary, in situ observations showed increases in mitochondria and suggested intracellular trafficking in GCs during follicular growth and indicated that they may partially be under the control of gonadotropins/cAMP. In line with this, elevation of cAMP in KGN profoundly affected mitochondria dynamics in a PKA-dependent manner and implicated cytoskeletal changes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (KGN 50 µM FSK for 24 h and solvent control EtOH, n = 3) were processed using the Preomics iST-kit as recommended by the manufacturer. For LC-MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm analytical column (75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 100-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_P000005640_Hsapiens_190109.fasta; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as differential if their MaxQuant log2 fold change LFQ values were higher than log2 2.

### Publication Abstract
In the ovary, proliferation and differentiation of granulosa cells (GCs) drive follicular growth. Our immunohistochemical study in a non-human primate, the Rhesus monkey, showed that the mitochondrial activity marker protein cytochrome c oxidase subunit 4 (COX4) increases in GCs in parallel to follicle size, and furthermore, its intracellular localization changes. This suggested that there is mitochondrial biogenesis and trafficking, and implicates the actions of gonadotropins, which regulate follicular growth and ovulation. Human KGN cells, i.e. granulosa tumour cells, were therefore used to study these possibilities. To robustly elevate cAMP, and thereby mimic the actions of gonadotropins, we used forskolin (FSK). FSK increased the cell size and the amount of mitochondrial DNA of KGN cells within 24&#x2009;h. As revealed by MitoTracker&#x2122; experiments and ultrastructural 3D reconstruction, FSK treatment induced the formation of elaborate mitochondrial networks. H89, a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor, reduced the network formation. A proteomic analysis indicated that FSK elevated the levels of regulators of the cytoskeleton, among others (data available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032160). The steroidogenic enzyme CYP11A1 (Cytochrome P450 Family 11 Subfamily A Member 1), located in mitochondria, was more than 3-fold increased by FSK, implying that the cAMP/PKA-associated structural changes occur in parallel with the acquisition of steroidogenic competence of mitochondria in KGN cells. In summary, the observations show increases in mitochondria and suggest intracellular trafficking of mitochondria in GCs during follicular growth, and indicate that they may partially be under the control of gonadotropins and cAMP. In line with this, increased cAMP in KGN cells profoundly affected mitochondrial dynamics in a PKA-dependent manner and implicated cytoskeletal changes.

### Keywords
Ovary, Kgn, Mitochondrial dynamics, Forskolin, Granulosa cells, Camp

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
BMC, Zellbiologie, Anatomie III Großhaderener Strasse 9 D-82152 Planegg Germany

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. med. Artur Mayerhofer
BMC, Zellbiologie, Anatomie III Großhaderener Strasse 9 D-82152 Planegg Germany


