### Accession
PXD002474

### Title
MMP10 degradomics in keratinocytes

### Description
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are important players in skin homeostasis, wound repair, and in the pathogenesis of skin cancer. One member – MMP10 – is specifically expressed in wound keratinocytes and in epithelial cancer cells, but its function is unclear and epidermal substrates are poorly characterized. To unravel the role of MMP10 in the skin, we employed Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS), an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics technique for the discovery of protease substrates and their cleavage sites, to monitor MMP10-dependent proteolysis over time in secretomes from keratinocytes. By time-resolved abundance clustering of neo-N termini we revealed a cleavage site specificity preference of MMP10 for glutamate in the P1 position and identified the α6 integrin subunit, cysteine-rich angiogenic inducer 61 and dermokine as novel MMP10 substrates. Moreover, we confirmed the same MMP10-dependent processing of dermokine in vivo by TAILS analysis of epidermis from transgenic mice that overexpress a constitutively active mutant of MMP10 in basal keratinocytes. Since these substrates have been associated with cell adhesion, differentiation and senescence, MMP10 might contribute to modulation of these processes during skin repair.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: 1.) 20110812_MPK: Cell culture supernatants from matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 10 deficient immortalized mouse primary keratinocytes that had been incubated with recombinant human MMP10 as test protease for 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 hours or buffer alone (0 and 16 hours controls) were subjected to 8plex-iTRAQ-TAILS analysis. Labeling scheme: 113: 0h control, 114: 1h, 115: 2h, 116: 4h, 117: 8h, 118: 12h, 119: 16h, 121: 16h control. 2.) 20131004_K14_MMP10_epidermis: Epidermal lysates were prepared from K14-MMP10 transgenic mice (tg) and wild-type (wt) control littermates (n=2) and analyzed by 4plex-iTRAQ-TAILS in a single experiment. Labeling scheme: 114: wt1, 115: wt2, 116: tg1, 117: tg2.  Peptide fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixtures from both prior and after enrichment for protein N termini were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography. Pooled peptide fractions were either analyzed on (i) an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Eksigent-Nano-HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA) (8plex-iTRAQ-TAILS, 8plex) or on (ii) a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an ultra high-pressure nano-LC system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Fischer Scientific) combined with an ESI nanospray source (Digital PicoView, New Objective, Woburn, MA) (4plex-iTRAQ-TAILS, 4plex). Peptides were loaded onto a self-made tip column (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with C18 material (AQ, 3 μm 200 Å, Bischoff GmbH, Leonberg, Germany) and separated at a flow rate of 250nL/min with a linear gradient from 8 to 30% of Buffer B within 60 min (8plex) or at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 2 to 37% Buffer B within 120 min (4plex). Buffer A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid. Buffer B: 100% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid. Full scan MS spectra (8plex: 300-1700 m/z; 4plex: 400-2000 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 30 k (8plex) or 70 k (4plex) after accumulation to a target value of 1E6. 8plex: Collision induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS spectra were recorded in a data-dependent manner in the ion trap from the eight most intense signals using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% with an activation time of 10 ms. For the detection of iTRAQ reporter ions, the same precursors were selected again for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a NCE of 45%, and the spectra were recorded at a resolution of 7500 at 400 m/z. 4plex: HCD MS/MS spectra with fixed first mass 100 m/z for the 15 most abundant precursor ions were recorded at a resolution of 17.5 k applying an AGC target value of 2E5 and a maximum IT of 120 ms. Precursors were isolated using a window of 2 m/z and fragmented at 30% NCE. The underfill ratio of the orbitrap mass analyzer was set to 5% and precursor ions below the intensity threshold of 8.3E4 were excluded from fragmentation. Precursor ions (4plex and 8plex) with unassigned or single charge states were rejected and precursor masses already selected for MS/MS were excluded for further selection for 10 s (8plex) or 45 s (4plex).

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Mascot Distiller v2.4.3.3 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used to extract peak lists from raw files and for merging of corresponding CID/HCD spectra pairs (8plex). Peak lists (mgf) were searched by Mascot v2.4.1 search engine against a mouse UniProtKB database (release 2014_03; 50807 entries), to which reversed decoy sequences as well as sequences for common contaminants had been added and with following parameters: semi-Arg-C for enzyme specificity allowing up to 1 missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl(C), iTRAQ(K) as fixed modifications; acetyl(N-term), iTRAQ(N-term), pyroQ(N-term), and oxidation(M) as variable modifications; parent mass error at 10 ppm, fragment mass error at 0.8 Da (Q Exactive: 0.02 Da). The Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.8, rev 0, Build 201501131705) was used to secondary validate Mascot search results and to compile a single peptide list from all peptide fractions obtained from both samples (with and without N-terminal enrichment). First, data were processed by PeptideProphet setting the ‘minimum peptide length’ to 7, applying ‘accurate mass binning (PPM)’, omitting the ‘NTT model’, ‘leaving alone all entries with asterisked score values’ (4plex only), and using ‘decoy hits to pin down the negative distribution’. Next, iProphet was employed for additional validation, and only peptides with an iProphet probability of ≥ 0.9 (corresponding to an error rate of < 1%) were included in subsequent analyses. For relative quantification iTRAQ reporter ion intensities were extracted from mgf files using a modified version of i-Tracker with a mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and purity corrections supplied by the iTRAQ manufacturer and assigned to filtered peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are important players in skin homeostasis, wound repair, and in the pathogenesis of skin cancer. It is now well established that most of their functions are related to processing of bioactive proteins rather than components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). MMP10 is highly expressed in keratinocytes at the wound edge and at the invasive front of tumors, but hardly any non-ECM substrates have been identified and its function in tissue repair and carcinogenesis is unclear. To better understand the role of MMP10 in the epidermis, we employed multiplexed iTRAQ-based Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) and monitored MMP10-dependent proteolysis over time in secretomes from keratinocytes. Time-resolved abundance clustering of neo-N termini classified MMP10-dependent cleavage events by efficiency and refined the MMP10 cleavage site specificity by revealing a so far unknown preference for glutamate in the P1 position. Moreover, we identified and validated the integrin alpha 6 subunit, cysteine-rich angiogenic inducer 61 and dermokine as novel direct MMP10 substrates and provide evidence for MMP10-dependent but indirect processing of phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein 1. Finally, we sampled the epidermal proteome and degradome in unprecedented depth and confirmed MMP10-dependent processing of dermokine in vivo by TAILS analysis of epidermis from transgenic mice that overexpress a constitutively active mutant of MMP10 in basal keratinocytes. The newly identified substrates are involved in cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, and/or differentiation, indicating a contribution of MMP10 to local modulation of these processes during wound healing and cancer development. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002474.

### Keywords
Degradomics, Keratinocytes, Itraq-tails, Skin, Mmp10

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich


