### Accession
PXD003925

### Title
Spatial and temporal proteomic of HCMV-infected cells

### Description
Project for the study of spatial and temporal alterations in organelle proteins during HCMV infection. Two datasets are included, one for label-free quantification and one for TMT quantification. Samples were collected at 5 time points of infection (24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hours) and subject to organelle fractionation. One non-infected sample was included for the label-free analysis, and 5 non-infected samples (one per time point) were included for the TMT dataset. The nucleus and cytosolic fractions were removed by differential centrifugation, leaving a crude organelle fraction. The crude organelle fraction was further fractionated by density gradient ultracentrifugation into sicx fractions.

### Sample Protocol
For the label-free dataset, Organelle fraction pellets were prepared for in-gel digestion. Briefly, equal proportions from each sample were resuspended in LDS sample buffer, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and separated by PAGE for 3 min. Gel lanes were cut into 1mm pieces for a total of 6 fractions per lane. Proteins were digested overnight with 20ul MS-grade trypsinsolution (12.5ng/?l trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate). Peptides were desalted using StageTips with Empore C18 discs followed by nanoliquid chromatography tandem MS (nLC-MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nRSLC coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoFischer).  For the TMT dataset, Organelle pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (0.1M ammonium bicarbonate, 2.5%(w/v) sodium deoxycolate, 10mM pH neutral TCEP, 40mM choloroacetamide) and protein concentration was measured by bicinchoninic acid assay. Chloroacetamide was quenched with 40mM cysteine and 100?g of proteins were diluted 1:2.5 in water containing 2?g of MS-grade trypsin for overnight digestion. Ethyl acetate was used to extract detergents, followed by C18 Stage-Tip clean-up as above. TMT labeling of each organelle fraction was performed using the TMT sixplex label set (40?g TMT in 50mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.0) for 1hr. TMT was quenched with hydroxylamide, and peptides were subject to a 2-dimensional off-line fractionation by sequential StageTip with Empore SCX and  SDB-RPS discs (3M) into a total of 13 fractions.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification and quantification of the label-free and TMT dataset, Maxquant version 1.5.0.0 and 1.5.2.8 were used, respectively. Spectra were searched against the human subset of the UniProt protein sequence database, appended with herpesvirus sequences and common sample contaminants. PSM and protein identification probabilities were set to an FDR of 1%, using reverse decoy sequences.

### Publication Abstract
The organelles within a eukaryotic host are manipulated by viruses to support successful virus replication and spread of infection, yet the global impact of viral infection on host organelles is poorly understood. Integrating microscopy, subcellular fractionation, mass spectrometry, and functional analyses, we conducted a cell-wide study of organelles in primary fibroblasts throughout the time course of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection. We used label-free and isobaric-labeling proteomics to characterize nearly 4,000 host and 100 viral proteins, then classified their specific subcellular locations over time using machine learning. We observed a global reorganization of proteins across the secretory pathway, plasma membrane, and mitochondria, including reorganization and processing of lysosomal proteins into distinct&#xa0;subpopulations and translocations of individual proteins between organelles at specific time points. We also demonstrate that MYO18A, an unconventional myosin that translocates from the plasma membrane to the viral assembly complex, is necessary for efficient HCMV replication. This study provides a comprehensive resource for understanding host and virus biology during HCMV pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Hcmv spatial organelle temporal cytomegalovirus fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Molecular Biology Department, Princeton University, Princeton, USA

### Submitter
Pierre Jean Beltran

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Molecular Biology Department, Princeton University, Princeton, USA


