### Accession
PXD039379

### Title
Cx32 surface expression (wildtype vs. mutants) - HeLa cells

### Description
Cx32 wildtype and mutants (W3S, R22G) were expressed in HeLa cells and subjected to surface biotinylation to check for expression level differences between the different conditions. A CFP control was conducted.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared according to the manufacturer's protocol (Thermo Scientific Pierce Cell Surface Biotinylation and Isolation Kit) and eluted with Western Blot conditions. The samples were further processed with ProtiFi S-Trap micro columns according to the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were dried and reconstituted in 5% ACN, 0.1% FA with the addition of iRT peptides (Biognosys). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed C18 column with a linear gradient of 3-30% B (A: 0.1% FA in water, B: 95% ACN, 0.1% FA) and measured on a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. All samples were measured in DIA with a 41 window method with 1 m/z overlap, pooled samples of each condition were measured in DDA.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with Spectronaut v. 15.7. Libraries were generated from pooled samples. Non-biotinylated samples were analyzed with directDIA. CAMthiopropanoylation was included as a variable modification. Data was further analyzed in R.

### Publication Abstract
In myelinating Schwann cells, connection between myelin layers is mediated by gap junction channels (GJCs) formed by docked connexin 32 (Cx32) hemichannels (HCs). Mutations in Cx32 cause the X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT1X), a degenerative neuropathy without a cure. A molecular link between Cx32 dysfunction and CMT1X pathogenesis is still missing. Here, we describe the high-resolution cryo-electron cryo-myography (cryo-EM) structures of the Cx32 GJC and HC, along with two CMT1X-linked mutants, W3S and R22G. While the structures of wild-type and mutant GJCs are virtually identical, the HCs show a major difference: In the W3S and R22G mutant HCs, the amino-terminal gating helix partially occludes the pore, consistent with a diminished HC activity. Our results suggest that HC dysfunction may be involved in the pathogenesis of CMT1X.

### Keywords
Membrane proteins, Surface biotinylation

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland

### Submitter
Dina Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Volodymyr M. Korkhov
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Division of Biology and Chemistry, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland


