### Accession
PXD002672

### Title
Prediction of Mortality In Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome

### Description
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) continues to have a high mortality.  The objective of this study is to understand the differences in disease biology between survivors and non-survivors by characterizing BALF protein expression profiles in individual ARDS subjects.

### Sample Protocol
BALF containing at least 8 mg of protein was processed for LC-MS/MS from individual patient.  The BALF was concentrated and desalted using Amicon 3-MWCO filters, depleted of high abundance proteins with appropriate buffer exchanges for labeling with isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification followed by two dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (iTRAQ 2DLC-MS/MS).  The enriched medium and low abundance protein fractions from BALF was digested with trypsin-gold, dried and suspended in 0.1- 0.2% formic acid (pH < 3) and MCX cation exchange (Oasis MCX Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA, Cat no 186000254) performed to remove SDS. Peptides were eluted and adequacy of the trypsin digestion was confirmed with analysis of 3µg of the tryptic-digested peptides with linear trap quadropole MS (LTQ-MS). The remaining 37 µg of the peptide mixture was labeled with eight-plex iTRAQ reagent per manufacturer.  To compare the protein abundance across different LC-MS/MS experiment, we used the same-pooled mastermix as a global internal standard as a reference for determination of relative protein abundance. In each LC-MS/MS experiment, two iTRAQ reporter ion channels contained the mastermix to assure accuracy of fold changes measurement while the remaining six channels contained individual study samples. To characterize thirty-six ARDS cases in the study, we performed 6 separate iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. The labeling strategy for the 36 BALF samples was randomized. To prevent reporter ion signal (channel) bias the mastermix, ARDS survivors and ARDS non-survivors samples were randomly placed in different iTRAQ reporter ion channels in each experiments.   iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixture, was purified with an MCX Oasis cartridge before off-line peptide separation in the first dimension and if needed C18 stage tipping. Peptides were separated offline into 15 separate peptide-containing fractions collected in 2-minute intervals on a C18 Gemini column at pH 10. Peptide fractions were concentrated, purified by the stage tip procedure with Empore SDB-RPS extraction disks [mixed mode strong cation exchange and reversed phase], and separated in the 2nd dimension by C18 reversed phase capillary LC with a nano LC system online with MS. Data-dependent acquisition  was performed on an Orbitrap Velos system with HCD (higher energy collision induced dissociation) activation for peptide tandem MS. LC and MS experimental details were previously reported, with the exception that the activation time was 20 msec

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained directly from the Orbitrap Velos XL Mass Spectrometer were imported into GalaxyP for further processing. Within GalaxyP, all raw files together (using a multifile format that has been recently changed to dataset collection) were converted to mzml format using msconvert and then into a ProteinPilot compatible Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files with preselected iTRAQ reporter ions. The MGF files were searched against the target-decoy version of Human UniProt database along with contaminant protein sequences (88,304 sequences in total; Date Aug 1, 2014) using ProteinPilot version 4.5 and the following search parameters: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labeled); Cys-alkylation: MMTS; Instrument: Orbi MS, Orbi MS/MS; run quant; bias correction on; search focus on biological modifications and amino-acid substitutions; thorough search and with a detected protein threshold (Unused Protscore (Conf)): 10%. The ProteinPilot searches and subsequent generation of Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) - FDR reports and protein and peptide-level summaries were generated within Galaxy-P as previously described.   The results of multiple iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were aligned to compare protein-level using Protein Alignment Template vs. 2.00p (AB Sciex). .  For this alignment, we created a ‘reference master list’ by performing a database search using .RAW files from all six iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. To ensure that the proteins in this list are high ID quality, a local FDR ≤ 5% was used as a threshold for the reference master list. As per the recommendation of the Protein Alignment Template, for creation of feature table with quantitative values, the threshold of ≤ 5% global FDR was used for individual sets for the six-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is associated with high mortality. We sought to identify biological pathways in ARDS that differentiate survivors from non-survivors. We studied bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from 36 patients with ARDS (20 survivors, 16 non-survivors). Each sample, obtained within seven days of ARDS onset, was depleted of high abundance proteins and labeled for iTRAQ LC-MS/MS separately. Protein identification and relative quantification was performed employing a target-decoy strategy. A variance weighted t-test was used to identify differential expression. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used to determine the canonical pathways that differentiated survivors from non-survivors. We identified 1115 high confidence proteins in the BALF out of which 142 were differentially expressed between survivors and non-survivors. These proteins mapped to multiple pathways distinguishing survivors from non-survivors, including several implicated in lung injury and repair such as coagulation/thrombosis, acute phase response signaling and complement activation. We also identified proteins assigned to fibrosis and ones involved in detoxification of lipid peroxide-mediated oxidative stress to be different in survivors and non-survivors. These results support our previous findings demonstrating early differences in the BALF protein expression in ARDS survivors vs. non-survivors, including proteins that counter oxidative stress and canonical pathways associated with fibrosis.

### Keywords
Galaxyp, 2dlc-ms/ms, Biomarkers, Bal, Itraq, Ards

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Pulmonary/Critical Care Department of Medicine University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Kevin Viken

### Lab Head
Dr Maneesh Bhargava
Associate Professor Pulmonary/Critical Care Department of Medicine University of Minnesota


