### Accession
PXD012731

### Title
Quantitative mass spectrometric analysis to unravel glycoproteomic signature of follicular fluid in women with polycystic ovary syndrome

### Description
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrinopathy affecting reproductive aged women, whose etiology has not been fully understood yet. The follicular growth is arrested at preantral stage leading to cyst formation, consequently resulting in anovulatory infertility in these women. As follicular fluid provides the microenvironment for the growing oocyte, molecular profiling of the fluid may provide unique information about pathophysiology associated with follicular development in PCOS. Modification with oligosaccharide chains are known to influence functions of several secreted proteins and these glycoproteins also play a role in disease pathology. The glycoproteomic profile of follicular fluid of PCOS has not been explored in PCOS yet. In the present study, we performed comparative glycoproteomic analysis by first enriching glycoproteins using three different lectins viz. concanavalin A, wheat germ agglutinin and Jacalin from follicular fluid of women with PCOS and controls undergoing in vitro fertilization. Peptides generated by trypsin digestion were labeled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification reagents and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.  We identified 10 differentially expressed glycoproteins, in the follicular fluid of women with PCOS compared to control. Two important differentially expressed proteins- SERPINA1 and ITIH4, were consistently upregulated and downregulated respectively, upon validation by Western blotting in follicular fluid and real-time polymerase chain reaction in granulosa cells. These proteins play a role in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix stabilization which are vital for follicle maturation. In conclusion, comparative glycoprotein profiling of follicular fluid from women with PCOS and controls revealed altered expression of proteins which may contribute to defects in follicle development in PCOS pathophysiology.

### Sample Protocol
Glycoprotein enrichment Total protein of follicular fluid from 15 control and 15 PCOS samples were measured using Bicinchoninc method of protein estimation (Pierce, Rockford, USA). Approximately 670 μg amount of protein from each sample was combined to obtain a pool of 10 mg protein for controls and PCOS separately. An equivalent volume of approximately 200µl of each type of agarose bound lectins were  suspended together and was further split into two equal halves and used for enrichment of glycoproteins. The lectins were washed 3-4 times with ice cold 1X PBS by centrifuging at 1,000 rpm for 2 min at 4°C. Subsequently, follicular fluids of both the conditions were loaded onto the beads separately and the volume was made upto 5 ml with 50 mM Tris-Hcl and 150 mM Nacl, pH 7.5. The samples were incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotor, after incubation, beads were centrifuged at 1000 rpm at 4°C for 5 min and the supernatant was removed. Subsequently, the beads were washed 3 times with ice cold 1X PBS and the bound glycoproteins were eluted using a mixture of sugars. Briefly, 200mM α-methyl mannoside for Con A, 500 mM N-acetyl-D-glucosamine for WGA and 100 mM melibiose for JAC in Tris buffer, pH 7.5 were used. The beads were incubated with sugar solutions for 30 mins on a rocker at room temperature; the supernatant was collected by centrifuging at 1500 rpm for 10 min at 4°C and this whole procedure repeated twice. The pooled supernatants were concentrated by using 3 KDa MWCO filters (Amicon, Millipore, Ireland). The protein amount was estimated by BCA protein assay kit and stored at −20°C until further use. iTRAQ labeling and Peptide fractionation Proteins denaturated with 2% SDS, reduced and alkylation with 20 mM Iodoacetamide. Further, digestion was carried out with Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents. Samples were labeled in technical replicates as follows: control samples with 114 and 115 tags and PCOS samples with 116 and 117 tags. All labeled samples were then pooled and vacuum-dried.   Dried peptides were subjected to stage tip-based strong anion exchange (SAX) and strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation as previously described (18). Briefly, SAX and SCX material were punched separately into 200 μl tips and the stage tips were centrifuged at a speed of 1000g to 2000g during fractionation. The peptides were reconstituted in SAX pH 12 buffer (20 mM acetic acid, 20 mM phosphoric acid, 20 mM boric acid) and elution was performed separately with SAX buffers of pH 2, pH 5, pH 9 and pH 12, where the pH was adjusted with 1M NaOH. In case of SCX stage tip fractionation, the peptides were reconstituted in 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the 6 fractions were eluted with different concentrations of SCX buffer (50mM, 75mM, 125mM, 200mM, 300 mM ammonium acetate, 20% ACN and 0.5% formic acid) and buffer X containing 5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% ACN. All the SCX and SAX fractions were cleaned using C18 stage tips prior to mass spectrometry analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC 1000 system. Peptides were first enriched on a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, C18 material 5 μm, 100 Å) using solvent A (5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 3 μL/min and resolved on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm × 20 cm, C18 material 3 μm, 120 Å) using a linear gradient of 7-35% solvent B (95%ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The nanospray source maintained at 2 kV ion spray voltage. MS data was acquired in a data dependent manner with full scans acquired using the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and MS/MS scans acquired at a mass resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. In addition to four SAX and six SCX fractions, we also generated four other fractions by analyzing the peptides at four different mass ranges at MS level i.e. 300 – 800 m/z, 300 – 1000 m/z, 800 – 2000 m/z, 1000 – 2000 m/z. Data dependent MS/MS scans were triggered using Top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 sec and a minimum intensity threshold of 10,000. The fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 32% NCE and step collision energy of 5%. The fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded for 30 sec to prevent repeated MS/MS analysis of precursor ions. The automatic gain control for FT-MS was set to 2x105 ions and for FT-MS/MS 5x104 ions with a maximum ion injection time of 100ms for MS and 200ms for MS/MS analysis. Lock mass option (m/z 445.12002) was enabled for accurate mass measurements.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw data was analyzed using SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). Human uniprot protein database with known contaminants included was used for the database searching. Search parameters included trypsin as the enzyme with maximum 2 missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification while carbamidomethylation at cysteine and iTRAQ modification at N-terminus of the peptide and at lysine were set as static modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05Da, respectively. False discovery rate of 1% at peptide level was used for filtering the confident peptide identifications. Reporter ion quantitation node was used for relative expression pattern of proteins based on the relative intensities of reporter ions for the corresponding peptide. Proteins with ratios 1.4-fold increased or decreased between control and PCOS were considered to be up or down regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrinopathy affecting women of reproductive age, and whose etiology is not well understood yet. In these women, the follicular growth is arrested at preantral stage leading to cyst formation, consequently resulting in anovulatory infertility in these women. As the follicular fluid provides the conducive microenvironment for the growth of oocytes, molecular profiling of the fluid may provide unique information about pathophysiology associated with follicular development in PCOS. Post-translational addition of oligosaccharide residues is one of the many modifications of secreted proteins influencing their functions. These glycoproteins play a significant role in disease pathology. Despite glycoproteins having such essential functions, very limited information is available on their profiling in human reproductive system, and glycoproteomic profile of follicular fluid of women with PCOS is yet unexplored. In the present study, we performed a comparative glycoproteomic analysis of follicular fluid between women with PCOS and controls undergoing in vitro fertilization, by enrichment of glycoproteins using three different lectins viz. concanavalin A, wheat germ agglutinin and Jacalin. Peptides generated by trypsin digestion were labeled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification reagents and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. We identified 10 differentially expressed glycoproteins, in the follicular fluid of women with PCOS compared to controls. Two important differentially expressed proteins- SERPINA1 and ITIH4, were consistently upregulated and downregulated respectively, upon validation by immunoblotting in follicular fluid and real-time polymerase chain reaction in granulosa cells. These proteins play a role in angiogenesis and extracellular matrix stabilization, vital for follicle maturation. In conclusion, a comparative glycoproteomic profiling of follicular fluid from women with PCOS and controls revealed an altered expression of proteins which may contribute to the defects in follicle development in PCOS pathophysiology.

### Keywords
Infertility, Follicular fluid quantitative glycoproteomics, Mass spectrometry, Ovarian pathophysiology

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, Indian Council of Medical Research, Mumbai 400012, India

### Submitter
Srabani Mukherjee

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Srabani Mukherjee
Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, Indian Council of Medical Research, Mumbai 400012, India


