### Accession
PXD001474

### Title
Label-free analysis of HCV-associated hepatic fibrosis

### Description
A differential label-fee proteomics approach was performed using 27 biopsies from patients with HCV-associated hepatic fibrosis. For statistical analysis the patients were grouped into a low and a high fibrosis group. The low fibrosis group contained 13 patients of fibrosis stages 0, 1 and 2, whereas the high fibrosis group contained 14 patients of fibrosis stages 3 and 4 (fibrosis stages according to Batts-Ludwig classification).

### Sample Protocol
Biopsied specimens were lysed and homogenized in 40 µL of sample buffer (30 mM Tris, 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 0,1% SDS, pH 8,5). The samples were sonicated in an ultrasonic ice bath 6 times for 10 seconds and insoluble compounds were subsequently removed by centrifugation (15000 g for 10 min). The protein concentration of supernatants was determined using the Bradford assay (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA). 15 µg of protein per sample were loaded on a 18% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel (Anamed Elektrophorese, Groß-Bieberau, Germany) and allowed to run slightly into the gels (15 min, 100 V). The protein bands were stained with Coomassie and manually cut from the gels. Digestion of proteins was performed overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (Serva Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.8). The peptides were extracted from the bands with 20 μL of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA (1:1) by sonication (15 min, on ice) for two times. Subsequently, the peptides were vacuum dried, dissolved in 0.1% TFA and the peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis.

### Data Protocol
The RPLC−MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) online coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 300 ng of peptides were injected in a volume of 15µl and preconcentrated with 0.1% TFA on a trap column for 7 min (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% acetonitrile; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60 °C). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full scan mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer and the 20 most abundant precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. The tandem mass spectra were measured in the linear ion trap after peptide fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis are major health problems worldwide. Until now, highly invasive biopsy remains the diagnostic gold standard despite many disadvantages. To develop noninvasive diagnostic assays for the assessment of liver fibrosis, it is urgently necessary to identify molecules that are robustly expressed in association with the disease. We analyzed biopsied tissue samples from 95 patients with HBV/HCV-associated hepatic fibrosis using three different quantification methods. We performed a label-free proteomics discovery study to identify novel disease-associated proteins using a subset of the cohort (n = 27). Subsequently, gene expression data from all available clinical samples were analyzed (n = 77). Finally, we performed a targeted proteomics approach, multiple reaction monitoring (MRM), to verify the disease-associated expression in samples independent from the discovery approach (n = 68). We identified fibulin-5 (FBLN5) as a novel protein expressed in relation to hepatic fibrosis. Furthermore, we confirmed the altered expression of microfibril-associated glycoprotein 4 (MFAP4), lumican (LUM), and collagen alpha-1(XIV) chain (COL14A1) in association to hepatic fibrosis. To our knowledge, no tissue-based quantitative proteomics study for hepatic fibrosis has been performed using a cohort of comparable size. By this means, we add substantial evidence for the disease-related expression of the proteins examined in this study.

### Keywords
['Liver biopsy', 'Human', 'Hepatic fibrosis', 'Liver', 'Fibrosis']

### Affiliations
['Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center AG Clinical Proteomics Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum', 'Clinical Proteomics']

### Submitter
['Thilo Bracht']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center AG Clinical Proteomics Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum', 'email': 'barbara.sitek@rub.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Jun. Prof. Dr. Barbara Sitek', 'id': '12770100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['liver']
Characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
Characteristics[disease]: ['HCV-related hepatic fibrosis']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Elite;AC=MS:1001910']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Propionamide;AC=UNIMOD:24;TA=C;MT=fixed']

