### Accession
PXD013214

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, Wheat grass

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from a single Size exclusion fractionation of soluble wheat grass extract.  Data are from collected fractions 3-50 (excluding 47).

### Sample Protocol
Green leafy portions of 1-week old wheat sprouts were clipped and frozen in liquid nitrogen.This material was powdered in liquid nitrogen and solubilized in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, phosphatase inhibitors, and plant-specific protease inhibitors.  Following clarification by centrifugation, the extract was diluted and reconcentrated by ultrafiltration to reduce NaCl to 50 mM and glycerol to 3% final concentration prior to size exclusion chromatography of 1.6 mg total protein.  Collected fractions were prepared for mass spec using a modified version of the SP3 bead method as in Hughes et al. 2014 (Molecular systems Biology 10 (10):1-10) in which samples were reduced and alkylated prior to binding to beads.  They were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion overnight and following elution were desalted using a 18 Lab-in-a-plate (Glygen).  Samples were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spec using a data-dependent 75 minute topspeed CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Size exclusion, Wheat grass, Triticum aestivum, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


