### Accession
PXD026420

### Title
Enhanced Access to the Human Phosphoproteome with Genetically Encoded Phosphothreonine

### Description
Protein phosphorylation is a ubiquitous post-translational modification that governs signaling cascades and protein-protein interactions. Orthogonal translation systems repurpose evolutionarily divergent aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and tRNA pairs for the co-translational insertion of a modified amino acid. Subsequent advancements over the last decade have enabled the insertion of phospho-amino acids, bypassing a priori knowledge requirements of upstream kinases for the study of phosphoproteins. Here we optimized a pThrOTS and corresponding E. coli strain for pThr protein production.  We then produced a peptidome library containing ~57,000 known threonine/phosphothreonine phosphosites using oligonucleotide library synthesis. We were able to identify approximately ~20% of the peptides encoded by the pThr library, and ~44% of the peptides encoded by the Thr library with mass spectrometry. Robust, genetically encoded phosphothreonine revealed a new activation and inhibition mechanism for the kinase CHK2. Proteome-wide surveys of interactions between active CHK2 and our peptidome library identified novel substrates and motif elements. Finally, we developed a novel technique, Hi-P+, for directly linking kinase substrate discovery to phospho-binding domain recognition, unveiling multi-level interaction networks with phosphosite resolution. This new methodology enables kinase-specific, proteome-wide surveys of multiple phosphorylation-dependent protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
MS-READ analysis: 5 μg of MS-READ reporter was dissolved in 12.5 μl solubilization buffer consisting of 10 mM Tris-HCl pH=8.5 (23°C), 10 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% acid labile surfactant (ALS-101, Protea). Samples were heat denatured for 15 min at 55°C in a heat block. Alkylation of cysteines was performed with iodoacetamide (IAA) using a final IAA concentration of 24 mM. The alkylation reaction proceeded for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess IAA was quenched with 200 mM DTT and the buffer concentration was adjusted using a 1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 resulting in a final Tris-HCl concentration of 150 mM. The reaction was then diluted with water and 1 M CaCl2 solution to obtain an ALS-101 concentration of 0.045% and 2 mM CaCl2 respectively. Trypsin (Promega) was added, and the digest was incubated for 15 h at 37°C. The digest was quenched with 20% TFA solution. Peptides were desalted on C18 UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group Inc. #SUM SS18V). Columns were conditioned with 400 μL 80% ACN 0.1% TFA followed by 200 uL 0.1% TFA. Samples were pelleted at 2000g for 1 minute before having lysate applied to columns.  Sample was loaded onto column and washed twice with 400 μL 0.1% TFA before eluting with twice with 200 μL 80% ACN 0.1% TFA. Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at room temperature. Dried peptides were reconstituted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Digestion of intact E. coli for shotgun proteomics: Cell pellets were thawed on ice and 2 μL of cell pellet was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube containing 40 μl of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.5 % ALS). Cells were lysed by vortex for 30 seconds and disulfide bonds were reduced by incubating the reaction for 30 min. at 55°C. The reaction was briefly quenched on ice and 16 μl of a 60 mM IAA solution was added. Alkylation of cysteines proceeded for 30 min in the dark. Excess IAA was quenched with 14 μl of a 25 mM DTT solution and the sample was then diluted with 330 μl of 183 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0 supplemented with 2 mM CaCl2. Trypsin (Promega) was added, and the digest was incubated for 15 h at 37°C. The digest was quenched with 20% TFA solution. The sample was desalted by C18 MicroSpin columns (The Nest Group #SEM SS18V) as described earlier. The desalted peptides were dried at room temperature in a rotary vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 30 μl 70 % formic acid 0.1 % TFA (3:8 v/v). The sample was diluted to a final concentration of 0.2 μg/μl with 5 μl (1 μg) injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. pThr Phosphosite library: 5 mg of purified pThr phosphosite library was digested using S-TrapTM midi columns (Protifi) per manufacturer’s instructions. Phosphoproteins were then enriched using Thermo Scientific High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (#A32992) followed by Thermo Scientific High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (#A32993). Samples were split into separate fractions before being dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Pooled Fe-NTA and TiO2 flow through was cleaned up and desalted using C18 MicroSpin (The Nest Group #SEM SS18V) columns as described earlier. Dried peptides were reconstituted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Following phosphatase treatment, samples were cleaned up using 200 μL StageTips. Tips consisted of 2 1.06 mM diameter punches of Empore C18 (3M #2215) fitted into 200 uL pipette tips. Sample was acidified with 3 μl 70% FA and vortexed and applied to the conditioned column and centrifuged at 2800 rpm for 5 minutes. Columns were washed with 50 μl 0.1% TFA and centrifuged for 3 minutes at 900g. Centrifugation was repeated with 20 μl 0.1% TFA. StageTips were then transferred to new tubes and eluted with 30 μl of 80% ACN 0.1% TFA. Elution was repeated with 20 μL of 80% ACN 0.1% TFA, centrifuged at 900g for 2 minutes. Samples were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge at room temperature. Samples were then reconstituted in in 2 μl 30 % ACN 0.1 % FA and 10 μL of 3:8 70 % formic acid: 0.1% TFA. CHK2 and threonine phosphosite library digestion: 24 μg of cleaved Thr phosphosite library, and 5 μg CHK2 kinase were digested using S-TrapTM mini spin columns (Protifi) per manufacturer’s instructions. Following digestions samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at room temperature and frozen at -80°C.  Threonine phosphosite library fractionation: Dried down samples were fractionated using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher #84868) following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then reconstituted in in 2 μl 30 % ACN 0.1 % FA and 10 μL of 3:8 70 % formic acid: 0.1% TFA as described earlier. CHK2 phospho-enrichment: Both full length CHK2 and CHK2 KD were enriched using Thermo Scientific High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (#A32992) following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at room temperature and reconstituted in in 2 μl 30 % ACN 0.1 % FA and 10 μL of 3:8 70 % formic acid: 0.1% TFA as described earlier.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class (Waters) and Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The analytical column employed was a 65-cm-long, 75-μm-internal-diameter PicoFrit column (New Objective) packed in-house to a length of 50 cm with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 Å C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch) using methanol as the packing solvent. Peptide separation was achieved using mixtures of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B) with a 90-min gradient 0/1, 2/7, 60/24, 65/48, 70/80, 75/80, 80/1, 90/1; (min/%B, linear ramping between steps). Gradient was performed with a flowrate of 250 nL/min. A single blank injection (5 μl 2% B) was performed between samples to eliminate peptide carryover on the analytical column. 100 fmol of trypsin-digested BSA or 100 ng trypsin-digested wildtype K-12 MG1655 E. coli proteins were run periodically between samples as quality control standards. The mass spectrometer was operated with the following parameters: (MS1) 70,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC target, 300–1,700 m/z scan range; (data dependent-MS2) 17,500 resolution, 1e6 AGC target, top 10 mode, 1.6 m/z isolation window, 27 normalized collision energy, 90s dynamic exclusion, unassigned and +1 charge exclusion. Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.6.10.43 with Deamidation (NQ), Oxidation (M), and Phospho (STY) as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl (C) or Dithiomethane (C) as a fixed modification with up to 3 missed cleavages, 5 AA minimum length, and 1% FDR against targeted libraries. E. Coli. proteome searches were run against a modified Uniprot E. coli database (taken on February 9, 2021) containing MS-READ reporter proteins and OTS components (supplemental data file 2). Phosphosite libraries were run against a modified FASTA file of the phosphosite library containing a partially digested MBP tag and 6xHis tag (supplemental data files 3&4). Only phosphosite peptides with a MaxQuant score greater than 40 were considered. MS-READ search results were quantified using Skyline version 20.1.0.31. Proteome search results were analyzed with Perseus version 1.6.2.2. Ion spectra were taken from searches using Mascot Daemon 2.5.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Genetic code expansion, Checkpoint kinase 2, Phosphoproteome, Phosphothreonine, Orthogonal translation system

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06516, USA

### Submitter
Jack Moen

### Lab Head
Dr Jesse Rinehart
Department of Cellular & Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06516, USA


