### Accession
PXD021757

### Title
Epigenetic inactivation of the autophagy-lysosomal system in the Parkinson’s disease appendix

### Description
The gastrointestinal tract may be a site of origin for α-synuclein (α-syn) pathology in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD), and an abundance of aggregated α-syn has recently been demonstrated in both the healthy and PD appendix. However, the molecular changes that enable gut α-syn aggregates to contribute to the development and progression of PD remain unclear. Here, our deep-sequencing of DNA methylation changes at 521 autophagy-lysosomal pathway (ALP) genes in the human appendix and brain in PD and healthy controls indicates a pattern of widespread hypermethylation in the PD appendix that is recapitulated in the PD brain. There is significant overlap in the individual ALP genes affected across the PD appendix and brain, with lysosomal genes specifically downregulated in both regions. Healthy epigenetic aging, which involves a hypermethylation of macroautophagy and selective autophagy genes in the appendix and brain, is disrupted in both areas in PD. In mice, DNA methylation changes at ALP genes induced by chronic gut inflammation are greatly exacerbated by the presence of α-syn pathology. DNA methylation changes at ALP genes induced by α-synucleinopathy are significantly associated with the ALP abnormalities observed in the PD appendix, specifically involving lysosomal genes. Our work, which constitutes an in-depth, unbiased investigation of epigenetic changes in the ALP of the PD gut and brain, identifies the epigenetic misregulation of the ALP, especially a downregulation of lysosomal genes, as a potential culprit for the initiation and spread of α-syn pathology in idiopathic PD.

### Sample Protocol
At the Whitehead Institute reduction, alkylation, proteolytic digestion and isotopic labeling were carried out using Pierce TMT 10-plex (catalog number 90110) according to kit specifications. The resulting labeled peptides were washed, extracted and concentrated by solid phase extraction using Waters Sep-Pak Plus C18 cartridges. Organic solvent was removed and the volumes were reduced to 80 ul using a speed vac for subsequent analyses. First dimension of chromatography fractionation of the labeled peptides was performed using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (catalog  number 84868) according to manufacturer’s specifications . The volume of each of the fractions was reduced by speed vac and transferred to autosampler vials and reduced to a final volume of 20 ul by SpeedVac with eight fractions destined for subsequent analysis. Each of the eight chromatographic fractions were analyzed by reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 pumps and autosampler and a Thermo Exploris 480 Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap  mass spectrometer  using a nano flow configuration. Samples were loaded on a 2 cm x 75 micron Thermo Pepmap100  C18 trapping column  and washed with 4 uL total volume to trap and wash peptides. These were then eluted onto the 15cm x 75 umThermo EASY-Spray C18 analytical column attached to a spray emitter with a 5 micron tip.  The gradient initial condition was 1% A Buffer at 300 nl min-1 with increasing B buffer concentrations to 6% B at 1 minute, 21% B at 42.5 minutes, 36% B at 63 minutes and 50% B at 73 minutes. The column was washed with high percent B and re-equlibrated between analytical runs for a total cycle time of approximately 97 minutes. Buffer A consisted of 1% formic acid in water and buffer B consisted of 1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in a dependant data acquisition mode where the 12 most abundant peptides detected in the Exploris using full scan mode with a resolution of 120,000 were subjected to daughter ion fragmentation using a resolution of 60,000. A running list of parent ions was tabulated to an exclusion list to increase the number of peptides analyzed throughout the chromatographic run.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were searched using PEAKS Studio ((Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada, version 10.5) against a combined protein database of Refseq human entries and common MS contaminants. De novo sequencing of peptides, database search and characterizing specific PTMs were used to analyze the raw data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 0.5%, and [-10*log(P)] was calculated accordingly where P is the probability that an observed match is a random event. The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine and TMT10plex as fixed modifications with oxidation at methionine as a variable modification. Precursor tolerance were set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to ±0.05 Da for both de novo and database searches. Purity correction factors for isotopic distribution of reporter ions was incorporated in the quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Autophagy-lysosomal system, Appendix

### Affiliations
Vilnius university, Institute of Biotechnology
Bioinformatics Scientist Van Andel Institute

### Submitter
Juozas Gordevicius

### Lab Head
Dr Juozas Gordevicius
Bioinformatics Scientist Van Andel Institute


