### Accession
PXD011223

### Title
Gené organ engagement in lipid metabolism revealed by a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach

### Description
Gené organ (GO) is an exclusive apparatus of female ticks that secretes a protective wax coat onto the egg surface. This wax coat makes eggs more viable in the environment due to its waterproof, stickiness and antimicrobial proprieties. In this work, a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach shows that GO is engaged in synthesis, modification and oxidation of lipid compounds, not solely secrets compounds uptaked from haemolymph onto the egg surface. GO were analysed at two distinct stages: (i) in the day haematophagy is concluded and ticks detach from host and (ii) during egg laying, precisely at the second day of oviposition. Data presented here show that before oviposition begins, GO undergoes a maturing process in order to be ready to play its role during oviposition. Before oviposition, GO content is directed to machineries of cell division, transcription and protein synthesis, including proteins participating in the cytoskeleton structure. Whereas during egg laying, the content of proteins related to secretion, transporting and metabolism of wax is overrepresented, though protein synthesis is also preserved. Since GO is a wax secretion organ, the work was focused on lipid metabolism, examining a full machinery to synthesize, modify and oxidize fatty acids. In addition, proteins involved on sterols modification, transport and degradation were addressed. Further than highlighting GO importance in tick reproduction physiology, data reveals molecules and pathways crucial to egg wax secretion, and consequently, its development in the environment. Tools targeting these molecules and pathways would impair egg development in environment, and so could be potential targets for novel tick control methods.

### Sample Protocol
Firstly, ticks were washed in 70% ethanol for 10 min and then naturally dried. After dissection, Gene organs (GO) were gently washed in nuclease free PBS,  immediately transferred to TRIzol® reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein extracts from two 10-ticks groups   ) of each group (DET and OVP) were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Protein concentration was measured using BCA Protein Assay Reagent Kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce). Proteins were precipitated following a methanol/chloroform protocol (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Dried pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide and digested overnight at 37° C using trypsin with a final ratio of 1:20 (w/w; enzyme: substrate) (2 M urea/100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 buffer). Digestion reactions, in a final concentration of 1 µg/µL, were quenched with formic acid (5 % final concentration) and centrifuged at 17,000 g, for 5 min at 4º C, for debris removal. Peptide mixtures were analysed by nanoflow LC-MS using an Easy NanoLC II coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides eluted from the analytical column were electrosprayed directly in the mass spectrometer. Solutions A and B consisted of 5 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. Protein samples for each group (1.5 µg per injection) were separated in 155-min chromatographic runs, as follows: 1-10 % B in 10 min, 10-40 % in 100 min, 40-50 % B in 10 min and 50-90 % B in 10 min. The column was held at 90 % B for 10 min, reduced to 1 B and re-equilibrated prior to next injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 400 to 1,200 m/z at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1 x 106. The 10 most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS at 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 2 x 105, and an under fill ratio of 0.1 %. Maximum fill times were 20 and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, with dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Normalized collision energy was set to 25.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched directly from RAW files with Comet (Eng et al., 2012) in the platform PatternLab for Proteomincs (Carvalho et al., 2016). Resulting mass spectra was searched against two transcriptomic databases: (i) a local R. microplus protein database (Rm-INCT-EM) containing 22,010 sequences previously produced by our research group (BioProject ID PRJNA232001 at Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly (TSA) database–GenBank); and (ii) the R. microplus GO predicted amino acid sequences translated from nucleotide sequences presented in the current study. Search was performed using these non-redundant databases and reverse sequences of all entries, and included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as static modification. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by COMET was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform. XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaMass, ZScore, number of peaks matched, and secondary rank values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminating function. A cutoff score was established to accept a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. A minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required and results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with <10ppm precursor mass error.  Quantitative analysis was performed using the semi-quantitative method based on NSAF (normalized spectral abundance factor), which was calculated according to Zybailov et al. (2006). NSAF for a given protein is the number of spectral counts (SpC) identified for that protein, divided by the protein’s length (L), divided by the sum of SpC/L of all protein in the experiment. The following parameters were used to select differentially expressed proteins: proteins were grouped by maximum parsimony, spectral count data were normalized using NSAF values, and two nonzero replicate values were required for each condition (at least two out of three replicates). A BH q-value was set at 0.02 (2 % FDR). A variable fold-change cutoff for each individual protein was calculated according to the t-test p-value using an F-Stringency value automatically optimized using the TFold software. Low abundant proteins were removed using an L-stringency value of 0.4 Venn diagram comparing samples from groups DET and OVP were produced in PatternLab for Proteomics software, using proteins present in at least 2 replicates. Those proteins that did not fit this parameter were also functionally   annotated, but were not grouped in DET or OVP groups. Volcano plot was generated by a pairwise comparison of DET and OVP using the PatternLab’s TFold module.

### Publication Abstract
Lipids play key roles in arthropod metabolism. In ticks, these biomolecules are transported from fat body to other organs, such as ovary and Gen&#xe9;'s organ. Gen&#xe9;'s organ, an apparatus found exclusively in female ticks, secretes a protective wax coat onto the egg surface, increasing egg viability in the environment due to waterproof, cohesive, and antimicrobial properties. In this work, a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach shows that Gen&#xe9;'s organ not solely secrets compounds taken up from the hemolymph, but is actively engaged in synthesis, modification, and oxidation of lipids. Gen&#xe9;'s organ was analyzed at two distinct stages: 1) when ticks detach from host by the end of hematophagous phase, and 2) during egg-laying. Data show that Gen&#xe9;'s organ undergoes a maturation process before the onset of oviposition, in preparation for its role during egg-laying. Because it deals with a wax-secreting organ, the study focused on lipid metabolism, examining a full machinery to synthesize, modify, and oxidize fatty acids. Proteins involved in sterol modification, transport, and degradation were also addressed. In addition to highlighting Gen&#xe9;'s organ importance in tick reproductive physiology, the results reveal proteins and pathways crucial to egg wax secretion, and consequently, egg development in the environment. Tools targeting these molecules and pathways would impair egg viability in the environment, and therefore have the potential to be developed into novel tick control methods.

### Keywords
Gené organ, Transcriptome, Lipid gland, Proteome, Tick, Egg wax

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Faculdade de Veterinária, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil

### Submitter
Itabajara Vaz Jr.

### Lab Head
Dr Itabajara da Silva Vaz Junior
Faculdade de Veterinária, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil


