### Accession
PXD020090

### Title
Identification of novel 53BP1 associated proteins

### Description
We used homologous recombination based CRISPR Knock-in strategy to insert a SFB tag at C terminal of 53BP1 in 293T cells. We performed tandem affinity purification of endogenous 53BP1 in both soluble and chromatin fraction to uncover known and new 53BP1 binding proteins which might play roles in DNA damage response. We identified and examined FOXK1 for its role in DNA damage response through the interaction with 53BP1 mainly in soluble fraction.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T 53BP1 CKI-SFB cells were expanded and seeded into 6 150 cm2 dishes. Cells were lysed in NETN buffer (20mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1mM DTT, with phosphatase and proteinase inhibitors) for 30min and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15min at 4°C. We collected the soluble fraction (i.e. the supernatant) and chromatin fraction (i.e. pellet suspended in NETN without EDTA and then sonicated and treated with turbonuclease) for TAP. The soluble fraction and chromatin fraction were incubated with streptavidin-conjugated beads (Amersham) for 2h at 4°C. The beads were then washed with NETN buffer twice and eluted with 2 mg/mL biotin (Sigma) for 1h. The eluates were then incubated with S-protein beads (Novagen) for 2h at 4°C. After washed with NETN for five times, beads were boiled at 95°C for 10 min in Laemmli buffer and loaded onto 10% SDS-PAGE. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in the laboratory of Dr. Jun Qin at Baylor College of Medicine using their standard procedures. Briefly, the pull-down samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining. The gel band containing the entire sample was excised into small pieces, destained completely and digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight. The peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and vacuum dried. The samples were reconstituted in loading solution (5% methanol containing 0.1% formic acid) and subjected to nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) analysis with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). A nanoscale reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) capillary column was created by packing Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 silica into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. The peptides were separated with a 75-min discontinuous gradient of 4-26% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 800 nl/min. Separated peptides were directly electro-sprayed into a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite; ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA). The mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent mode, and the precursor MS spectrum was scanned at 375-1300 m/z with 240k resolution at 400 m/z (2 106 AGC target). The 25 strongest ions were fragmented via collision-induced dissociation with 35 normalized collision energy and 1 m/z isolation width and detected by using an ion trap with 30 s of dynamic exclusion time, 1 104 AGC target and 100 ms of maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were searched in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) with Mascot algorithm 2.4 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). The Human UniProt FASTA database (October 2015) containing 70,097 entries was searched. Dynamic modifications included acetylation of N-terminus and oxidation of methionine. The precursor mass tolerance was confined within 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Assigned peptides were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate using percolator validation. To identify the significantly enriched proteins in the experiment, we compared the list obtained to the negative control list obtained in the lab with multiple mass spec data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
53BP1 plays a central role in dictating DNA repair choice between non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR), which is important for the sensitivity to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis) of BRCA1-deficient cancers. In this study, we show that FOXK1 associates with 53BP1 and regulates 53BP1-dependent functions. FOXK1-53BP1 interaction is significantly enhanced upon DNA damage during the S phase in an ATM/CHK2-dependent manner, which reduces the association of 53BP1 with its downstream factors RIF1 and PTIP. Depletion of FOXK1 impairs DNA repair and induces compromised cell survival upon DNA damage. Overexpression of FOXK1 diminishes 53BP1 foci formation, which leads to resistance to PARPis and elevation of HR in BRCA1-deficient cells and decreased telomere fusion in TRF2-depleted cells. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that FOXK1 negatively regulates 53BP1 function by inhibiting 53BP1 localization to sites of DNA damage, which alters the DSB-induced protein complexes centering on 53BP1 and thus influences DNA repair choice.

### Keywords
53bp1

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA

### Submitter
Mengfan Tang

### Lab Head
Dr Junjie Chen
Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA


