### Accession
PXD030708

### Title
MetaNovo : an open-source pipeline for probabilistic peptide discovery in complex metaproteomic datasets

### Description
Results  We compared MetaNovo to published results from the MetaPro-IQ pipeline on 8 human mucosal-luminal interface samples, with comparable numbers of peptide and protein identifications, many shared peptide sequences and a similar bacterial taxonomic distribution compared to that found using a matched metagenome database - but simultaneously identified proteins present in the samples that are derived from known gut organisms that were missed by the previous analyses. Finally, MetaNovo was benchmarked on samples of known microbial composition against matched metagenomic and whole genomic database workflows, yielding many more MS/MS for the expected taxa, with improved taxonomic representation, while also highlighting previously described genome sequencing quality concerns for one of the organisms, and providing evidence for a known sample contaminant without prior expectation.   Conclusions By estimating taxonomic and peptide level information directly on microbiome samples from tandem mass spectrometry data, MetaNovo enables the simultaneous identification of peptides from all domains of life in metaproteome samples, bypassing the need for curated sequence search databases. We show that the MetaNovo approach to mass spectrometry metaproteomics can be more accurate than current gold standard approaches of tailored or matched genomic database searches, identify sample contaminants without prior expectation and that increases in assigned spectra from this approach can yield novel insights into previously unidentified metaproteomic signals - building on the potential for complex mass spectrometry metaproteomic data to speak for itself. The pipeline source code is available on GitHub and documentation is provided to run the software as a singularity-compatible docker image available from the Docker Hub.

### Sample Protocol
Mucosal-luminal interface (MLI) sample metagenomic and proteomics data. Metagenome and proteomics data of 8 MLI samples from adolescent volunteers obtained during colonoscopy were downloaded from PRIDE with identifier PXD003528 and through author correspondence. The sample processing, mass spectrometry and metagenomics database creation methods have already been described (Zhang, X., Ning, Z., Mayne, J., Moore, J. I., Li, J., Butcher, J., … Figeys, D. (2016). MetaPro-IQ: a universal metaproteomic approach to studying human and mouse gut microbiota. Microbiome, 4(1), 31. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-016-0176-z)  9MM sample and validation databases. Two samples of known microbial mixture from a single biological replicate (9MM) were obtained from PeptideAtlas at identifier PASS00194. Detailed proteomic methods are described in the original publication (Tanca et. al, 2013). In brief, each of 9 organisms were cultured separately on the appropriate growing media, and divided into aliquots of approximately 10⁹ CFU each. The 9MM sample was created by combining an aliquot of each organism pellet, and processed separately by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) and protein precipitation followed by in-solution digestion (PPID). Two databases were selected from the original publication for comparison. One, the top performing database from the previous publication was created by single genome assembly followed by gene prediction and protein annotation using TrEMBL (SGA-PA). Secondly, to illustrate a typical metaproteomics workflow, the database created by NGS of the combined sample (metagenome sequencing) followed by gene prediction and protein annotation using TrEMBL was selected (Meta-PA). Tanca, A., Palomba, A., Deligios, M., Cubeddu, T., &#38; Fraumene, C. (2013). Evaluating the Impact of Different Sequence Databases on Metaproteome Analysis: Insights from a Lab-Assembled Microbial Mixture. <i>PLoS ONE</i>, <i>8</i>(12), 82981. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0082981

### Data Protocol
Mucosal-luminal interface samples MetaNovo database generation. The 2019_11 release of UniProt, containing ca. 180 million protein entries, was used to create a database containing 74136 entries. The default MetaNovo settings were used. Database search using MaxQuant. MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 was used to search the MetaNovo database, with the same settings as for the MetaPro-IQ publication. Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Specific enzyme mode with Trypsin/P was selected with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed, and a PSM and protein FDR of 0.01 was required.  9MM samples MetaNovo database generation. The 2019_11 release of UniProt, containing ca. 180 million protein entries, was used to create a database containing 13195 entries. The default MetaNovo settings were used. Database search using MaxQuant. MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 was used to search the MetaNovo database, SGA-PA and Meta-PA databases. Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Specific enzyme mode with Trypsin/P was selected with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed, and a PSM and protein FDR of 0.01 was required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
De novo sequencing, Metaproteomics, Probabilistic

### Affiliations
Computational Biology Division, Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, IDM, University of Cape Town, South Africa
Computational Biology Division, Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

### Submitter
Matthys  Potgieter

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Mulder
Computational Biology Division, Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.


