### Accession
PXD012842

### Title
Cell envelope adaptation and minimal Tat translocation are functionally intertwined

### Description
Protein secretion is key for bacterial growth, survival and adaptation. In the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis, the twin-arginine (Tat) pathway serves in the exclusive secretion of proteins with bound cofactors. The Bacillus Tat pathway stands out for its minimalist nature with two independently acting translocases being composed of dedicated TatA and TatC subunits only. Here we addressed the question whether one of these translocases, TatAyCy, recruits additional common cellular components for activity. To this end, TatAyCy was purified by affinity chromatography and gel filtration, and interacting co-purified proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. This revealed the cell envelope stress responsive LiaH protein as an appendix to the TatAyCy complex. Importantly, our functional studies show that Tat expression is tightly trailed by LiaH induction, and that LiaH itself determines the capacity and quality of Tat-dependent protein translocation. Altogether, our observations show that protein translocation by the minimal Tat translocase TatAyCy is tightly intertwined with an adequate bacterial response to cell envelope stress. This is consistent with a critical need to maintain cellular homeostasis, especially when the membrane is widely opened to permit passage of large fully-folded proteins via Tat.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were subjected to GeLC-MS/MS analysis as previously described [1]. Briefly, upon staining with SimplyBlue SafeStain, gels were washed twice with water to remove excessive stain. Protein bands of interest were excised, transferred into low-binding Eppendorf tubes, and washed/destained at least three times for 15 min with 750 µL of gel wash buffer (0.2 M ammonium bicarbonate in 30% [v/v] acetonitrile) at 37°C under vigorous shaking. The destained gel pieces were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 30°C and rehydrated with trypsin solution (2 µg of modified trypsin [Promega] in 1 mL of water) for 15 min. Excess trypsin solution was removed, and digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Next day, the gel pieces were covered with water, and peptides were eluted from the gel matrix by immersion of the reaction tube in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min. The supernatant containing the peptides was transferred to a glass vial and concentrated to a final volume of 10 µL in a vacuum centrifuge.  Bonn F, Bartel J, Büttner K, Hecker M, Otto A, Becher D (2014) Picking Vanished Proteins from the Void: How to Collect and Ship/Share Extremely Dilute Proteins in a Reproducible and Highly Efficient Manner. Anal Chem 86: 7421–7427.

### Data Protocol
For LC−MS/MS analyses of 1D gel samples, in-house self-packed columns were prepared and used with an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo). In brief, fused-silica emitter tips with an inner diameter of 100 µm and an outer diameter of 360 µm were prepared by using a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments). The resulting emitter tips were then packed with Aeris C18 reversed-phase material (3.6 µm particles) in a custom-built pressure bomb to obtain a 20 cm nano-LC column. The peptides were loaded onto the column by the LC system with 10 µL of buffer A (0.1% [v/v] acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min without trapping. The peptides were subsequently eluted using a nonlinear 100 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (0.1% [v/v] acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min and injected online into the mass spectrometer. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with a LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo). After a survey scan at a resolution of 30.000 in the Orbitrap with activated lockmass correction, the five most abundant precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states were not selected for MS/MS analysis. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed for 30 ms with normalized collision energy of 35, and the fragment ions were recorded in the linear ion trap. Database searching was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (SageN). After extraction from the raw files, *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target−decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. The target database was the Uniprot reference database of B. subtilis 168 (downloaded May 21, 2014). The resulting *.out files were compiled with Scaffold 4. Proteins were only considered as identified if at least two unique peptides matching solid quality criteria (delta cN > 0.1 and XCorr > 2.2; 3.3; 3.75 for doubly, triply, or higher charged peptides) had been assigned, resulting in a false-positive rate (FPR) below 0.1% on protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial twin-arginine (Tat) pathway serves in the exclusive secretion of folded proteins with bound cofactors. While Tat pathways in Gram-negative bacteria and chloroplast thylakoids consist of conserved TatA, TatB and TatC subunits, the Tat pathways of Bacillus species and many other Gram-positive bacteria stand out for their minimalist nature with the core translocase being composed of essential TatA and TatC subunits only. Here we addressed the question whether the minimal TatAyCy translocase of Bacillus subtilis recruits additional cellular components that modulate its activity. To this end, TatAyCy was purified by affinity- and size exclusion chromatography, and interacting co-purified proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. This uncovered the cell envelope stress responsive LiaH protein as an accessory subunit of the TatAyCy complex. Importantly, our functional studies show that Tat expression is tightly trailed by LiaH induction, and that LiaH itself determines the capacity and quality of TatAyCy-dependent protein translocation. In contrast, LiaH has no role in high-level protein secretion via the general secretion (Sec) pathway. Altogether, our observations show that protein translocation by the minimal Tat translocase TatAyCy is tightly intertwined with an adequate bacterial response to cell envelope stress. This is consistent with a critical need to maintain cellular homeostasis, especially when the membrane is widely opened to permit passage of large fully-folded proteins via Tat.

### Keywords
Liah, Tatcy, Translocation, Tatay, Liars, Twin-arginine, Bacillus

### Affiliations
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Medical Microbiology, Hanzeplein 1, P.O. box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands
Institute of Microbiology University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Minia Antelo

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Maarten van Dijl
University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Medical Microbiology, Hanzeplein 1, P.O. box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The Netherlands


