### Accession
PXD035403

### Title
Exit of spore dormancy transforms the yeast cytoplasm and the solubility of its proteome

### Description
The biophysical properties of the cytoplasm are a major determinant of key cellular processes. Yeasts produce dormant spores that can withstand extreme conditions. We show that spores exhibit extraordinary biophysical properties, including a highly viscous and acidic cytosol. These conditions alter the solubility of more than 100 proteins such as metabolic enzymes that become more soluble as spores transit to active cell proliferation upon nutrient repletion. A key regulator of this transition is the heat shock protein Hsp42, which shows transient solubilization and phosphorylation, and is essential for the transformation of the cytoplasm during germination. Germinating spores therefore return to growth through the dissolution of protein assemblies, orchestrated in part by Hsp42 activity. The modulation of spores’ molecular properties are likely key adaptive features of their exceptional survival capacities.

### Sample Protocol
Gel lanes of each sample were cut into smaller pieces, destained with 40% ethanol in 30 mM ammonium bicarbonate then reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 30 min. The gel pieces were digested at 37°C initially with 0.5 ug of trypsin (Promega) per sample for 6 hours then additionally with 0.3 μg of trypsin overnight. The resulting peptides were extracted from gel pieces using sequential shaking in 40% acetonitrile then 100% acetonitrile, vacuum centrifuged (Vacufuge, Eppendorf) to evaporate the organic solvents and cleaned through C18 STop-And-Go-Extraction tips (StageTips, PMID 12498253), eluted in 40% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and vacuum centrifuged until complete dryness.  LC-MSMS analysis (PMID: 32539747). The concentration of the final reconstituted sample was measured at A205 using a NanoDrop One (Thermo Fisher) to inject 250 ng into Bruker Impact II Qtof coupled to easy nLC 1200 (PMID: 32539747). The injection was randomized to minimize loading order bias. A single analytical column set up using IonOpticks’ Aurora UHPLC column (1.6 μm C18 and 25 cm long) was used to create 90 minutes of separation from 5% to 35% buffer B for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Resulting data were searched on MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 (PMID 19373234) against sequences from verified and uncharacterized ORFs from the R64-3-1 release of the S288C genome proteome database (yeastgenome.org) and common contaminant sequences provided by the software (246 sequences) adding the following variable modifications:  oxidation on methionines, acetylation on protein N-termini, acetylation on lysines, methylations on arginine, and phosphorylation on serines, threonines, and tyrosines. Fixed carbamidomethylation was set on cysteines. Default match between runs was enabled and default peptide and fragment mass tolerances (10 and 40 ppm) were set. Data were filtered to have 1% false discovery rates at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell dormancy, Protein phosphorylation, Protein solubility, Cytoplasm

### Affiliations
Université Laval, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Christian R. Landry
Université Laval, Canada


