### Accession
PXD029683

### Title
Proteome dataset of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in postpartum dairy cows supplemented with different sources of omega-3 fatty acids

### Description
This article contains raw and processed data related to research published by Kra et al. [1]. There is a scarce knowledge on the proteome of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) during the transition period in dairy cows. In human research, proteomics PBMC is used in order to gain insight into inflammatory diseases and syndromes. Dietary fats, and specifically omega-3 (n-3) FA, can moderate the immune fluctuation caused by parturition through improvements of the immune function [2]. Therefore, this study aim was to characterize the changes that may occur in proteome of PBMC during transition, as influenced by different n-3 FA supplementation. Proteomics data of PBMC was obtained from postpartum dairy cows supplemented peripartum with either encapsulated saturated fat (CTL), encapsulated flaxseed oil that is enriched with ALA (α-linolenic acid; FLX) or encapsulated fish oil that is enriched with EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid; FO).The analysis was done by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry from PBMCs protein extraction. The cells were collected from six cows per treatment during the 1st week postpartum. Quantification of differential abundance between groups was done using MS1 intensity based label-free. Label-free quantitative shotgun proteomics was used for characterization. This novel dataset of proteomics data from PBMC contains 3807 proteins; 44, 42 and 65 were differently abundant (P ≤ 0.05 and FC ± 1.5), in FLX vs. CTL, FO vs. CTL and FLX vs. FO, respectively; these findings are discussed in our recent research article [1]. The present dataset of PBMC proteome adds new information regarding the effects of n-3 FA on the immune system, while providing reference for PBMC proteome in postpartum dairy cows.

### Sample Protocol
The bicinchoninic acid assay was used to determine protein concentration in each AT sample, from 10 cows (5 per treatment from each fat depot) were chosen for proteomics analysis based on protein yield. The sample size for proteome analysis was calculated using data from earlier studies in dairy cows50. Using a modified filter-aided sample preparation process, samples were tryptic digested. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (16,000X g, 10 min) after lysing samples in 1 ml SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.6, DTT 100 mM) for 6 minutes at 95 °C. 50 µg of the supernatant was mixed with 200 µl of urea buffer I (8.0 M urea in 0.1 M Tris–HCl pH 8.0), loaded onto a 30-kDa molecular-weight-cutoff filter (vivacon 500, VN01H22, Sartorius, Göettingen, Germany), and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g, followed by one wash with urea buffer I and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g. Iodoacetamide was then added to the filter, which was incubated for 10 minutes before being centrifuged for 20 minutes at 14,000 g. Using 200 micro liters of ammonium bicarbonate, two washes were performed. The samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight with trypsin (1 g) in 40 L ammonium bicarbonate.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human sequences from UniprotKB version 11_2018, 73,101 sequences, and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N termini. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Detected proteins were considered with at least one peptide and at least one valid intensity value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cows, Fatty acids

### Affiliations
Department of Ruminant Science, Institute of Animal Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani Center, Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Uzi Moallem
Department of Ruminant Science, Institute of Animal Sciences, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani Center, Israel


