### Accession
PXD031592

### Title
The Ubiquitin-Specific Protease USP36 SUMOylates EXOSC10 and promotes the nucleolar RNA exosome function in rRNA processing

### Description
The RNA exosome is an essential 3’ to 5’ processing exoribonuclease complex that mediates degradation, processing, and quality control of virtually all eukaryotic RNAs. The nucleolar RNA exosome, consisting of a 9-subunit core and a distributive 3ʹ to 5ʹ exonuclease EXOSC10, plays a critical role in processing and degrading nucleolar RNAs, including pre-ribosomal RNA (pre-rRNA). However, how the RNA exosome is regulated in the nucleolus is poorly understood. Here, we report that the nucleolar ubiquitin-specific protease USP36 is a novel regulator of the nucleolar RNA exosome. USP36 binds to the RNA exosome through direct interaction with EXOSC10. Interestingly, USP36 does not significantly regulate the levels of EXOSC10 and other exosome subunits. Instead, it mediates EXOSC10 SUMOylation at Lys (K) 583. Mutating K583 impaired the binding of EXOSC10 to pre-rRNAs and the K583R mutant failed to rescue the defects in rRNA processing and cell growth inhibition caused by knockdown of endogenous EXOSC10, indicating that EXOSC10 SUMOylation is critical for the exosome function in rRNA processing. Furthermore, USP36 itself is a rRNA-binding protein that associates pre-rRNA. These results suggest that USP36 acts as a novel SUMO ligase to mediate EXOSC10 SUMOylation critical for the RNA exosome function in rRNA processing and ribosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, plasmids, and recombinant proteins: Human HEK-293 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 50 U/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin at 37°C in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere. Recombinant proteins were expressed in E. Coli (BL21) by induction with Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and purified using glutathione agarose for GST-fusion proteins and Ni2+-NTA agarose beads for His-tagged proteins. Anti-Flag (M2, F3165, Sigma) was purchased.  Affinity purification of human USP36-associated protein complexes and mass spectrometry analysis: HEK-293 cells stably expressing control or Flag-USP36 were established by transfecting with control pcDNA3-Flag and Flag-USP36 plasmids, respectively, followed by selection in medium containing 0.5 mg/ml neomycin (G418) for single clones. The cells were lysed in NP40 lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors at 4C for one hour followed by centrifugation. Twenty milligrams of the cleared cell lysates from either control or Flag-USP36 expressing cells were incubated with 0.1 ml of anti-Flag (M2) agarose beads at 4C for 4 hours. The beads were washed four times in lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors. The bead-bound proteins were eluted in 0.2 ml of TBS (50 mM Tris HCL, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) containing 0.1 mg/ml of Flag peptides. Eluted proteins were run into a SDS-PAGE gel for 6 minutes, the gel stained, protein bands at the top of the gel excised, reduction and alkylation of cysteines performed using dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively, and proteins in-gel trypsinized.   Dried peptides were then dissolved in 5% formic acid were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 0.1 x 20 mm NanoViper C18 peptide trap (Thermo Scientific) for 5 min at a 10 microliter/min flow rate in a 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid mobile phase and peptides separated using a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron particle, 75-micron x 50-cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific) using a 7.5–30% acetonitrile gradient over 120 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid and a 300 nl/min flow rate using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLC nano UPLC. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) configured for data dependent analysis. MS1 scan resolution was set to 120,000 (at m/z 200) and MS1 automatic gain control (AGC) target was 200000 with a maximum injection time of 50ms. Mass range was set at 400-1500. MS1 data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity. The linear ion trap AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 10000, and intensity threshold was 5000. Quadrupole isolation width was set at 1.6 m/z. Normalized HCD collision energy was set at 35%. Peptide match was set to off, and isotope exclusion was on. Dynamic exclusion was set to plus/minus 10 ppm with a duration of 30s.

### Data Protocol
Comet (v. 2016.01, rev. 3) was used to search MS2 Spectra against a June 2019 version of a UniProt FASTA protein database containing 20,960 canonical Homo sapiens sequences with the addition of human USP36 and SENP3 sequences, and 179 common contaminant sequences. To estimate error rates, sequence-reversed forms of all proteins were concatenated to the FASTA file. The database processing was performed with python scripts available at https://github.com/pwilmart/fasta_utilities.git and Comet results processing used the PAW pipeline from https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git.  Comet searches for all samples were performed with trypsin enzyme specificity. Monoisotopic parent ion mass tolerance was 1.25 Da. Monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance was 1.0005 Da. A static modification of +113.084 Da was added to all cysteine residues and a variable modification of +79.9663 Da to serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. Comet scores were combined into linear discriminant function scores, and discriminant score histograms created separately for each peptide charge state (2+, 3+, and 4+). Separate histograms were created for matches to forward sequences and for matches to reversed sequences for all peptides of 7 amino acids or longer. The score histograms for reversed matches were used to estimate peptide false discovery rates (FDR) and set score thresholds for each peptide class. After removal of contaminates, this resulted in the identification of about 1030 proteins with at least two peptides per protein. Estimation of protein abundance differences in the immunoprecipitates from control or Flag-USP36 cell lysates was performed using the numbers of assigned MS/MS spectra to each protein across the two samples.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA exosome is an essential 3' to 5'&#xa0;exoribonuclease complex that mediates degradation, processing and quality control of virtually all eukaryotic RNAs. The nucleolar RNA exosome, consisting of a nine-subunit core and a distributive 3' to 5' exonuclease EXOSC10, plays a critical role in processing and degrading nucleolar RNAs, including pre-rRNA. However, how the RNA exosome is regulated in the nucleolus is poorly understood. Here, we report that the nucleolar ubiquitin-specific protease USP36 is a novel regulator of the nucleolar RNA exosome. USP36 binds to the RNA exosome through direct interaction with EXOSC10 in the nucleolus. Interestingly, USP36 does not significantly regulate the levels of EXOSC10 and other tested exosome subunits. Instead, it mediates EXOSC10 SUMOylation at lysine (K) 583. Mutating K583 impaired the binding of EXOSC10 to pre-rRNAs, and the K583R mutant failed to rescue the defects in rRNA processing and cell growth inhibition caused by knockdown of endogenous EXOSC10. Furthermore, EXOSC10 SUMOylation is markedly reduced in cells in response to perturbation of ribosomal biogenesis. Together, these results suggest that USP36 acts as a SUMO ligase to promote EXOSC10 SUMOylation critical for the RNA exosome function in ribosome biogenesis.

### Keywords
Human, Ribosome biogenesis, Rna exosome, Deubiquitination, Usp36, Sumoylation

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Mu-Shui Dai
Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


