### Accession
PXD001344

### Title
Inactivation of a NB-LRR plant immune-effector complex by post-translational modification

### Description
Modification of plant immune complexes by pathogen effectors can trigger strong immune responses mediated by the action of nucleotide binding-leucine rich repeat immune receptors. Although some strains of the pathogen Pseudomonas syringae harbor effectors that individually can trigger immunity, the plant’s response may be suppressed by other virulence factors. This work shows a new strategy for immune suppression. After injection into host cells, the suppressing effector binds to and acetylates multiple members of an immune complex, including another effector that on its own can trigger immunity. Acetylations modify serine, threonine, lysine and/or histidine residues in the targets resulting in the inactivation of the whole immune complex and increased growth of the pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digestion of samples from SDS-PAGE gels Protein bands to be analyzed were excised from 4-12 % MOPS buffer SDS-PAGE gels with sterile razor blade and chopped into ~1 mm3 pieces. Each sample was washed in water and destained using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5 and 10 μl of 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine HCl at 37°C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by adding 100 μl 50 mM iodoacetamide and allowed to react in the dark at 20°C for 30 min. Gel samples were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and dried in a SpeedVac. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with 1:50 enzyme-protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and vacuum dried.   HPLC for Mass Spectrometry The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic C8 (Optimize Technologies), washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC-MS/MS Analysis The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive (Thermo scientific) mass spectrometer, using a 60,000 RP survey scan, m/z 375-1950, with lockmasses, followed by 15 HCD CID scans on only doubly and triply charged precursors between 375 Da and 1950 Da.  Inclusion lists of expected acetylated or phosphorylated tryptic in-silico peptide ion masses were generated (in-house software) and were loaded into instrument method. We loaded up the FASTA sequence file for RIPK, RIN4, AvrB3, and/or HopZ3 and modeled the following modifications: (formyl n-term, oxidation (M), acetyl (K, H, S, T), 13C heavy acetyl (K, H, S, T), phospo (S, T)), the produced m/z ions were filtered for 2+ and 3+ expected ions, then combined into a *.csv file ready to load into the QE instrumentation method. Due to a hard upper limit of 5000 inclusion ions allowed by the instrument, we generated 3 files (1: RIPK and HopZ3 ions, 2: RIN4 and HopZ3, and 3: AvrB3 and HopZ3 ions). Ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was set up to search the 130416_Greenberb_db3 database (6626 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the 130416_Greenberb_db3 database (6626 entries) also assuming trypsin. Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. oxidation of methionine, formyl of the n-terminus, acetyl of histidine, lysine, serine and threonine, heavy acetyl:13C(2) of histidine, lysine, serine and threonine, and phospho of serine and threonine were specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as variable modifications.  Criteria for Protein Identification Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Peptide Probabilities from Mascot (Ion Score Only) were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  All acetylated and phosphorylated peptide spectra were manually validated.  Manual validation included inspecting the *.raw file for the MS isotopic peak, validating the correct charge state and noting which isotope was selected for MSMS fragmentation.  We then inspected the MSMS fragmentation data inspecting the *.raw scan with the scaffold labeled peaks and checked manually for any 13C-acetyl peptides that were mis-identified as a 12C-acetyl peptide.  This distinction was enabled by inspection of the masses of MSMS fragmentation peaks and inspection of the MS Isotopic Peak pattern for the peptide.  Preliminary results using Scaffold as the output suggested the presence of 13C-acetylation sites on RIPK, RIN4, and AvrB3. Potential sites were manually checked using the primary MS data. For each site identified in the data file, a snapshot was taken of the spectra that corresponded to the greatest intensity of the peptide over the span of its detection. Peaks were then measured for their absolute intensity at the apex of each peak for all peaks within the isotopic distribution. Only peaks that were clearly within the isotopic distribution of the peptide in question were measured.  The sum of all peaks within a distribution was then used as an indicator of the peptide quantity, which was then directly compared to the same summation of the corresponding peptide from the samples treated with either the catalytically inactive mutant or the substrate alone. This produced the list of sites of acetylation that resulted specifically from HopZ3 treatment in Table 1, column 1. We also report acetylation sites where there was similar background with 13C-acetyl-CoA alone or 13C-acetyl-CoA plus HopZ3_C300A, but where HopZ3 caused >2-fold increase in the level of 13C-acetylation (Table 1, column 2). To assess the acetylation sites of the enzyme HopZ3, each of the above samples (RIPK, RIN4, and AvrB3) were examined for detected sites of 13C-acetylation in HopZ3. Spectra for each identified site were analyzed for their presence in both the HopZ3 and HopZ3_C300A versions of the sample as was done in the above substrate samples. Sites of acetylation were assessed for each sample set then were compared across all three sets. Table 1, column 1 reports the sites found in HopZ3 but not the catalytic mutant across all three sample sets, as well as sites identified in only one of the sample sets.  Table 1, column 2 reports a site that showed 3.4-fold higher modification in HopZ3 than was found in the catalytic mutant.

### Publication Abstract
Modifications of plant immune complexes by secreted pathogen effectors can trigger strong immune responses mediated by the action of nucleotide binding-leucine-rich repeat immune receptors. Although some strains of the pathogen Pseudomonas syringae harbor effectors that individually can trigger immunity, the plant's response may be suppressed by other virulence factors. This work reveals a robust strategy for immune suppression mediated by HopZ3, an effector in the YopJ family of acetyltransferases. The suppressing HopZ3 effector binds to and can acetylate multiple members of the RPM1 immune complex, as well as two P. syringae effectors that together activate the RPM1 complex. These acetylations modify serine, threonine, lysine, and/or histidine residues in the targets. Through HopZ3-mediated acetylation, it is possible that the whole effector-immune complex is inactivated, leading to increased growth of the pathogen.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Q-exactive, Pseudomonas syringae, Acetylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Jean T. Greenberg
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA


