### Accession
PXD007256

### Title
Calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase kinase 2 (CAMKK2), an alternative to curcumin in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

### Description
Curcumin has been shown to exhibit anti-neoplastic effects. However, due to its poor bioavailability, use of curcumin as an anti-cancer drug is limited. It is thus necessary to identify molecules that could be targeted using anti-cancer agents as alternatives to curcumin. For this, it is important to understand the underlying signaling pathways mediating the anti-neoplastic effects of curcumin. We carried out phosphoproteomic analysis (TiO2-based enrichment of Ser/Thr kinases) of head and neck cancer cell line, CAL27 treated with curcumin to identify curcumin mediated signaling pathways. This resulted in the identification of 5921 phosphopeptides (phosphosite probability≥75%) corresponding 1,878 proteins. Of these, 275 and 335 phosphopeptides corresponding to 183 and 242 proteins (≥2.0-fold) were found to be hyper- and hypo-phosphorylated respectively, in response to curcumin treatment

### Sample Protocol
CAL 27 cells were grown and maintained in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin mixture at 37ºC in a humidified incubator supplied with 5% CO2. CAL 27 cells grown in regular media were treated with curcumin at a dose of 11.5 uM for 4h and cells cultured in SILAC media were treated with DMSO. Post-treatment, the cells from both the conditions were washed with 1X PBS and harvested in urea lysis buffer [20 mM HEPES (pH8.0), 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate]. The samples were then sonicated and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm at 15°C for 20 min. Equal amount of protein lysate from both the conditions was mixed and subjected to reduction, alkylation and protein digestion using sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides were fractionated by basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography and pooled into 12 fractions and lyophilized. TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment of the 12 fractions was carried out. Briefly, TiO2 beads were incubated with DHB solution (80% ACN, 1% TFA, 3% 2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB)) for 2-4 hours at room temperature. Each fraction was resuspended in DHB and incubated with pre-treated TiO2 beads (1 mg). Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 beads were washed three times with DHB solution and twice with 40% ACN. Peptides were eluted three times with 40 μl of 2% ammonia into 10 μl of 20% TFA. LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bermen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for analysis of the enriched phosphopeptides. Precursor MS scan (m/z 350–1700) and MS/MS (m/z 350–1400) was acquired with a mass resolution of 120K and 15K at 200 m/z in the orbitrap mass analyzer. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 50K for both MS and MS/MS and maximum ion injection time was set to 100ms for MS and 250ms for MS/MS scan events. In each duty cycle 10 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) mode at 35% normalized collision energy and isolation width was set to 1.9 m/z. Singly charged and unassigned charge precursor were rejected. The lock mass option was enabled using polysiloxane ion (m/z= 445.12002) from ambient air for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analysis was searched against Human RefSeq database (Version 59 containing 36,208 protein sequences and known contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and SILAC labels 13C6-Lysine; 13C6-Arginine were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as static modification. The mass error of parent ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and MS/MS identifications of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis. Precursor ion quantifier node was used for peptide quantification and PhosphoRS node (version 3.1) was used for calculation of phosphosite probabilities. Further phosphopeptides with phosphosite probabilities ≥75% were used for identification of protein phosphorylation  sites.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular transformation owing to cigarette smoking is due to chronic exposure and not acute. However, systematic studies to understand the molecular alterations in lung cells due to cigarette smoke are lacking. To understand these molecular alterations induced by chronic cigarette smoke exposure, we carried out tandem mass tag (TMT) based temporal proteomic profiling of lung cells exposed to cigarette smoke for upto 12months. We identified 2620 proteins in total, of which 671 proteins were differentially expressed (1.5-fold) after 12months of exposure. Prolonged exposure of lung cells to smoke for 12months revealed dysregulation of oxidative phosphorylation and overexpression of enzymes involved in TCA cycle. In addition, we also observed overexpression of enzymes involved in glutamine metabolism, fatty acid degradation and lactate synthesis. This could possibly explain the availability of alternative source of carbon to TCA cycle apart from glycolytic pyruvate. Our data indicates that chronic exposure to cigarette smoke induces mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming in cells to support growth and survival.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Quantitative proteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Head and neck cancer, Bioavailability, Kinases, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, ITPB, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, ITPB, Bangalore, India


