### Accession
PXD016017

### Title
A Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Matrix with Potent Osteoregenerative Capabilities

### Description
Approximately 10% of fractures that occur in the United States annually will not heal without intervention. This figure is rising due to an aging population and a rise in conditions that impair bone healing. Current treatments can be marginally effective, costly, and some have adverse effects. A safe and manufacturable material that mimics anabolic bone is the holy grail of bone tissue engineering, but achieving this is challenging. Adult stem cells, especially mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), are excellent candidates for engineering bone, but the lack of reproducibility due to donor variation and culture protocols have hindered progress in this area. Herein, we describe an MSC line generated from induced pluripotent stem cells with remarkable osteogenic properties. The cells can be induced to generate large amounts of osteogenic extracellular matrix (ihMatrix) under monolayer culture conditions. When pure ihMatrix is implanted into calvarial defects in mice, it has intrinsic osteogenic activity that significantly surpasses the efficacy of bone morphogenic protein 2 resulting in complete healing of defects in 4 weeks through a mechanism of action mediated in part by collagen VI and XII. Based on these findings, we propose that ihMatrix could represent a superior replacement for the current gold standards, autograft and BMP products, used commonly in bone tissue engineering.

### Sample Protocol
Confluent human mesenchymal stem cells were incubated in 5 mM beta-glycerophosphate and 50 micrograms per mL ascorbate for 8 days to induce matrix deposition. In some cases, 10 microM peroxisome proliferator activated receptor inhibitor GW9662 was added to media to enhance output. After 8 days, extracellular matrices (ECM) were decellularized and purified in accordance with Zeitouni et al. 2012. The pure ECM was subjected to proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Matrices were subjected to tryptic fingerprinting and LC/MS analysis. Samples were separated on a 4-20% Mini-Protean TGX precast gel (BioRad) and stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue (Sigma). Resultant bands were excised and de-stained by 2 cycles of 2:1 acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min, followed by 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes. Proteins were reduced by 1 h incubation in 5 mM dithiothrietol following alkylation with 5.5 mM iodoacteamide. The bands were digested with 25µg mL-1 trypsin overnight at 36ºC. The sample was desalted and purified using Ziptip C18 column according to manufacturer’s instructions (EMD Millipore, Burlington, MA). Digested samples were suspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA) before separation and analysis by LC-MS (Dionex UltiMate 3000 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system - Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, Thermo Fisher). The LC gradient was set up at 4 ml.min-1 using a 2-90% gradient of 0.1% (v/v) FA in acetonitrile (buffer B) against 0.1% (v/v) FA in dH2O (buffer A). Detection was performed with spray voltage of 2.3 KV, orbitrab resolution of 120 K, scan range of 400-1600, and higher-energy C-trap dissociation energy (HCD) set to 28%. Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2 software (Thermo). Clustering analysis was performed based on Euclidean distances in Rstudio (v1.1.435).

### Publication Abstract
Approximately 10% of fractures will not heal without intervention. Current treatments can be marginally effective, costly, and some have adverse effects. A safe and manufacturable mimic of anabolic bone is the primary goal of bone engineering, but achieving this is challenging. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), are excellent candidates for engineering bone, but lack reproducibility due to donor source and culture methodology. The need for a bioactive attachment substrate also hinders progress. Herein, we describe a highly osteogenic MSC line generated from induced pluripotent stem cells that generates high yields of an osteogenic cell-matrix (ihOCM) in vitro. In mice, the intrinsic osteogenic activity of ihOCM surpasses bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2) driving healing of calvarial defects in 4 weeks by a mechanism mediated in part by collagen VI and XII. We propose that ihOCM may represent an effective replacement for autograft and BMP products used commonly in bone tissue engineering.

### Keywords
Stem cell， matrix

### Affiliations
Texas A&M Health Science Center
Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center, College Station, TX, 77843, USA.

### Submitter
Carl Gregory

### Lab Head
Dr Carl A. Gregory
Department of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Texas A&M Health Science Center, College Station, TX, 77843, USA.


