### Accession
PXD031225

### Title
Structure-guided mutagenesis of a mucin-selective metalloprotease from Akkermansia muciniphila alters substrate preferences

### Description
Akkermansia muciniphila, a mucin-degrading microbe found in the human gut, is often associated with positive health outcomes. The abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila is modulated by the presence and accessibility of nutrients, which can be derived from diet or host glycoproteins. In particular, the ability to degrade host mucins, a class of proteins carrying densely O-glycosylated domains, provides a competitive advantage in the sustained colonization of niche mucosal environments. Although Akkermansia muciniphila is known to rely on mucins as a carbon and nitrogen source, the enzymatic machinery used by this microbe to process mucins in the gut is not yet fully characterized. Here, we focus on the mucin-selective metalloprotease, Amuc_0627 (AM0627), which is known to cleave between adjacent residues carrying truncated core 1 O-glycans. We showed that this enzyme is capable of degrading purified mucin 2 (MUC2), the major protein component of mucus in the gut. An X-ray crystal structure of AM0627 at 1.9 Å resolution revealed O-glycan binding residues that are conserved between structurally characterized enzymes from the same family. We further rationalized the substrate cleavage motif using molecular modeling to identify nonconserved glycan-interacting residues. Mutagenesis of these residues resulted in altered substrate preferences down to the glycan level, providing insight into the structural determinants of O-glycan recognition.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation Digests against recombinant glycoproteins podocalyxin, MUC16, PSGL-1, and CD43 (3 µg) were performed with 200 nM AM0627 or AM0627 mutants ± 3 U of SialEXO in PBS (20 µL of total volume) for 21 h at 37 ºC. Control digests were set up with substrate alone or substrate + SialEXO. Digests were de-N-glycosylated via addition of 1 µL of PNGase F (New England Biolabs, diluted to 50,000 U/mL in PBS) overnight at 37 ºC. DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated at 55 ºC for 15 min. Samples were brought to room temperature, then iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 15 mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:15 enzyme:substrate ratio and samples were incubated overnight at room temperature. Samples were quenched by dilution with 500 µL of 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and peptides were desalted using 10 mg/1 mL Strata-X columns (Phenomenex). Briefly, columns were wet with 1 mL of acetonitrile followed by 1 mL of 0.2% FA. Acidified peptides were loaded onto the columns and washed with 300 µL of 0.2% FA. Peptides were eluted with 400 µL of 0.2% FA, 80% acetonitrile, dried via lyophilization, then resuspended in 10 µL of 0.2% FA.  LC-MS/MS Data was acquired using product-dependent triggering of EThcD scans similar to previous descriptions . Approximately 1 µg of peptides were injected on column for each sample. Peptides were separated over a 25 cm EasySpray reversed phase LC column (75 µm inner diameter packed with 2 μm, 100 Å, PepMap C18 particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A Dionex Ultimate 3000 RPLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an integrated loading pump was used for online liquid chromatography using mobile phases A (water with 0.2% formic acid) and B (acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 um particles, 20 mm length, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 5 µl/min, which was put in line with the analytical column 5.5 minutes into the acquisition. Gradient elution was performed at 300 nL/min. The gradient was held at increased from 0% B for the first 6 mins of the analysis, followed by an increase from 0% to 5% B from 6 to 6.5 minutes, an increase from 5% to 22% B from 6.5 to 66.5 minutes, an increase from 22% to 90% B from 66.5 to 71 minutes, isocratic flow at 90% B from 71 to 75 minutes, and a re-equilibration at 0% for 15 minutes for a total analysis time of 90 minutes. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursors were ionized using an EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) held at +2.2 kV compared to ground, and the column was held at 40 °C. The inlet capillary temperature on the quadrupole-Orbitrap-linear ion trap Tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific) used for analysis was held at 275 °C. Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 400-1800 m/z with a normalized AGC target of 100% (400,000 charges), a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-8 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 3 seconds of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 20 seconds, and exclusion duration of 20 seconds.  An isolation window of 2 m/z was used to select precursor ions with the quadrupole. EThcD scans were collected in product-dependent fashion , where the presence of oxonium ions (126.055, 138.0549, 144.0655, 168.0654, 186.076, 204.0865, 274.0921, 292.1027, and 366.1395) in a “scouting” higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scan triggered acquisition of a second MS/MS scan. The “scout HCD” scan used an automated scan range determination and a first mass of 100 Th, a normalized collision energy (nce) of 36, a normalized AGG target value of 100% (50,000 charges), a maximum injection time setting of Auto (54 ms), and a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. If at least three of the nine listed oxonium ions were present in the scout HCD scan within a ±15 ppm tolerance and were among the 20 most intense peaks, an EThcD MS/MS scan was triggered that used calibrated charge dependent parameters for calculating reagent AGC targets and ion-ion reaction times , a supplemental collision energy of 25, a scan range of 200-3,000 m/z, a maximum injection time of 200 ms, a normalized AGC target of 200% (100,000 charges), 3 microscans per spectrum, and a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis All raw data were searched using O-Pair Search implemented in MetaMorpheus (0.0.317), which is available at https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/MetaMorpheus . Files for mucin digestions from a given digestion condition (e.g., AM0627, AM0627 with sialidase treatment) were searched together in batches with a fasta file containing Uniprot-derived sequences from all four mucins. The “Glyco Search” option was selected, where the O-glycopeptide search feature was enabled with an O-glycan database of 22 glycans (Table X) below. The “Keep top N candidates” feature was set to 50, and Data Type was set as HCD with Child Scan Dissociation set as EThcD. The “Maximum OGlycan Allowed” setting was set to 4, where this number represents both the maximum number of O-glycan modifications that could occur on a glycopeptide candidate and the number of times each O-glycan could occur per peptide. Under Search Parameters, both “Use Provided Precursor” and “Deconvolute Precursors” were checked. Peak trimming was not enabled and Top N peaks and minimum ratio were set to 1000 and 0.01, respectively. In-Silico Digestion Parameters were set to generate decoy proteins using reversed sequences, and the initiator methionine feature was set to “Variable”. The maximum modification isoforms allowed was 1024, and non-specific digestion was enabled for peptides ranging from 5 to 60 residues. Precursor and product mass tolerances were 10 and 20 ppm, respectively, and the minimum score allowed was 3. Modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl on C as fixed, and Oxidation on M and Deamidation on N as variable. Note, O-Pair Search returns a single identification representing two spectra, both an HCD and EThcD spectrum. Identifications are made using the HCD spectrum, and the associated EThcD spectrum is used to localize O-glycosites.  The oglyco.psmtsv results file was used for all data processing. Identifications were filtered to include only target matches (T) and identifications with a q-value < 0.01. O-glycopeptide identifications were further filtered to include only Level 1 identifications, which include only identifications with confident and unambiguous O-glycosite localization, and to exclude O-glycopeptides that contained an N-glycosylation sequon (N-X-S/T). Peptide windows for motif generation were mapped from this filtered O-glycopeptide list onto fasta sequences. The percent of O-glycosylated serine and threonine residues was determined by counting the number of modified residues at a given position relative to the total number of serine and threonine residues. Serine and threonine counts were summed, so this is an aggregate value for both residues.

### Publication Abstract
Akkermansia muciniphila, a mucin-degrading microbe found in the human gut, is often associated with positive health outcomes. The abundance of A.&#xa0;muciniphila is modulated by the presence and accessibility of nutrients, which can be derived from diet or host glycoproteins. In particular, the ability to degrade host mucins, a class of proteins carrying densely O-glycosylated domains, provides a competitive advantage in the sustained colonization of niche mucosal environments. Although A.&#xa0;muciniphila is known to rely on mucins as a carbon and nitrogen source, the enzymatic machinery used by this microbe to process mucins in the gut is not yet fully characterized. Here, we focus on the mucin-selective metalloprotease, Amuc_0627 (AM0627), which is known to cleave between adjacent residues carrying truncated core 1 O-glycans. We showed that this enzyme is capable of degrading purified mucin 2 (MUC2), the major protein component of mucus in the gut. An X-ray crystal structure of AM0627 (1.9&#xa0;&#xc5; resolution) revealed O-glycan-binding residues that are conserved between structurally characterized enzymes from the same family. We further rationalized the substrate cleavage motif using molecular modeling to identify nonconserved glycan-interacting residues. We conclude that mutagenesis of these residues resulted in altered substrate preferences down to the glycan level, providing insight into the structural determinants of O-glycan recognition.

### Keywords
X-ray crystallography, Enzyme structure, Mucin, Metalloprotease, O-glycosylation, Mucinase, Molecular docking, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry, Stanford ChEM-H

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry, Stanford ChEM-H


