### Accession
PXD004761

### Title
Ubiquitylated-Rpn10 -  Structure of ubiquitylated-Rpn10 provides insight into its autoregulation mechanism

### Description
MS/MS characterization of the proteasomal ubiquitin-receptor Rpn10 in its ubiquitylated state that together with structural and biochemical studies reveal a novel ubiquitin-binding patch on RPN10 that directs K84 ubiquitylation.

### Sample Protocol
Rpn10 in its ubiquitylated state was expressed using bacteria that express a ubiquitylation apparatus. Complexes of wt RPN10-ubiquitin and mutant RPN10-ubiquitin (I147A,T173R, T175R) were we purified and isolated by SDS-PAGE. The relevant bands were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) Version 4.8.0. TPP-processed centroid fragment peak lists in mzML format were searched against a database composed of yeast and E. coli proteins (Uniprot), ubiquitination enzymes (see EMBO J. 2012 Jan 18;31(2):378-90. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.397), human ubiquitin, mutant RPN10 and known contaminants (cRAP) supplemented with their corresponding decoy sequences. The database searches were performed using X! Tandem with high-resolution k-score plugin (HRK) through the TPP. Search parameters comprised: trypsin cleavage specificity with two missed cleavage, cysteine carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, methaionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation and lysine GG as variable modifications, peptide tolerance and MS/MS tolerance were set at 20 ppm. X! Tandem refinement comprised: semi-style cleavages and variable lysine GG modification.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin receptors decode ubiquitin signals into many cellular responses. Ubiquitin receptors also undergo coupled monoubiquitylation, and rapid deubiquitylation has hampered the characterization of the ubiquitylated state. Using bacteria that express a ubiquitylation apparatus, we purified and determined the crystal structure of the proteasomal ubiquitin-receptor Rpn10 in its ubiquitylated state. The structure shows a novel ubiquitin-binding patch that directs K84 ubiquitylation. Superimposition of ubiquitylated-Rpn10 onto electron-microscopy models of proteasomes indicates that the Rpn10-conjugated ubiquitin clashes with Rpn9, suggesting that ubiquitylation might be involved in releasing Rpn10 from the proteasome. Indeed, ubiquitylation on immobilized proteasomes dissociates the modified Rpn10 from the complex, while unmodified Rpn10 mainly remains associated. In vivo experiments indicate that contrary to wild type, Rpn10-K84R is stably associated with the proteasomal subunit Rpn9. Similarly Rpn10, but not ubiquitylated-Rpn10, binds Rpn9 in vitro. Thus we suggest that ubiquitylation functions to dissociate modified ubiquitin receptors from their targets, a function that promotes cyclic activity of ubiquitin receptors.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Yeast, Rpn10

### Affiliations
The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Structural Biology, George S. Wise faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Gali Prag
The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Structural Biology, George S. Wise faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel


