### Accession
PXD001199

### Title
Systematic identification of hypothetical bacteriophage proteins targeting key protein complexes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Addressing the functionality of predicted genes remains an enormous challenge in the post-genomic era. A prime example of genes lacking functional assignments are the poorly conserved, early expressed genes of lytic bacteriophages, whose products are involved in the subversion of the host metabolism. In this study, we focused on the composition of important macromolecular complexes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa involved in transcription, DNA replication, fatty acid biosynthesis, RNA regulation, energy metabolism and cell division, during infection with members of seven distinct clades of lytic phages. Using affinity purifications of these host protein complexes coupled to mass spectrometric analyses, 37 host complex-associated phage proteins could be identified. Importantly, eight of these show an inhibitory effect on bacterial growth upon episomal expression, suggesting that these phage proteins are potentially involved in hijacking the host complexes. Using complementary protein-protein interaction assays, we further mapped the inhibitory interaction of gp12 of phage 14-1 to the α subunit of the RNA polymerase. Together, our data demonstrate the powerful use of interactomics to unravel the biological role of hypothetical phage proteins, which constitute an enormous untapped source of novel antibacterial proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains, phages and media  All manipulations and phage infections in P. aeruginosa were performed on the P. aeruginosa PAO1 strain (Stover et al, 2000). P. aeruginosa strains with a Strep-tag® II or a Protein A-tag (PrA) fused to the C-terminus of the target proteins were made by targeted homologous recombination of the genome (Lesic & Rahme, 2008). Three E. coli strains were used: E. coli TOP10 (Life Technologies) was used during cloning procedures, E. coli BL21 (DE3) (Life Technologies) was used for heterologous expression of proteins and E. coli BTH101 (Euromedex) was used for bacterial two-hybrid assays. Unless stated elsewhere, bacteria were grown in Lysogeny Broth (LB) (with appropriate antibiotics) at 37°C. The phages used in this research are listed in Table I. The phages were propagated on P. aeruginosa PAO1 or Li010 (in case of phage LUZ24) cells using standard soft agar overlay followed by PEG8000 precipitation, as previously described (Ceyssens et al, 2008) and stored in phage buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM MgSO4, 150 mM NaCl). The ‘efficiency of plating’ was determined by using standard soft agar overlay and comparing the titer of phages on the wild type P. aeruginosa PAO1 strain to the mutant strains. Affinity purification For affinity purification, a 600 ml culture of the constructed P. aeruginosa PAO1 strain was infected by one of the phages at a multiplicity of infection of 10 or 5 (in case of phage phiKZ) to ensure complete and synchronous infection of the cell culture, at an optical density of 0,3 at 600 nm. The infection was stopped early in infection (Table I) by rapidly chilling the culture in an icy water bath. Cells were collected and a PrA-tag pull-down was performed as previously described (Klimuk et al, 2013). For pull-downs using the Strep®-tag II, 1 ml pre-washed Strep-Tactin® Sepharose beads (IBA) were used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The eluted fractions were concentrated by ultrafiltration (Amicon Ultra 3K, Millipore). Protein expression and purification For overexpression, phage protein gp12 of phage 14-1 was C-terminally fused to a self-cleavable intein tag by cloning into the expression vector pTYB1 (New England Biolabs) and transformation to E. coli BL21 (DE3) cells. Proteins were expressed and purified using standard procedures. The protein was dialyzed to a storage buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.0, 200 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA and 50% glycerol). Recombinant E. coli RNAP as well as the σ70-factor of P. aeruginosa were prepared and purified as described previously (Borukhov & Goldfarb, 1993). The P. aeruginosa RNAP was produced similar to the procedure to prepare native E. coli RNAP (Polyakov et al, 1995). Briefly, the cell lysate of 15 g P. aeruginosa PAO1 RpoC::PrA cells was precipitated with 0.8% polymin-P and loaded on a HiTrap Heparin HP column (GE Healthcare) after salt removal with 40% ammonium sulphate. Subsequently, the eluted proteins were dialysed to TST buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween) and loaded on IgG SepharoseTM6Fast flow beads (GE Healthcare). After three washing steps with TST buffer, the RNAP was eluted by incubation with ProTEV protease (Promega), concentrated by ultrafiltration and dialysed to a buffer of 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 50% glycerol and 1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol.  Western blot  Mass spectrometry analysis  Expression phage proteins in P. aeruginosa and E. coli  Bacterial two-hybrid  In vitro pull-down assay  Native gel mobility shift

### Data Protocol
Preceding the mass spectrometry analysis, protein samples were loaded on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. The Coomassie-stained gel was cut into slices and subjected to trypsin digestion (Shevchenko et al, 1996). LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using a combination of two systems. Firstly, protein digests were analysed by ESI-MS/MS on a LCQ Classic (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, USA) equipped with a nano-LC column switching system as described (Dumont et al, 2004). In a second method, an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) which was on-line coupled to a mass calibrated LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) was used (Ceyssens et al, 2014). MS/MS spectra were searched against a database containing all P. aeruginosa PAO1 proteins and all ‘stop-to-stop’ protein sequences in all six frames of all phages.

### Publication Abstract
Addressing the functionality of predicted genes remains an enormous challenge in the postgenomic era. A prime example of genes lacking functional assignments are the poorly conserved, early expressed genes of lytic bacteriophages, whose products are involved in the subversion of the host metabolism. In this study, we focused on the composition of important macromolecular complexes of Pseudomonas aeruginosa involved in transcription, DNA replication, fatty acid biosynthesis, RNA regulation, energy metabolism, and cell division during infection with members of seven distinct clades of lytic phages. Using affinity purifications of these host protein complexes coupled to mass spectrometric analyses, 37 host complex-associated phage proteins could be identified. Importantly, eight of these show an inhibitory effect on bacterial growth upon episomal expression, suggesting that these phage proteins are potentially involved in hijacking the host complexes. Using complementary protein-protein interaction assays, we further mapped the inhibitory interaction of gp12 of phage 14-1 to the &#x3b1; subunit of the RNA polymerase. Together, our data demonstrate the powerful use of interactomics to unravel the biological role of hypothetical phage proteins, which constitute an enormous untapped source of novel antibacterial proteins. (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001199.).

### Keywords
Bacteriophages, Interactomics, Functional annotation, Affinity purifications, P. aeruginosa

### Affiliations
FBI
Division of Gene Technology, KU Leuven, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Jean-Paul Noben

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Rob Lavigne
Division of Gene Technology, KU Leuven, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium


