### Accession
PXD011626

### Title
Genome-wide postnatal changes in immunity following fetal inflammatory response

### Description
The fetal inflammatory response (FIR) increases the risk of perinatal brain injury, particularly in extremely low gestational age newborns (ELGANs, < 28 weeks of gestation). One of the mechanisms contributing to such a risk is a postnatal intermittent or sustained systemic inflammation (ISSI) following FIR. The link between prenatal and postnatal systemic inflammation is supported by the presence of well-established inflammatory biomarkers in the umbilical cord and peripheral blood. However, the extent of molecular changes contributing to this association is unknown. Using RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry proteomics, we profiled the transcriptome and proteome of archived neonatal dried blood spot (DBS) specimens from 21 ELGANs. Comparing FIR-affected and unaffected ELGANs, we identified 782 gene and 27 protein expression changes of 50% magnitude or more, and an experiment-wide significance level below 5% false discovery rate. These expression changes confirm the robust postnatal activation of the innate immune system in FIR-affected ELGANs and reveal for the first time an impairment of their adaptive immunity. In turn, the altered pathway provide clues about the molecular mechanisms triggering ISSI after FIR, and the onset of perinatal brain injury.

### Sample Protocol
DBS samples were excised and collected in a 2 mL eppendorf, and extracted as described in Chambers, A. G., et al. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 14, 3094–3104 (2015). Briefly, each sample was soaked with 970 µl of a solution consisting on 758 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 113 µl of 10% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate and 99 µl of 5 mM tris(2-carboxtethyl)phosphine and incubated at 60 ºC during 1h in constant agitation. Samples were alkylated with 10 µM iodacetamide (37ºC, 30 min) and quenched with 10 µM dithiothreitol (37ºC, 30 min). Samples were digested with trypsin (40 ng/µl) overnight at 37 ºC. Digestion was stopped with formic acid, and samples were vortexed and centrifuged (800 xg, 20 min) prior supernatant desalting using spin C18 columns.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition: Samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and were analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with an EASY-Spray nanosource coupled to a nano-UPLC system (EASY-nanoLC 1000 liquid chromatograph) equipped with a 50-cm C18 column (EASY-Spray; 75 µm id, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 mm particles, 45 ºC). Chromatographic gradients started at 5% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and gradually increased to 22% buffer B in 79 min and to 32% in 11 minutes. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 95% buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, with full MS scans over a mass range of m/z 350–1500 with detection in the Orbitrap (120K resolution) and with auto gain control (AGC) set to 100,000. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 were selected for fragmentation with HCD at normalized collision energy of 28%. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm (max cycle time of 3 seconds), and a dynamic exclusion of 60 s was set. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the ion trap with an AGC of 10,000 and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. One of the samples, BS04, could not be profiled for technical reasons. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v4.1.  Mass spectrometry protein expression quantification: The MaxQuant software suite (v1.6.2.6) was used for peptide identification and label-free protein quantification. The data were searched against the Uniprot human database with decoy entries (as in April 2018, 42518 entries). A precursor ion mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to two missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of methionine, protein acetylation at the N-terminal were defined as variable modification; whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fix modification. The minimum number of razor and unique peptides (“min. razor + unique”) for a protein group to be considered as identified was set to 1. Identified peptides and proteins were filtered using a 5% FDR. The match between runs algorithm was activated with a tolerance of 0.7 min for the matching time window and 20 min for the alignment time window.  From the initial set of 650 quantified protein expression profiles on 20 samples we discarded 26 whose protein identifier could not be mapped to one of the 25,221 genes profiled by RNA-seq. From the remaining 624 proteins, we selected 303 with protein quantification values in at least 6 out of the 20 samples. We further discarded 48 proteins whose protein quantification values were based in one single peptide, leading to a final protein quantification data matrix of 245 proteins by 20 samples. Raw protein protein quantifications were normalized using the vsn R/Bioconductor package. A complete normalized matrix of protein expression values was obtained by imputing missing quantifications with a multivariate method based on the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm implemented in the function impute.wrapper.MLE from the R package imputeLCMD. Using this complete and normalized matrix of protein expression values as input to the edgeR and limma-trend pipelines, we produced the MDS plot of Figure 1d and conducted a protein differential expression analysis with linear models. The design matrix included the FIR status of infants as main explanatory variable and sex as a covariate.

### Publication Abstract
The fetal inflammatory response (FIR) increases the risk of perinatal brain injury, particularly in extremely low gestational age newborns (ELGANs, &lt;&#xa0;28&#xa0;weeks of gestation). One of the mechanisms contributing to such a risk is a postnatal intermittent or sustained systemic inflammation (ISSI) following FIR. The link between prenatal and postnatal systemic inflammation is supported by the presence of well-established inflammatory biomarkers in the umbilical cord and peripheral blood. However, the extent of molecular changes contributing to this association is unknown. Using RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry proteomics, we profiled the transcriptome and proteome of archived neonatal dried blood spot (DBS) specimens from 21 ELGANs. Comparing FIR-affected and unaffected ELGANs, we identified 782 gene and 27 protein expression changes of 50% magnitude or more, and an experiment-wide significance level below 5% false discovery rate. These expression changes confirm the robust postnatal activation of the innate immune system in FIR-affected ELGANs and reveal for the first time an impairment of their adaptive immunity. In turn, the altered pathways provide clues about the molecular mechanisms triggering ISSI after FIR, and the onset of perinatal brain injury. DATABASES: EGAS00001003635 (EGA); PXD011626 (PRIDE).

### Keywords
Human, Dried blood spots, Fetal inflammatory response

### Affiliations
Center for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Center for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


