### Accession
PXD013063

### Title
HeLa Cells Cross-Linked In Vivo versus as a Lysate

### Description
HeLa Cells were cross-linked with PIR either in vivo or as a lysate.

### Sample Protocol
Cells used for intact cross-linking were immediately mixed with BDP-NHP to a final concentration of 10mM, incubated while shaking at room temperature (hereafter RT) for 30 minutes, and then washed with ammonium bicarbonate until pellet was no longer yellow.  Cell samples used for lysate cross-linking were first snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored at -80℃ until they were cryoground at -80℃ with Retsch MM 400 cryomill.

### Data Protocol
5 fraction runs were cobined separately for the in vivo and lysate cross-linked samples.  Data was analyzed with Mango and searched with Comet.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry is of growing use for establishment of distance constraints on protein conformations and interactions. Whereas intraprotein cross-links can arise from proteins in isolation, interprotein cross-links reflect proximity of two interacting proteins in the sample. Prediction of expected ratios of the number of interprotein to intraprotein cross-links is hindered by lacking comprehensive knowledge on the interactome network and global occupancy levels for all interacting complex subunits. Here we determine the theoretical number of possible inter- and intraprotein cross-links in available PDB structures of proteins bound in complexes to predict a maximum expected fraction of interprotein cross-links in large scale in vivo cross-linking studies. We show how the maximum fraction can guide interpretation of reported interprotein fractions with respect to the extent of sample protein binding, comparing whole cell and lysate cross-linked samples as an example. We also demonstrate how an observation of interprotein cross-link fractions greater than the maximum value can result from the presence of false positive cross-links which are predominantly interprotein, their number estimable from the observed surplus fraction of interprotein cross-links.

### Keywords
Pir cross-linker xl-ms

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA

### Submitter
Andrew Keller

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA


