### Accession
PXD012671

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals the GSK3-PDX1 axis as a key pathogenic signaling node in diabetic islets

### Description
Progressive decline of pancreatic beta cell function is central to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. Protein phosphorylation regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from beta cells, but how signaling networks are remodeled in diabetic islets in vivo remains unknown. Using high-sensitivity mass spectrometry-based proteomics we quantified 6,500 proteins and 13,000 phosphopeptides in islets of obese diabetic mice and matched controls, revealing drastic remodeling of key kinase hubs and signaling pathways. Integration with a literature-derived signaling network implicated GSK3 kinase in the control of the beta cell-specific transcription factor PDX1. Deep phosphoproteomic analysis of human islets chronically treated with high glucose demonstrated a conserved glucotoxicity-dependent role of GSK3 kinase in regulating insulin secretion. Remarkably, the ability of beta cells to secrete insulin in response to glucose was rescued almost completely by pharmacological inhibition of GSK3. Thus, our resource enables investigation of mechanisms and drug targets in type 2 diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome and phosphoproteome sample preparation. Cells were lysed in SDC lysis buffer containing 4% (w/v) SDC, 100 mM Tris -HCl (pH 8.5). Proteome preparation was done using the in StageTip (iST) method (Kulak et al., 2014). Phosphoproteome preparation was performed as previously described (Humphrey 2015; Humphrey et al., 2018). Per condition, a total of only 200 μg protein input material was lysed, alkylated and reduced in a single step. Then proteins were digested and phosphopeptides enriched with TiO2 beads. After elution, samples were separated by HPLC in a single run (without pre-fractionations) and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Proteome and phosphoproteome data processing. Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment (Cox and Mann, 2008), version 1.5.1.6, employing the Andromeda engine for database search. MS/MS spectra were matched against the Mus Murine UniProt FASTA database (September 2014), with an FDR of <1% at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline and between aspartic acid and proline. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine tyrosine residue (STY) as variable modifications. Label free proteome analysis was performed in MaxQuant. For proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, where possible, the identity of peptides present but not sequenced in a given run was obtained by transferring identifications across liquid chromatography (LC)-MS runs (‘match between runs’). For phosphopeptide identification, an Andromeda minimum score and minimum delta score threshold of 40 and 17 were used, respectively. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion and peptides had to be fully tryptic.

### Publication Abstract
Progressive decline of pancreatic beta cell function is central to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. Protein phosphorylation regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from beta cells, but how signaling networks are remodeled in diabetic islets in&#xa0;vivo remains unknown. Using high-sensitivity mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we quantified 6,500 proteins and 13,000 phosphopeptides in islets of obese diabetic mice and matched controls, revealing drastic remodeling of key kinase hubs and signaling pathways. Integration with a&#xa0;literature-derived signaling network implicated GSK3 kinase in the control of the beta cell-specific transcription factor PDX1. Deep phosphoproteomic analysis of human islets chronically treated with high glucose demonstrated a conserved glucotoxicity-dependent role of GSK3 kinase in regulating insulin secretion. Remarkably, the ability of beta cells to secrete insulin in response to glucose was rescued almost completely by pharmacological inhibition of GSK3. Thus, our resource enables investigation of mechanisms and drug targets in type 2 diabetes.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Gsk3, Proteomics, Pdx1, Islets, Diabetes, Mass spectrometry, Signalling networks, Insulin secretion

### Affiliations
Max Planck of Biochemistry
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry


