### Accession
PXD009437

### Title
Human intestine LC-MSMS -  Transcriptional and proteomic analysis revealed a synergistic effect of aflatoxin M1 and ochratoxin A mycotoxins on intestinal epithelial integrity of differentiated human Caco-2 cells

### Description
Aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) is a common mycotoxin in dairy milk and it is typically concurrently present with other mycotoxins that may represent a threat for food safety. However, knowledge on how AFM1, alone or in combination with other mycotoxins may affect human intestinal epithelial integrity remain to be established. We employed transcriptome and proteome analysis integrated with biological validation to reveal the molecular basis underlining the effect AFM1 and/or ochratoxin A (OTA) exposure on intestinal epithelial integrity of differentiated Caco-2 cells. Exposure to 4 μg/ml of OTA was found to disrupt human gut epithelial integrity, whereas 4 μg/ml of AFM1 did not. Integrated transcriptome and proteome analysis of AFM1 and OTA, alone or in combination, indicate synergistic effect of the two mycotoxins in disrupting intestinal integrity. This effect was mechanistically linked to a broad ranges of pathways related to intestinal integrity enriched by down-regulated genes and proteins, associated to focal adhesion, adherens junction, and gap junction pathways. Furthermore, the cross–omics analysis of mixed AFM1 and OTA compared with OTA alone suggest that kinases family members, including MLCK, MAPKs, and PKC are the potential key regulators on modulating intestinal epithelial integrity. These findings provide novel insight into the synergistic detrimental role of multiple mycotoxins in disrupting intestinal integrity, and, therefore, identify potential target to improve milk safety related to human health.

### Sample Protocol
Differentiated Caco-2 cells without treated with mycotoxins were chosen as the control group. Cells treated with 4 μg/ml AFM1 and 4 μg/ml OTA separately as well as their combination were considered as treated group. To reduce the sample variability, three replicates of harvested differentiated Caco-2 cells were pooled into one sample. Each treatment was run in three replicates. The samples were ground in liquid nitrogen. An aliquot of 2 μl of lysis buffer (8M urea, 2% SDS, 1×protease inhibitor cocktail, Roched. Basel, Switzerland) was added into samples, followed by sonication on ice and centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. For each sample, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone at -20 °C overnight. Proteins were dissolved in 500 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate), and the concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay. A 100 μg of protein in both control and treated groups was then transferred into a new tube and adjusted to a final volume of 100 μl with 100 mM TEAB. Thereafter, 5 μl of 0.2 M Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) was added to samples and incubated at 55 °C for 1 h. Subsequently, 5 μl of 375 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added to the samples, and incubated in darkness for 30 min. Proteins were then tryptic digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), and the resultant peptides were labeled with iTRAQ as follows: 114 as Combination (AFM1+OTA) group, 115 as Control group, 116 as AFM1 group, 117 as OTA group. The labeled samples were combined and dried in vacuum. The digested peptides were dissolved in buffer A (buffer A: 20 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide), and then fractionated by high pH separation using Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse phase column (XBridge C18 column, 4.6 mm× 250 mm, 5 μm (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). High pH separation was performed using a linear gradient from 5% to 45% B in 40 min (B: 20 mM ammonium formate in 80% ACN, pH 10.0, adjusted with ammonium hydroxide). The column was re-equilibrated at initial conditions for 15 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 1 ml/min and temperature was maintained at 30 °C. Twelve fractions were collected, and each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for following analysis. The peptide fractions were resuspended with 30 μl of solvent C (C: water with 0.1% formic acid; D: ACN with 0.1% formic acid), separated by nanoLC and analyzed by on-line electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. An Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with an online nano-electrospray ion source were used. A 10 μl of peptide samples were loaded onto the trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap C18) with a flow of 10 μl/min for 3 min followed by separating on the analytical column (75 μm×15 cm, Acclaim PepMap C18) with a linear gradient from 3% D to 90% D in 120 min. The column was re-equilibrated at initial conditions for 10 min. The column flow rate was maintained at 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode and switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1550) were acquired with a mass resolution of 120K, followed by sequential higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a resolution of 30K, and the top 15 most abundant scans were used to obtain MS/MS. The isolation window was set as 1.6 Da. The AGC target was set as 400 000. MS/MS fixed first mass was set at 110. In all cases, one microscan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds. The mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and de isotoped by Mascot Distiller Version 2.6. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1) using following settings: enzyme: trypsin; parent ion tolerance: 20.0 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance: 0.050 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and iTRAQ8plex of lysine and the n-terminus were specified as fixed modifications. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of the n-terminus and iTRAQ8plex of tyrosine were specified as variable modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to 2+ and 5+. Protein identifications were accepted if they contained at least 2 identified peptides and FDR less than 1%. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. Only proteins with significant quantitative ratios between the two treatments (p < 0.05) and fold changes > 1.2 or < 0.83 were considered to be differentially regulated on the basis of previous reports.

### Publication Abstract
Aflatoxin M1 (AFM1) is a common mycotoxin in dairy milk, and it is typically concurrently present with other mycotoxins that may represent a threat to food safety. However, knowledge of how AFM1, alone or in combination with other mycotoxins, may affect human intestinal epithelial integrity remain to be established. We employed transcriptome and proteome analysis integrated with biological validation to reveal the molecular basis underlining the effect of exposure to AFM1, ochratoxin A (OTA), or both on the intestinal epithelial integrity of differentiated Caco-2 cells. Exposure to 4 &#x3bc;g/mL of OTA was found to disrupt human gut epithelial integrity, whereas 4 &#x3bc;g/mL of AFM1 did not. The integrated transcriptome and proteome analysis of AFM1 and OTA, alone or in combination, indicate the synergistic effect of the two mycotoxins in disrupting intestinal integrity. This effect was mechanistically linked to a broad range of pathways related to intestinal integrity enriched by down-regulated genes and proteins, associated with focal adhesion, adheren junction, and gap junction pathways. Furthermore, the cross-omics analysis of mixed AFM1 and OTA compared to OTA alone suggest that kinase family members, including myosin light-chain kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinases, and protein kinase C, are the potential key regulators in modulating intestinal epithelial integrity. These findings provide novel insight into the synergistic detrimental role of multiple mycotoxins in disrupting intestinal integrity and, therefore, identify potential targets to improve milk safety related to human health.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Intestinal epithelial cells

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, P. R. China
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Yanan Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Jiaqi Wang
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, P. R. China


