### Accession
PXD006135

### Title
Mps1 regulates kinetochore-microtubule attachment stability via the Ska complex to ensure error-free chromosome segregation

### Description
Spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) regulators such as the Mps1 kinase not only delay anaphase onset, but also correct improper chromosome-spindle linkages that would otherwise lead to missegregation and aneuploidy. However, the substrates and mechanisms involved in this pathway of error correction remain poorly understood. Using a chemically tuned kinetochore-targeting assay, we show that Mps1 destabilizes microtubule attachments (K-fibers) epistatically to Aurora B, the other major error-correcting kinase. Through chemical genetics and quantitative proteomics, we identify both known and novel sites of Mps1- regulated phosphorylation at the outer kinetochore. Modification of these substrates was sensitive to microtubule tension and counterbalanced by the PP2A-B56 phosphatase, a positive regulator of chromosome-spindle interactions. Consistently, Mps1 inhibition rescued K-fiber stability after depleting PP2A-B56. We also identify the hinge region of the W-shaped Ska complex as a key effector of Mps1 at the kinetochore-microtubule interface, as mutations that mimic constitutive phosphorylation strongly destabilized K-fibers in vivo and inhibited the Ska complex’s conversion from lattice diffusion to end-coupled microtubule binding in vitro. Together these results provide new insights into how Mps1 modulates the microtubule-binding properties of the kinetochore to promote the selective stabilization of bipolar attachments and error-free chromosome segregation.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC cell culture and treatments For SILAC cells were grown in DMEM:F12 medium with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum and either 175 μM unlabeled L-arginine (Arg0) and 250 μM unlabeled L-lysine  (Lys0) or the same concentrations of L-[U-13C6, 14N4]-arginine (Arg10) and L-[U-13C6, 15N2]- lysine (Lys8). After six cell doublings, 1.6 x 106 cells were seeded per 15-cm dish (6 per experiment). 18 h later, 1 μg/ml aphidicolin was added for 12 h to synchronize cells in early S phase. Cells were then washed with PBS and cultured for another 13 h in fresh SILAC medium containing 50 ng/ml nocodazole to arrest cells in M phase. Thereafter the Arg0Lys0-labeled cells were treated with 10 μM MG132 and 5 μg/ml 3MB-PP1, while the Arg10Lys8-labeled cells were treated with 10 μM MG132 alone. All cultures were harvested 2 hours later. This labeling scheme was used for first two replicates of each cell line and reversed for the last two replicates. Mass spectrometry analysis Cell lysis and MS sample preparation were performed as described previously (Oppermann et al., 2012). Briefly, after lysis in denaturing buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris- HCl pH 8.2, 75 mM NaCl plus protease and phosphatase inhibitors), cell extracts were pooled, reduced, alkylated, and digested with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin as described (Daub et al., 2008). Peptides were filtered through a 0.22 μm PVDF membrane and desalted on reversed-phase C18 SepPak cartridges (Villen and Gygi, 2008), then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, lyophilized, and stored at -20°C. Peptides were dissolved in 600 μl of 7 mM KH2PO4 pH 2.65, 30% acetonitrile (ACN) and loaded onto a 250 x 9.4 mm polySULFOETHYL A column (PolyLC) operated with an ÄKTA explorer system (GE Healthcare) at 3 ml/min. The flow-through was collected and bound peptides were fractionated by a 30 min gradient ranging from 0% to 30% elution buffer (7 mM KH2PO4 pH of 2.65, 30% ACN, 350 mM KCl) as described (Villen and Gygi, 2008). SCX-separated fractions (3 ml) were pooled based on UV absorption (215 nm) to yield twelve samples with similar peptide amounts. For phosphopeptide enrichment, samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 200 μl of 25 mM formic acid, 40% acetonitrile, then incubated with 2.5 μl PHOS-Select Iron Affinity Gel (Sigma) for 1 hr at 25°C under continuous agitation. Phosphopeptide elution and subsequent desalting with C18 StageTips were performed as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007; Villen and Gygi, 2008). In total 96 phosphopeptide samples were prepared and analyzed in technical replicates by LC-MS on a LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a nanoflow HPLC system (Agilent 1100) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems) as described (Oppermann et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
All raw files acquired in this study were collectively processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.0.13.13), which performs peak list generation, SILAC-based quantification, estimation of false discovery rates, peptide to protein group assembly, and phosphorylation site localization as described previously (Cox and Mann, 2008; Oppermann et al., 2012). Peak lists were searched against concatenated forward and reversed version of the human International Protein Index database (IPI version 3.37) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.2.04). SILAC spectra detected by pre-search MaxQuant analysis were searched with the additional fixed modifications Arg10 and/or Lys8, whereas spectra for which a SILAC state was not assignable were searched with Arg10 and Lys8 as variable modifications. The accepted estimated FDR determined on the basis of peptide-spectral matches in the reversed database version was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identifications. Phosphorylation sites were assigned by the PTM scoring algorithm implemented in MaxQuant as described (Olsen et al., 2006; Olsen et al., 2010). All phosphopeptide or phosphosite ratios measured in at least two biological replicates of each cell line were log2-transformed and subjected to two-class, unpaired SAM analysis of Mps1as versus Mps1wt cells ± 3-MB-PP1 as described previously (Oppermann et al., 2012; Tusher et al., 2001). Phosphopeptides and phosphosites of the SAM output with a false discovery rate (FDR or q value) of 0% (obtained for Δ ≥ 1.189 and Δ ≥ 1.268, respectively) and ≥ 2-fold regulation in 3MB-PP1- treated Mps1as cells were rated as significant.

### Publication Abstract
The spindle assembly checkpoint kinase Mps1 not&#xa0;only inhibits anaphase but also corrects erroneous attachments that could lead to missegregation and aneuploidy. However, Mps1's error correction-relevant substrates are unknown. Using a chemically&#xa0;tuned kinetochore-targeting assay, we show that Mps1 destabilizes microtubule attachments (K&#xa0;fibers) epistatically to Aurora B, the other major error-correcting kinase. Through quantitative proteomics, we identify multiple sites of Mps1-regulated phosphorylation at the outer kinetochore. Substrate modification was microtubule sensitive and opposed by PP2A-B56 phosphatases that stabilize chromosome-spindle attachment. Consistently, Mps1 inhibition rescued K-fiber stability after depleting PP2A-B56. We also identify the Ska complex as a key effector of Mps1 at the kinetochore-microtubule interface, as mutations that mimic constitutive phosphorylation destabilized K fibers in&#xa0;vivo and reduced the efficiency of the Ska complex's conversion from lattice diffusion to end-coupled microtubule binding in&#xa0;vitro. Our results reveal how Mps1 dynamically modifies kinetochores to correct improper attachments and ensure faithful chromosome segregation.

### Keywords
Pp2a-b56, Mps1, Spindle assembly checkpoint (sac), Proteomics, Chemical genetics, Ska complex

### Affiliations
Evotec (München) GmbH
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY UNITED STATES

### Submitter
Kathrin Grundner-Culemann

### Lab Head
Dr Prasad V Jallepalli, M.D., Ph.D.
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY UNITED STATES


