### Accession
PXD016787

### Title
Differential Lysis Approach Enables Selective Extraction of Taxon-Specific Proteins for Gut Metaproteomics

### Description
A differential lysis approach was developed with different strength of lysis buffers (urea and/or sodium dodecyl sulfate) and applied on human stool samples to separate different microbial species to increase the depth of metaproteomic measurements. We showed that the lysates dominating by proteins from Gram-positive (G+) or negative bacteria (G-) can be achieved by differential lysis

### Sample Protocol
Fresh stool samples were collected from three healthy adult volunteers at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. The Ottawa Health Science Network Research Ethics Board at the Ottawa Hospital approved the protocol (Protocol # 20160585-01H). Each fresh stool sample was immediately put on ice, transferred to the laboratory and subjected to microbiome cell harvesting using differential centrifugation and thorough cell washing using ice-cold PBS according to the procedures described previously. The resulting microbial pellets were mixed with a series of lysis buffers containing different concentrations of urea and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for the protein extraction. One Roche cOmplete™ mini tablet (Roche Diagnostics GmbH) was added to every 10 mL lysis buffer before use for all of the lysis buffers. The experimental protocol was shown as Fig. 1. The microbiome sample was added to 200 μL of lysis buffer 1 and mixed by pipetting up and down until there is no visible chunk at first and ultrasonication was performed for 1 min at 8 °C with the parameters of 10 s ON/ 10 s OFF and amplitude of 50% in the method DL 1. The supernatant was obtained and transferred to a new tube after centrifugation at 16,000 g, 8 °C for 10 min. The remaining cell debris was used for the continuous lysis with other lysis buffers step by step and sonicator was used for 10 min in the last step for complete extraction of protein. The 1-min sonication was removed in the 1- 4 steps in the method DL 2. In the last step, ultrasonication (10 min) was performed in both of the methods. For comparison, the samples were conducted without differential lysis as well (NM). The lysis buffer (400 μL, 8 M urea, 4 % SDS) was used for the microbial cell lysis in the ice with ultrasonication for 10 min (10 s ON/ 10 s OFF, amplitude of 50%). Two replicates were conducted for each sample. Five-fold volume of protein precipitation buffer (ice-cold acidified acetone/ethanol buffer) was added to each lysate and stored at -20 °C overnight and proteins were spun down with centrifugation at 16,000g, 4 °C for 25 min and subsequently washed twice with ice-cold acetone. The extracted protein was dissolved in 6 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer to qualify protein concentration using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Trypsin digestion and desalting were conducted as described previously [38]. Briefly, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was used for the reduction of 50 μg protein at 56 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was applied for alkylation for 40 min at room temperature in dark. Each sample was then mixed with 1 μg trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ) and incubated at 37 °C for 18.5 h with agitation at a speed of 850 rpm. A C18 column (10 μm, 5 mg) was activated with acetonitrile (ACN) and then equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid (v/v), which was used for the desalting of samples with 80% ACN (v/v)/0.1% formic acid (v/v). The tryptic peptides were dried with SPD1010-115 Integrated SpeedVac™ System (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc.) and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid (v/v). The peptides corresponding to 1 μg protein was loaded for mass spectrometry analysis. An Eksigent nanoLC system (nano2D ultra) coupled with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc.) was used for analysis. The chromatographic separation was achieved with an analytical C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm) packed with reverse phase beads (3 μm/120 Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a 2-hour gradient from 5 to 30 % acetonitrile (v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The range of full MS scan was from 300 to 1800 m/z and the maximum injection time was 100 ms, which was followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan of the 12 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of 2, resolution of 17,500, maximum injection time of 120 ms and repeat exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein/peptide identification and quantification were performed using the MetaLab software (version 1.1.0) automating the MetaPro-IQ approach [39]. The human gut microbial gene catalog database with 9,879,896 sequences (http://meta.genomics.cn/) was applied for the construction of a reduced database by extracting the peptide and protein at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, and label-free quantitative information of proteins were obtained with the maxLFQ algorithm. Quantitative taxonomic analysis was performed in MetaLab, which determines the phylogenetic assignment for identified peptides using a lowest common ancestor (LCA) algorithm through the pep2tax database. Taxonomic composition visualization was performed using Origin 2019 (OriginLab Corporation) by summing the intensity of all the distinctive peptides and calculating the relative abundance of each taxon identified with at least 3 peptides. Functional annotations were obtained with MetaLab version 1.1.0 and functional enrichment analysis was performed using iMetalab (http://imetalab.ca/). The COG category enrichment analysis of identified proteins was performed by calculating the FDR-corrected P values with hypergeometric probability analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Changes in microbiome composition and function have been linked to human health and diseases. Metaproteomics provides invaluable functional information on the state of a microbiome. However, lower-abundance bacteria in complex microbiomes are difficult to observe by metaproteomics. In this study, stepwise differential lysis protocols were developed for human stool microbiomes to separate different microbial species and to increase the depth of metaproteomic measurements. We achieved differential lysis of Gram-positive (G<sup>+</sup>) and Gram-negative (G<sup>-</sup>) bacteria, selective enrichment of specific bacteria, and functional enrichment by our stepwise differential lysis protocols. Therefore, differential lysis can serve as a fractionation method to reduce sample complexity and selectively extract proteins from specific taxa for deep metaproteomic studies.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth
Road, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada

### Submitter
Jiaqin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
BMI, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


