### Accession
PXD035775

### Title
Deciphering O-glycoprotease substrate preferences with O-Pair Search

### Description
O-glycoproteases are an emerging class of enzymes that selectively digest glycoproteins at positions decorated with specific O-linked glycans. O-glycoprotease substrates range from any O-glycoprotein (albeit with specific O-glycan modifications) to only glycoproteins harboring specific O-glycosylated sequence motifs, such as those found in mucin domains. Their utility for multiple glycoproteomic applications is driving the search to both discover new O-glycoproteases and to understand how structural features of characterized O-glycoproteases influence their substrate specificities. One challenge of characterizing O-glycoprotease specificity restraints is the need to characterize O-glycopeptides with site-specific analysis of O-glycosites. Here, we demonstrate how O-Pair Search, a recently developed O-glycopeptide-centric identification platform that enables rapid searches and confident O-glycosite localization, can be used to determine substrate specificities of various O-glycoproteases de novo from LC-MS/MS data of O-glycopeptides. Using secreted protease of C1 esterase inhibitor (StcE) from enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli and O-endoprotease OgpA from Akkermansia mucinophila, we explore numerous settings that effect O-glycopeptide identification and show how non-specific and semi-tryptic searches of O-glycopeptide data can produce candidate cleavage motifs that can be used to define new protease cleavage settings that lower search times and improve O-glycopeptide identifications. We use this platform generate the first consensus motif for the recently characterized immunomodulating metalloprotease (IMPa) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa and show that IMPa is a favorable O-glycoprotease for characterizing densely O-glycosylated mucin-domain glycoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinantly expressed MUC16, CD43, GP1bα(CD42b), podocalyxin, and PSGL-1, were purchased from R&D Systems (5609-MU, 9680-CD, 4067-GP, 1658-PD, and 3345-PS, respectively). StcE was expressed and purified as previously described. Briefly, E. coli BL21(DE3) were transformed with pET28b-StcE-∆35-NHis and grown at 37 °C until an optical density of 0.6-0.8 was reached. The culture was then induced with 0.3 mM IPTG and incubated at 20 °C overnight. Cells were lysed in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl using a probe tip sonicator. Lysates were applied to HisTrap HP columns (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) using a GE ÄKTA Pure FPLC. After washing with 20 column volumes of lysis buffer + 20 mM imidazole, elution was performed using a 15 min linear gradient from 20 mM imidazole to 250 mM imidazole. Pooled fractions for each enzyme were concentrated using Amicon Ultra 30 kDa MWCO filters (Millipore Sigma), then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. OgpA and a pan sialidase were purchased from Genovis under the names OpeRATOR and SialEXO (G1-OP1-020 and G1-SM1-020, respectively). IMPa was purchased from New England BioLabs as O-glycoprotease (P0761S). For each condition, 5 μg of each recombinant protein were digested, all digestions were conducted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and all digestions occurred during a 3 hour incubation at 37 °C. StcE and IMPa digestions were conducted at a 1:10 protease:protein ratio by weight. OgpA digests were conducted at a 1:1 protease units:protein weight, as directed by the manufacturer. When sialidase was added (for OgpA and IMPa digestions as described in the text), SialEXO was co-incubated with the O-glycoprotease. Following O-glycoprotease digestion, 1 μl PNGaseF (New England Biolabs, P0709S, diluted to 10,000 U/ml in PBS) was added to each digestion for an overnight (~12 hour) incubation at 37 °C. TCEP and CAA were then added to final concentrations of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively, followed by sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:25 protease:protein ratio by weight.  Samples were incubated for 12 hours at room temperature. Reactions were quenched by dilution with 500 μl of 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water and peptides were desalted using 10 mg/1 ml Strata-X columns (Phenomenex). Briefly, columns were wet with 1 ml of acetonitrile followed by 1 ml of 0.2% FA. Acidified peptides were loaded onto the columns and washed with 300 μl of 0.2% FA. Peptides were eluted with 400 μl of 0.2% FA, 80% acetonitrile, dried via lyophilization, then resuspended in 10 μl of 0.2% FA. All data reported here are results from two technical replicates of these conditions, i.e., each proteolytic digestion on each glycoprotein was performed twice in tandem and data were collected and analyzed separately for each replicate.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched using O-Pair Search implemented in MetaMorpheus (0.0.320), which is available at https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/MetaMorpheus. Files for digestions of each protein from a given digestion condition (e.g., all five proteins digested with StcE and trypsin) were searched together in batches with a fasta file containing Uniprot-derived sequences from all five proteins as described by their sequences from the vendor. Multiple parameters were tested as indicated in the text, which are further explained in Supplemental Table 1. The standard search parameters are also described in Supplemental Table 1 and went as follows. The “Glyco Search” option was selected, where the O-glycopeptide search feature was enabled with an O-glycan database of 22 glycans (Supplemental Data 1). The “Keep top N candidates” feature was set to 50, and Data Type was set as HCD with Child Scan Dissociation set as EThcD. The “Maximum OGlycan Allowed” setting was set to 4, where this number represents both the maximum number of O-glycan modifications that could occur on a glycopeptide candidate and the number of times each O-glycan could occur per peptide. Under Search Parameters, both “Use Provided Precursor” and “Deconvolute Precursors” were checked. Peak trimming was not enabled. In Silico Digestion Parameters were set to generate decoy proteins using reversed sequences, and the initiator methionine feature was set to “Variable”. The maximum modification isoforms allowed was 1024, and nonspecific digestion was enabled for peptides ranging from 5 to 60 residues. Precursor and product mass tolerances were 10 and 20 ppm, respectively, and the minimum score allowed was 3. Modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl on C as fixed, and Oxidation on M and Deamidation on N as variable. Deviations from these settings explored in this study are described in Supplemental Table 2. The oglyco.psmtsv results file was used for further data processing. Note, O-Pair Search returns a single identification representing two spectra, both an HCD and EThcD spectrum. Identifications are made using the HCD spectrum, and the associated EThcD spectrum is used to localize O-glycosites. Identifications were filtered to include only target matches (T) and identifications with a q-value < 0.01. O-glycopeptide identifications were further filtered to include only Level 1 identifications, which include only identifications with confident and unambiguous O-glycosite localization (localization probability > 0.75), and to exclude O-glycopeptides that contained an N-glycosylation sequon (N-X-S/T). Identified spectra were manually inspected using the Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator (http://www.interactivepeptidespectralannotator.com/PeptideAnnotator.html). Fully tryptic peptdies were removed from consideration prior to O-glycoprotease substrate cleavage determination. Peptides were then categorized as “Nterm” if they had non-tryptic cleavage at their N-terminus, “Cterm” if they had non-tryptic cleavage at their C-terminus, or “Both” if they were fully non-tryptic. Sequence windows for motif generation were obtained by mapping filtered O-glycopeptide identifications onto fasta sequences using the N-terminal residue of the O-glycopeptide as the P1’ alignment point for “N-term” identifications or the C-terminal residue as the P1 alignment point for “C-term” identifications. For peptides categoriezed as “Both”, two sequence windows were created, one each for N- and C-terminal alignment at P1’ and P1, respectively. For each sequence window, five residues upstream (P5->P1) and five residues downstream (P1’->P5’) were extracted the alignment (i.e., cleavage) point, and glycosites and their occupying glycans were tallied at each sequence position. Ten residue sequence windows (P5->P5’) were input into weblogo.berkeley.edu to generate minimum sequence motifs. Figure 1 summarizes this process graphically. Search times reported were taken directly from O-Pair Search output files. The percent of O-glycosylated serine and threonine residues was determined by counting the number of modified residues at a given position relative to the total number of serine and threonine residues. Serine and threonine counts were summed, so this is an aggregate value for both residues. All data reported is the average of two replicates unless otherwise reported.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-Glycoproteases are an emerging class of enzymes that selectively digest glycoproteins at positions decorated with specific <i>O</i>-linked glycans. <i>O</i>-Glycoprotease substrates range from any <i>O</i>-glycoprotein (albeit with specific <i>O</i>-glycan modifications) to only glycoproteins harboring specific <i>O</i>-glycosylated sequence motifs, such as those found in mucin domains. Their utility for multiple glycoproteomic applications is driving the search to both discover new <i>O</i>-glycoproteases and to understand how structural features of characterized <i>O</i>-glycoproteases influence their substrate specificities. One challenge of defining <i>O</i>-glycoprotease specificity restraints is the need to characterize <i>O</i>-glycopeptides with site-specific analysis of <i>O</i>-glycosites. Here, we demonstrate how O-Pair Search, a recently developed <i>O</i>-glycopeptide-centric identification platform that enables rapid searches and confident <i>O</i>-glycosite localization, can be used to determine substrate specificities of various <i>O</i>-glycoproteases <i>de novo</i> from LC-MS/MS data of <i>O</i>-glycopeptides. Using secreted protease of C1 esterase inhibitor (StcE) from enterohemorrhagic <i>Escherichia coli</i> and <i>O</i>-endoprotease OgpA from <i>Akkermansia mucinophila</i>, we explore numerous settings that effect <i>O</i>-glycopeptide identification and show how non-specific and semi-tryptic searches of <i>O</i>-glycopeptide data can produce candidate cleavage motifs. These putative motifs can be further used to define new protease cleavage settings that lower search times and improve <i>O</i>-glycopeptide identifications. We use this platform to generate a consensus motif for the recently characterized immunomodulating metalloprotease (IMPa) from <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> and show that IMPa is a favorable <i>O</i>-glycoprotease for characterizing densely <i>O</i>-glycosylated mucin-domain glycoproteins.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, O-glycoproteomics, O-pair search, Cleavage, Glycoproteins, O-glycoprotease, Informatics

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn R. Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University


