### Accession
PXD009331

### Title
Cryopreservation and egg yolk medium alter the proteome of ram spermatozoa

### Description
Cryopreservation causes significant lethal and sub-lethal damage to spermatozoa. In order to improve freezing outcomes, a comprehensive understanding of sub-lethal damage is required. Cryopreservation induced changes to sperm proteins have been investigated in several species, but few have employed currently available state of the art, data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (MS) methods. We used the SWATH LC-MS method to quantitatively profile proteomic changes to ram spermatozoa following exposure to egg yolk and cryopreservation. Egg yolk contributed 15 proteins to spermatozoa, including vitellogenins, apolipoproteins and complement component C3. Cryopreservation significantly altered the abundance of 51 proteins. Overall, 27 proteins increased (e.g. SERPINB1, FER) and 24 proteins decreased (e.g. CCT subunits, CSNK1G2, TOM1L1) in frozen thawed ram spermatozoa, compared to fresh spermatozoa. Chaperones constituted 20% of the proteins lost from spermatozoa following cryopreservation. These alterations may interfere with both normal cellular functioning and the ability of frozen thawed spermatozoa to appropriately respond to stress. This is the first study to apply SWATH mass spectrometry techniques to characterise proteins contributed by egg yolk based freezing media and to profile cryopreservation induced proteomic changes to ram spermatozoa.

### Sample Protocol
SDS was removed from sperm lysates using a chloroform/methanol precipitation as previously described by Wessel and Flügge. Protein concentration was determined using a Qubit protein assay (2.0 fluorometer; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) as per manufacturer’s instructions and was consequently standardised to 100 µg of total protein with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced (10 mM TCEP; 1 hour; 37°C), alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide; 30 min; room temperature in the dark) and digested overnight with trypsin (final ratio 1:50 (v/v) trypsin: substrate; 37°C; Promega; Madison, WI, USA). Digested samples were then desalted using a C18 Oasis HLB column (Waters; Elstree, Herts, UK) and vacuum dried prior to mass spectrometry. Samples for LC-MS/MS were resuspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (1 µg injection). A global standard was created to enable the generation of an ion spectral library. Equal amounts of protein from each sample (n = 9) were pooled, dried down and resuspended in 90% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (10 µg injection; 2D LC-MS/MS).  The global standard was processed using 2D LC-MS/MS to obtain superior protein separation and generate a comprehensive ion spectral library for quantitative analysis of SWATH acquisition data. Peptides were first fractionated using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system coupled to an in house built fritless TSK-Amide 80 HILIC 4.5 mm (i.d.) × 17 cm column (5 µm particle size). LC mobile phase buffers were comprised of A: 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and B: 90% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. A total of 12 fractions were eluted into a V bottom 96 well polypropylene plate (Griener, Sigma Aldrich, Castle Hill, Australia) using 100% B for 26.5 min, followed by a linear gradient of 60- 30% B over 11 min and then 100% B wash over 2 min at a flow rate of 6 µL/min. The resultant fractions were dried down and resuspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid ready for LC-MS/MS. Approximately 1 µg/5 µL of each global standard fraction was separated by nano-LC using an Eksigent 415 UHPLC system (Sciex, Foster City, USA) coupled to an in-house built fritless nano 75 μm (i.d.) × 20 cm column packed with ReproSil Pur 120 C18 stationary phase (1.9 μm particle size, Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). LC mobile phase buffers were comprised of A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5% to 40% B over 90 min and then 95% B wash over 1 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 350 – 1, 500 using a 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex, Foster City, USA). Up to 50 of the most abundant ions, with charge states between + 2 to + 5 were sequentially isolated and fragmented, and a product ion scan collected over 100 to 1800 m/z. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds.  One microgram of each sample was separated by nano-LC using the same 90 min gradient conditions described above. MS/MS runs were conducted using a 6600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex, Foster City, USA) in data independent acquisition mode, using SWATH acquisition. A total of 34 windows at a width of 54 Da covered the mass range 300 – 1,500 Da. An overlap of 1 Da between each SWATH window was used. An accumulation time of 96 ms was used for each fragment ion scan and for the survey scans acquired at the beginning of each cycle, resulting in a total cycle time of 3.3 seconds. The rolling collision energy for each window was 2 +. The mass spectrometer was operated in high sensitivity mode.

### Data Protocol
An ion spectral library was generated by searching 2D LC results (.wiff format) of the global standard in ProteinPilot (v5.0, Sciex, Foster City, USA), using the Paragon search algorithm. Search parameters included iodoacetamide as an alkylating agent, trypsin as a protease, thorough ID search effort and a detected protein threshold of 0.05. Two unique ion spectral libraries were produced; one by searching the global standard against an NCBI database for all mammals (downloaded August 2016), with Ovis aries as the ‘species’ search parameter, and the other against an NCBI database specific to the domestic chicken Gallus gallus (downloaded September 2017). The ion spectral library searched against Ovis aries was used for identification of proteins in fresh and frozen samples, while the ion spectral library searched against the domestic chicken was used for identification of proteins in fresh and fresh + EY samples. Identification of proteins was performed in the SWATH microapp within Peak View (v1.2.0.4; Sciex, Foster City, USA). The ion spectral library of interest was imported (.group format), excluding shared peptides. Retention time calibration was performed by selecting house-keeping peptides spaced equally along the 90 min gradient, with high intensity (> 2500) of the fragment ion and no modifications. Fresh and fresh + EY samples were compared to the chicken ion spectral library using the following processing parameters; 5 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, 90% peptide confidence, exclusion of shared peptides, XIC extraction window 5 min and XIC width 0.1 Da. Fresh and frozen samples were compared to the sheep ion spectral library using the following processing parameters; 4 peptides per protein, 4 transitions per peptide, 99% peptide confidence, exclusion of shared peptides, XIC extraction window 5 min and XIC width 0.1 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sperm, Swath, Ram

### Affiliations
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Sydney, Australia
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Taylor Pini

### Lab Head
Dr Taylor Pini
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Sydney, Australia


