### Accession
PXD036641

### Title
Lactate regulates cell cycle and proliferation by remodeling the anaphase promoting complex

### Description
Lactate is abundant in rapidly dividing cells, due to the requirement for elevated glucose catabolism to support proliferation. However, it is not known whether accumulated lactate affects the proliferative state. Here, we deploy a systematic approach to determine lactate-dependent regulation of proteins across the human proteome. From this data, we elucidate a mechanism of cell cycle regulation whereby accumulated lactate activates the anaphase promoting complex (APC/C). Remodeling of APC/C in this way is caused by direct inhibition of the SUMO protease SENP1 by lactate. We discover that accumulated lactate binds and inhibits SENP1 by forming a complex with zinc in the SENP1 active site. SENP1 inhibition by lactate stabilizes SUMOylation of two residues on APC4, which are required to reorient APC/C to allow UBE2C binding and thus increase APC/C activity. This direct regulation of APC/C by lactate is required to stimulate timed degradation of cell cycle proteins, and efficient mitotic exit in proliferative mammalian cells. The above mechanism is initiated upon mitotic entry when lactate abundance reaches its apex. In this way, accumulation of lactate communicates the consequences of a nutrient replete growth phase to stimulate timed opening of APC/C, cell division, and proliferation. Conversely, we show that aberrant remodeling of APC/C by lactate occurs when lactate concentrations are chronically elevated, which is a hallmark of numerous cancers. Moreover, persistent lactate accumulation overcomes anti-mitotic pharmacology to drive mitotic slippage via the newfound mode of APC/C activation. Taken together, we define a biochemical mechanism through which lactate directly regulates protein function to control cell cycle and proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
HEK cells were grown in 12 15-cm dishes (4 15-cm dishes per group). Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS. Then cells were gently scraped in 5 ml/dish PBS, transferred into 15-ml conical tubes and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 3 min at 4°C to pellet cells. Supernatant was carefully removed, then 1 ml/tube of PBS containing 0.5% IGEPAL (v/v) supplemented with protease inhibitors was added. 2 pellets were combined into 1 tube and were homogenized and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatants were combined into a fresh 50-ml conical tube. Zeba Spin Desalting Columns (Thermo Scientific) were used for buffer exchange into 5 ml PBS + 0.5% IGEPAL. Protein concentration was determined by using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce), and protein concentration was adjusted to 1 mg/ml. Then 1.75 ml/tube of protein samples was added into four 2-ml tubes. Protein samples were treated for 15 min with different concentrations of sodium lactate or sodium chloride with mild agitation at room temperature. Each cell suspension with vehicle control or with lactate was distributed into 10 different 0.2-ml PCR tubes (150 µl of cell suspension per tube). The PCR-tube strips were heated at their designated temperature for 3 min in a Veriti 96-well thermal cycler. Then the samples were centrifuged at max speed for 1.5 h at 4°C. For western blotting, 60 µl of the supernatant was transferred to a 1.5-ml tube, mixed with 20 µl of 4× NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, NP0007) supplemented with 10% 2-mercaptoethanol and boiled at 95°C for 10 min. For proteomics experiments, 60 µl of the supernatant was transferred to a 1.5-ml tube containing 50 µl of lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.8, 50 µM TCEP, protease inhibitor, HPLC water). Samples were reduced at 60°C for 30 min. Then the samples were brought back to room temperature and centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 5 min. Iodoacetamide was added (final concentration 14 mM) and samples were incubated in dark for 45 min. Then DTT was added (final concentration 5 mM) and samples were incubated in dark for 15 min. After incubation, 30 µl of 100% TCA was added and samples were vortexed briefly and incubated at 4°C on ice overnight. Protein pellets were dried and resuspended in 8 M urea containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) before protease digestion. Protein lysates were diluted to 4 M urea and digested with LysC (Wako, Japan) in a 1/100 enzyme/protein ratio overnight. Protein extracts were diluted further to a 1.0 M urea concentration, and trypsin (Promega) was added to a final 1/200 enzyme/protein ratio for 6 h at 37 °C. Digests were acidified with 20 μl of 20% formic acid (FA) to a pH ∼2, and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (50 mg Sep-Pak, Waters). Peptides were then dissolved with 75 µl 200 mM EPPS and 10 µl of TMT label (8 µg per µl) was added and incubated for 30 min, followed by addition of 10 µl of TMT label and incubation for a further 30 min. The labelling reactions were quenched with 4 µl hydroxylamine (5%) solution, incubated for a further 15 min and pooled together and vacuum dried for LC-MS-MS analysis. For TPP experiments, under each condition, samples from 11 different temperatures were labelled with 11 different TMT tags and pooled together as a single TMT experiment. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo) was used for proteomics measurements.  A 55-min gradient consisting of 2% - 30% ACN, 0.125% FA at 500 nl/min flow rate was used to separate and analyze peptides. For measurements made with Eclipse, a FAIMSPro (Thermo) device was operated under -40V/-60V/-80V for field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) separation of precursors for IP-MS experiments61. Under each voltage, data-dependent acquisition was used mode using a mass range of m/z 400-1400 using a top10 method. Resolution for MS1 was set at 120,000. Singly-charged ions were not further sequenced, and multiply-charged ions were selected and subjected to fragmentation with standard automatic gain control (AGC) and 35% normalized collisional energy (NCE) for MS2, with a dynamic exclusion window of 30 s. Quantification of TMT reporter ion were performed using the multinotch SPS-MS3 method62 with 45% NCE for MS3.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and searched using the Comet algorithm63 on an in-house database search engine reported previously 64.  Database searching included all human (Homo Sapiens) entries from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org, downloaded 2020) and the reversed sequences as well as common contaminants (keratins, trypsin, etc). Peptides were searched using the following parameters: 25 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully tryptic digestion; up to three missed cleavages; variable modification: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949); static modifications: TMTpro (+304.2071) on lysine and peptide N terminus, carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0214637236) on cysteines. The experiment was also searched with the parameters described above with an additional variable phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, or tyrosine was added.  The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled as described previously64-66 to < 1% on peptide level for each MS run using parameters such as XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state and precursor mass accuracy. Then protein-level FDR was also controlled to < 1%. Phosphorylation site localization was determined using the ModScore algorithm67 where a score of 13 corresponds to 95% confidence in correct localization. TMT reporter ions were used for quantification of peptide abundance. Isotopic impurities were corrected according to the manufacturer’s specifications, and signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) was calculated. Peptides with summed S/N lower than 160 across 16 channels of each TMTpro16 plex or isolation specificity lower than 0.5 were discarded. The high confidence peptides were then used to quantify protein abundance by summing up S/N values for all peptides assigned to the same protein, and only proteins in the linear quantification range of the instrument were included in the analysis. For IP-MS experiments, normalization for protein quantification was then performed by adjusting protein loadings to that every TMT channel has the same loading of CDC27, which is the target protein for pulldown.  For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 200 or greater across all channels. An isolation purity of at least 0.7 in the MS1 isolation window was used. Temperature cure plex strategy followed published approaches16,17. For each protein, the filtered peptide TMT SN values were summed to generate protein quantification. Within each 11-plex, protein abundance at every temperature was normalized to abundance at 37°C. To compare changes in thermostability between conditions, normalized temperature curves were compared. In lactate-treated conditions, normalized abundance of every protein, at each temperature, was compared to the normalized abundance of the same protein in the NaCl control. Then, for each protein an integrated stabilization value was generated by summing the differenced in normalized abundance at every temperature. The entire proteome was then assessed in terms of change in stabilization, comparing 15 mM lactate, and 25 mM lactate, to control.

### Publication Abstract
Lactate is abundant in rapidly dividing cells owing to the requirement for elevated glucose catabolism to support proliferation<sup>1-6</sup>. However, it is not known whether accumulated lactate affects the proliferative state. Here we use a systematic approach to determine lactate-dependent regulation of proteins across the human proteome. From these data, we identify a mechanism of cell cycle regulation whereby accumulated lactate remodels the anaphase promoting complex (APC/C). Remodelling of APC/C in this way is caused by direct inhibition of the SUMO protease SENP1 by lactate. We find that accumulated lactate binds and inhibits SENP1 by forming a complex with zinc in the SENP1 active site. SENP1 inhibition by lactate stabilizes SUMOylation of two residues on APC4, which drives UBE2C binding to APC/C. This direct regulation of APC/C by lactate stimulates timed degradation of cell cycle proteins, and efficient mitotic exit in proliferative human cells. This mechanism is initiated upon mitotic entry when lactate abundance reaches its apex. In this way, accumulation of lactate communicates the consequences of a nutrient-replete growth phase to stimulate timed opening of APC/C, cell division and proliferation. Conversely, persistent accumulation of lactate drives aberrant APC/C remodelling and can overcome anti-mitotic pharmacology via mitotic slippage. In sum, we define a biochemical mechanism through which lactate directly regulates protein function to control the cell cycle and proliferation.

### Keywords
Lactate, Tpp, Cell cycle

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Chouchani
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School


