### Accession
PXD016797

### Title
Effect of Shikonin on Aspergillus terreus

### Description
Aspergillus terreus is an emerging fungal pathogen in immunocompromised patients. Due to intrinsic resistance of AmB against A. terreus and acquiring resistance to azoles, alternative antifungal strategy needs investigation. Thus, we explored the activity of phytochemicals such as Shikonin, gallic acid, coumaric acid and quercetin against A. terreus. Amongst these, shikonin showed significant inhibition at MIC50;2 µg/ml, considered for proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from SHK treated and untreated A. terreus maintained at ~1µg/µl (200 µl) were supplied to Vproteomics, New Delhi-India for protein profiling using nLS-ESI-MS/MS (QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, each sample (50 µl) was reduced using 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide, then digested for 16 h at 37 °C. C18 silica cartridge was used to clean and dry the digests using a speed vac. Buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was used to resuspend the dried protein pellets. Afterward theses samples were subjected to Mass spectrometric analysis using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with Nano electrospray ion source. The peptide mixture was resolved using a 15 cm PicoFrit column (360µm outer diameter, 75µm inner diameter, 10µm tip) filled with 1.8 µm of C18-resin. The peptides were loaded with Buffer A and eluted with a 0–40% gradient of Buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 100 minutes and finally equilibrated with Buffer A. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1650 Th) for HCD fragmentation with dynamic exclusion duration of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) against the UniProt A. terreus database, the precursor (10 ppm) and fragment mass tolerances (0.5 Da) were set for Sequest search. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin (cleavage at the terminus of “K/R) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 0.01. Protein datasets were subjected for gene ontology (GO) annotations using Blast2GO, and proteins were categorized under GO terms such as cellular components, molecular function, and biological function. Further, the STRING database (version 10.5) was employed for protein-protein interaction network analysis. The protein interaction was done in modes such as action view, interactive, confirmation or evidence view and confidence mode, to get the appropriate interacting pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Aspergillus terreus is an emerging fungal pathogen in immunocompromised patients. Due to the intrinsic resistance of AmB against A. terreus and acquiring resistance to azoles, an alternative antifungal strategy needs investigation. Thus, we explored the activity of phytochemicals such as shikonin, gallic acid, coumaric acid and quercetin against A. terreus. Among these, shikonin showed significant inhibition at MIC<sub>50</sub>; 2&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/ml. SEM analyses revealed delayed swelling and distorted cell wall organization in shikonin treated A. terreus conidia. Further, we performed differential proteome profiling using nLC-ESI-MS/MS, qRT-PCR and catalase assay with and without shikonin treated A. terreus. Protein data generated using Proteome Discoverer showed 882 differentially expressed proteins (680 up- and 202 down-regulated). GO analysis showed proteins from signaling pathways, oxidative stress, energy metabolism, and cytoskeleton organization. qRT-PCR of selected genes from ROS detoxification (catalase-peroxidase, superoxide dismutase), respiration (succinate-dehydrogenase, NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase), signaling (protein kinase C, Mitogen-activated protein kinase, cAMP-dependent protein kinase, ras-1), and 1, 3-&#x3b2;-glucanosyltransferase, rho-1, &#x3b2;-hexosaminidase showed correlation with expressed proteins. We also observed elevated reactive oxygen species using fluorescence ROS assay correlating with low catalase-peroxidase activity in shikonin treated A. terreus. Modulation of ROS homeostasis and the metabolic shift could be instrumental in shikonin- mediated growth inhibition of A. terreus. SIGNIFICANCE: Aspergillosis caused by A. terreus requires more attention due to the development of drug resistance. In this report, we employed nLC-ESI-MS/MS to identify the differential proteome in A. terreus in response to shikonin. The identified proteins involved in pathways influenced by shikonin could be helpful to understand the molecular mechanism on how shikonin/ phytochemicals or other antifungal agents inhibit fungal growth and may enable the discovery of novel or synergistic drug targets.

### Keywords
Amphotericin b; catalase; shikonin; gallic acid; biofilm; oxidative stress

### Affiliations
Jaypee University of information and technology
Assitant Professor, Jaypee University of Information and Technology

### Submitter
Jata Shankar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jata Shankar
Assitant Professor, Jaypee University of Information and Technology


