### Accession
PXD015699

### Title
SPEN is a molecular integrator that bridges Xist with transcriptional and epigenetic control of X-chromosome inactivation

### Description
Xist represents a paradigm for long non-coding RNA function in epigenetic regulation, although how it mediates X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) remains largely unexplained. Multiple Xist-RNA binding proteins have recently been identified, including SPEN/SHARP, whose knockdown has been associated with deficient XCI at multiple loci. Here we demonstrate that SPEN is a key orchestrator of XCI in vivo and unravel its mechanism of action. We show that SPEN is essential for initiating gene silencing on the X chromosome in preimplantation mouse embryos and embryonic stem cells. On the other hand, SPEN is dispensable for maintenance of XCI in neural progenitor cells, although it significantly dampens expression of genes that escape from XCI. During initiation of XCI, we show by live-cell imaging and CUT&RUN approaches that SPEN is immediately recruited to the X chromosome upon Xist up-regulation, where it is targeted to enhancers and promoters of actively transcribed genes. SPEN rapidly disengages from chromatin once silencing is accomplished, implying a need for active transcription to tether it to chromatin. We define SPEN’s SPOC (SPEN paralog and ortholog C-terminal) domain as a major effector of SPEN’s gene silencing function, and show that artificial tethering of SPOC to Xist RNA is sufficient to mediate X-linked gene silencing. We identify SPOC’s protein partners which include NCOR/SMRT, the m6A RNA methylation machinery, the NuRD complex, RNA polymerase II and factors involved in regulation of transcription initiation and elongation. We propose that SPEN acts as a molecular integrator for initiation of XCI, bridging Xist RNA with the transcription machinery as well as nucleosome remodelers and histone deacetylases, at active enhancers and promoters.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were prepared by resuspending 50 million fresh cells in ice-cold 10mL buffer A (10mM HEPES, 10mM KCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.1% NP-40, c0mplete EDTA free, phosSTOP) and rotating for 10 minutes at 4°C. Nuclei were centrifuged at 2000rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C and resuspended in 1mL IP buffer C150 (20mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.2mM EDTA, 0.25% NP-40, cOmplete EDTA free, phosSTOP). Lysates were briefly sonicated followed by Benzonase (Merck) digestion for 30 minutes at 4°C. Finally, lysates were cleared through centrifugation at 13000rpm for 20 minutes prior to being incubated with 15uL of GFP trap magnetic agarose bead slurry (ChromoTek) overnight at 4°C. Beads were washed 5 times in IP buffer.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.212. For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN) with two-missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Xist represents a paradigm for the function of long non-coding RNA in epigenetic regulation, although how it mediates X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) remains largely unexplained. Several proteins that bind to Xist RNA have recently been identified, including the transcriptional repressor SPEN<sup>1-3</sup>, the loss of which has been associated with deficient XCI at multiple loci<sup>2-6</sup>. Here we show in mice that SPEN is a key orchestrator of XCI in vivo and we elucidate its mechanism of action. We show that SPEN is essential for initiating gene silencing on the X chromosome in preimplantation mouse embryos and in embryonic stem cells. SPEN is dispensable for maintenance of XCI in neural progenitors, although it significantly decreases the expression of genes that escape XCI. We show that SPEN is immediately recruited to the X chromosome upon the upregulation of Xist, and is targeted to enhancers and promoters of active genes. SPEN rapidly disengages from chromatin upon gene silencing, suggesting that active transcription is required to tether SPEN to chromatin. We define the SPOC domain as a major effector of the gene-silencing function of SPEN, and show that tethering SPOC to Xist RNA is sufficient to mediate gene silencing. We identify the protein partners of SPOC, including NCoR/SMRT, the m<sup>6</sup>A RNA methylation machinery, the NuRD complex, RNA polymerase II and factors involved in the regulation of transcription initiation and elongation. We propose that SPEN acts as a molecular integrator for the initiation of XCI, bridging Xist RNA with the transcription machinery-as well as with nucleosome remodellers and histone deacetylases-at active enhancers and promoters.

### Keywords
Spen, Epigenetic, Xist, X-chromosome inactivation, Xci

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


