### Accession
PXD027546

### Title
The heat-stable proteome contains a tightly associated LEA protein network during seed germination in Arabidopsis

### Description
Seed germination involves transition from desiccation tolerance to sensitivity during early stages of seedling establishment accompanied by comprehensive changes of metabolome and proteome. Germination of Arabidopsis seeds was investigated over 72 h with special focus on the heat-stable proteome including late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins together with changes of primary metabolites. Six metabolites in dry seeds important for seed longevity decreased during germination and seedling establishment, while all other metabolites increased simultaneously with activation of growth and development. In the heat stable proteome an almost equal fractioning of ordered and intrinsically disordered proteins (IDP) was discovered. Highly disordered proteins were assigned to functional bins development, protein, RNA and stress. Thermal stable proteins were related to a multitude of active biological processes. The majority of LEA proteins decreased during germination and seedling establishment in parallel to reduced desiccation tolerance. Five germination specific dehydrins were identified most likely providing stress tolerance. Network analysis of common proteins and metabolites over all time points revealed a tight network of LEA proteins with five hub LEAs with high connectivity. Connections to proteins such as Rubisco large subunit and seed storage proteins were discovered. Insights into the heat-stable proteome – metabolome network during seed germination are provided.

### Sample Protocol
Measurements were performed on a Q Exactive HF high-resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System (Waters, Milford, USA). Peptide samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 2 µm bead size (Thermo Scientific)) at a flow rate of 0.4 μl min-1 in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were eluted by an acetonitrile gradient from 3% to 80% [v/v] over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.5 μl/min. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 300 to 1,600 at resolution of 60,000. MS/MS scans were performed for top ten MS scans with the highest MS signal (ddMS2 resolution of 15,000, AGC target 3e5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 1.4 m/z, relative collision energy 30). Peptides for which MS/MS spectra had been recorded were excluded from further MS/MS scans for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann 2008) and the A. thaliana TAIR10 annotations (Arabidopsis TAIR database Version 10, The Arabidopsis Information Resource, www.Arabidopsis.org) in combination with the search engine Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011). The settings for MaxQuant analysis were set as follows: trypsin and lysine selected as digesting enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation (cysteine), variable modification: oxidation (methionine). Spectra were also searched against a decoy database of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome and results were filtered to obtain a FDR below 1 % on the protein level. The “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” options were selected. A minimum peptide length of six amino acids was used. The quantification was performed for proteins with minimum of one unique and one razor peptide. Known contaminants, such as keratins, and proteins which were identified with only one unique peptide were removed from further analysis. Statistical analysis was based on mass spectral label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Late embryogenesis abundant, Metabolomics, Heat-stable proteome, Dehydrins, Arabidopsis, Gene expression, Seed germination

### Affiliations
Celon Pharma
MPI für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Potsdam, Head of Zentrale Infrastrukturgruppe Genomics und Transkript Profiling

### Submitter
Michał Górka

### Lab Head
Dr Ellen Zuther
MPI für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Potsdam, Head of Zentrale Infrastrukturgruppe Genomics und Transkript Profiling


