### Accession
PXD005838

### Title
A sensitive and cost-effective approach for tyrosine phosphoproteome analysis based on SH2 superbinder

### Description
Albeit much less abundant than Ser/Thr phosphorylation (pSer/pThr), Tyr phosphorylation (pTyr) is considered a hallmark in cellular signal transduction. However, its analysis remains a challenge. The conventional immunopurification (IP) approach using antibodies pan-specific to pTyr sites is known to have low sensitivity, poor reproducibility and high cost. SH2 domain-derived pTyr-superbinder is a good replacement of pTyr antibody for the specific enrichment of pTyr peptides for phosphoproteomics analysis. In this study, we aim to optimize the approach using SH2 superbinder for tyrosine phosphoproteome analysis. The present work covalently immobilized SH2 superbinders to agrose beads, designed and evaluated four different SH2 superbinder based experimental workflows for phosphotyrosine analysis. After made a head to head comparison of them, we observed that the combined strategy employing Ti4+-IMAC and covalently immobilized SH2 superbinder enrichment in sequence generated the largest pTyr peptide dataset (3519) with the best selectivity (90%). Next the optimal method was applied for pTyr profiling from normal mouse tissues, and resulted in the identification of 197 pTyr sites (of which 73 were novel) from 5 mg protein digests, which validated its high sensitivity. An comparison with antibody 4G10 by isolating pTyr peptides from 5 mg unstimulated Jurkat cell digests were made, our optimal strategy identified 343 while the antibody 4G10 based method identified 242 pTyr sites, respectively, further confirmed the robustness of the method. Finally, the optimal strategy was applied for quantitative pTyr phosphorylation analysis of EGF stimulated/unstimulated HeLa cells, 261 pTyr sites were successfully quantified from 5 mg stable-isotope dimethyl labling protein digests. In general, the combination of Ti4+-IMAC and SH2 superbinder enrichment in sequence generated a facial and robust strategy for qualitative and quantitative analysis of pTyr proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture and Sample Preparation To prepare the epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulated HeLa cells, the cells were stimulated by 150 ng/mL EGF for 15 min after being placed in serum-free medium for 16 h. To prepare the pervanadate treated Jurkat cells, the cells were harvested and washed three times by PBS, then treated with 1mM freshly prepared sodium pervanadate for 15 min at 37 °C. Then the cells were lysed. The proteins were pecipitated and digested by trypsin. For the preparation of mouse skeletal muscle samples, the mice were sacriﬁced and the skeletal muscles were promptly removed and placed in liquid nitrogen. The skeletal muscles were grinded to powder in liquid nitrogen. Then they were transfered to the ice cold lysis buffer. The following protein extraction procedures were the same as cell samples mentioned above.  Prior to the IAP enrichment, the peptide mixture was either desalted with OASIS HLB column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) or subjected to immobilized titanium (IV) ion affinity chromatography (Ti4+-IMAC) for phosphopeptide enrichment. Stable Isotope Dimethyl Labeling  The EGF stimulated and unstimulated HeLa cells were subjected to heavy and light stable Isotope dimethyl labeling, separately. The two heavy and light dimethyl labeling samples were combined together for phosphopeptide enrichment by Ti4+-IMAC. The phosphopeptides were lyophilized and stored at -80 °C for further usage. Tyrosine Phosphorylated (pTyr) Peptide Enrichment Five distinctive experimental workflows were executed for the enrichment of tyrosine phosphopeptides, two of them used SH2 superbinder immobilized on Ni-NTA beads as affinity material, two of them used SH2 superbinder covalently immobilized on CNBr-activated sepharose beads as affinity material, and the last one used commercially available anti-phosphotyrosine antibody 4G10 (agarose conjugate, Millipore; USA) as affinity material.  Mass Spectrometric (MS) Analysis The nano RPLC−MS/MS experiments were performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano systems (Thermo Scientific, USA) connected to a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific, USA). The mobile phase A was 99.9% water / 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B was 80% ACN / 0.1% FA. The elution gradient executed was 5% to 35% mobile phase B lasted for 78min.  The Q Exactive instrument was operated in the data dependent mode. Survey scan MS spectra were acquired by the Orbitrap with 70 000 resolution (m/z 200). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The MS/MS scans were also acquired by the Orbitrap with 35 000 resolution (m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files generated by the Q-exactive were searched with software MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5, against the uniprot human database (released on December 11, 2013 and containing 88473 protein sequences), supplemented by frequently observed contaminants, and reversed versions of all sequences were contained. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (KR/P), up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Phospho (STY), oxidation (M), loss of ammonia and water were chosen for variable modifications, carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modifications. The maximum false-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both the peptides and proteins. The minimum required peptide length was set at six amino acids. For stable isotope dimethyl labeling samples, the multiply was set as 2, Lys0 and Nter0 were chosen for light lable, Lys4 and Nter4 were chosen for heavy lable. All the phosphorylation sites reported in this study were class I sites, defined by the combined cutoff values of protein FDR < 1%, peptide FDR < 1%, localization probability > 0.75 and ΔPTM score ≥ 5.

### Publication Abstract
Albeit much less abundant than Ser/Thr phosphorylation (pSer/pThr), Tyr phosphorylation (pTyr) is considered as a hallmark in cellular signal transduction. However, its analysis at the proteome level remains challenging. The conventional immunopurification (IP) approach using antibodies specific to pTyr sites is known to have low sensitivity, poor reproducibility and high cost. Our recent study indicated that SH2 domain-derived pTyr-superbinder is a good replacement of pTyr antibody for the specific enrichment of pTyr peptides for phosphoproteomics analysis. In this study, we presented an efficient SH2 superbinder based workflow for the sensitive analysis of tyrosine phosphoproteome. This new method can identify 41% more pTyr peptides than the previous method. Its excellent performance was demonstrated by the analysis of a variety of different samples. For the highly tyrosine phosphorylated sample, for example, pervanadate-treated Jurkat T cells, it identified over 1800 high confident pTyr sites from only 2 mg of proteins. For the unstimulated Jurkat cells, where the pTyr events rarely occurred, it identified 343 high confident pTyr sites from 5 mg of proteins, which was 31% more than that obtained by the antibody-based method. For the heterogeneous sample of tissue, it identified 197 high confident pTyr sites from 5 mg protein digest of mouse skeletal muscle. In general, it is a sensitive, robust and cost-effective approach and would have wide applications in the study of the regulatory role of tyrosine phosphorylation in diverse physiological and pathological processes.

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Ptyr phosphoproteome, Sh2 superbinder

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, China
DICP,CAS

### Submitter
Mingming Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Mingliang Ye
Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, China


