### Accession
PXD021713

### Title
Quantitative analysis of rtPA-associated ICH protein serum and plasma biomarkers in acute ischemic stroke

### Description
Acute stroke, with ischemic stroke comprising 80% of all cerebrovascular incidents, has been recognized as one of the core problems in clinical medicine in need of prevention and treatment. Intravenous rtPA is the mainstay and the highest class evidence based  method of acute ischemic stroke treatment, and is currently recommended 0-4.5 hours after stroke onset. In most patients decision on i.v. rtPA administration is striaghtforward, however the biggest concern is the symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage (sICH), which occurs in 3-7% of all treated patients, and is associated with worse 90-day functional outcome and higher disability than in those untreated. Finding a method of the powerful (highly specific and selective) identification of patients at highest risk of sICH, in order to increase the percentage of stroke patients safely treated with rtPA, is one of the most important challenges in stroke research. To address this problem we designed a major and complex project to identify blood, neuroimaging, and clinical biomarkers combined for prospective assessment of the risk of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) after thrombolytic treatment of acute ischemic stroke. Herein, we reveal our general methodological approach with shortlisting of blood protein candidates selected with Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) that in the future might increase sensitivity and selectivity of the rtPA-associated sICH risk calculations.

### Sample Protocol
Pool samples of serum and plasma were fractionated prior proteolytic digestion to enrich the spectral library employed in SWATH-MS quantification. Three strategies were applied: (i) ultrafiltration, (ii) immunodepletion, and (iii) protein enrichment. Ultrafiltration was conducted using Amicon filters (Merck) with membranes of 30 kDa and 100 kDa molecular weight cutoff. Both retentate and filtrate fractions were analyzed. Immunodepletion involved application of the Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge Human 14 (MARS-14) kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) according to manufacturer's protocol. Besides the isolated low abundant protein fractions, the bound high abundant protein fractions were also further processed for MS measurements. Protein enrichment was carried out with the ProteoMiner kit (BioRad) according to the manufacturer's protocol. All serum and plasma samples were prepared for proteomic analysis according to standard Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure. The sample was lyzed by the solution containing 1% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8, 50 mM DTT at 95 °C for 10 min. The protein concentration was established for each sample by measuring absorbance at 280 nm. For each digestion in triplicate, 100 µg of proteins were placed in the 10 kDa microcons (Merck) and processed according to standard FASP procedure. Samples were subjected to digestion by trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio). Generated tryptic peptides were desalted with StageTips. 10 µg of each sample was desalted on a StageTip containing three layers of 3 M Empore C18 exchange disks. Peptides eluated by 100 µl 60% acetonitrile/1% acetic acid were concentrated to 20 µl using SpeedVac prior to MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with the use of a Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (SCIEX Framingham, MA) coupled with the Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA). All chromatographic separations were performed on the ChromXP C18CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm). The chromatographic gradient for each MS run was 8–40% B (solvent A 0% aqueous solution 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 100% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid) in 30 min. The whole system was controlled by the SCIEX Analyst TF 1.7.1 software. Measurements for spectral library were acquired in triplicate. Each cycle of applied DDA method comprised of precursor spectra accumulation in 250 ms in the range of 400-100 m/z followed by top 20 precursor’s product ion spectra accumulation in 100 ms in the range of 100-1500 mz, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.3 s. Formerly fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded. Experiments on clinical samples were performed in a looped product ion mode with the spectrometer set to high sensitivity focus. A set of 25 transmission windows of variable width was constructed with the use of SwathTUNER software based on equalized frequency of precursor ions and covered the precursor mass range of 400–1000 m/z. The collision energy for each window was calculated for +2 to +5 charged ions centred upon the window with a spread of five. The SWATH-MS survey scan was acquired in the range covered by constructed windows in the beginning of each cycle with the accumulation time of 50 ms, and following SWATH-MS/MS spectra product ion scans were collected in the range of 100 to 1500 m/z in 40 ms, which resulted in the total cycle time of 1.1 s.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed with ProteinPilot 4.5 software (Sciex) using the Paragon algorithm against the SwisProt Homo sapiens database with an automated false discovery rate, and standard parameters. Next, a spectral library was created with the group file data processing in PeakView v. 2.2 (SCIEX). Joint search for library generation included unfractionated pool samples and samples fractionated as described before, both serum and plasma. Files from SWATH experiments for each sample were downloaded to PeakView software and processed with the previously established library. Resulting data were exported to Marker View software. All data were normalized using total area sums (TAS) approach.

### Publication Abstract
Intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) is, besides mechanical thrombectomy, the highest class evidence based reperfusion treatment of acute ischemic stroke (AIS). The biggest concern of the therapy is symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage (sICH), which occurs in 3-7% of all treated patients, and is associated with worse functional outcome. Finding a method of the powerful identification of patients at highest risk of sICH, in order to increase the percentage of stroke patients safely treated with rtPA, is one of the most important challenges in stroke research. To address this problem, we designed a complex project to identify blood, neuroimaging, and clinical biomarkers combined for prospective assessment of the risk of rtPA-associated ICH. In this paper we present results of blood proteomic and peptide analysis of pilot 41 AIS patients before rtPA administration (the test ICH group, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9 or the controls, without ICH, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;32). We demonstrated that pre-treatment blood profiles of 15 proteins differ depending on whether the patients develop rtPA-associated ICH or not. SWATH-MS quantification of serum or plasma proteins might allow for robust selection of blood biomarkers to increase the prospective assessment of rtPA-associated ICH over that based solely on clinical and neuroimaging characteristics.

### Keywords
Plasma, Stroke, Serum, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Core Facility Laboratories, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG&MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


