### Accession
PXD015673

### Title
Regulation of epidermal differentiation through KDF1-mediated deubiquitination of IKKα

### Description
Progenitor cells at the basal layer of skin epidermis play an essential role in maintaining tissue homeostasis and enhancing wound repair in skin. The proliferation, differentiation, and cell death of epidermal progenitor cells have to be delicately regulated, as deregulation of this process can lead to many skin diseases, including skin cancers. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms involved in skin homeostasis remain poorly defined. In this study, with quantitative proteomics approach, we identified an important interaction between KDF1 (Keratinocyte Differentiation Factor 1) and IKKα (IκB kinase α) in differentiating skin keratinocytes. Ablation of either KDF1 or IKKα in mice leads to similar but striking abnormalities in skin development, particularly in skin epidermal differentiation. With biochemical and mouse genetics approach, we further demonstrate that the interaction of IKKα and KDF1 is essential for epidermal differentiation. To probe deeper into the mechanisms, we find that KDF1 associates with a deubiquitinating protease, USP7 (Ubiquitin Specific Peptidase 7), and KDF1 can regulate skin differentiation through deubiquitination and stabilization of IKKα. Taken together, our study unravels an important molecular mechanism underlying skin tissue homeostasis and epidermal differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Undifferentiated WT keratinocytes were subjected to SILAC label. L-Lysine-2HCl (4, 4, 5, 5-D4) and L-Arginine-HCl (µ-13C6) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc, Andover, MA) were used to replace the regular Lysine and Arginine in the medium for heavy isotope labeling. Cells with light isotope labeling were used as a control. Heavy isotope labeled cells were transfected with construct expressing HA and His6-tagged KDF1. The cells were subjected to calcium shift for 24 hours before lysis with RIPA (radioimmunoprecipiation assay) buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1% Sodium Deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) containing protease inhibitors. We mixed the same amount of heavy labeled proteins and light labeled proteins, and conducted sequential purification with Ni-NTA column and immunoprecipitation with anti-HA affinity agarose (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). The product from tandem affinity purification were resolved in SDS-PAGE and subjected to identification with LC-MS/MS. Fractionation was conducted using trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Raw files were searched with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 using standard parameters and SILAC K4, R6 against SPROT Human database downloaded 5/30/2014.  Statistical analysis was performed using Excel or GraphPad Prism software. Box plots were used to represent the entire population without assumptions on the statistical distribution. In most experiments, a Student’s t test was used to evaluate the statistical significance of the difference (P value). For results in Fig. 4C, two-way ANOVA (analysis of variance) was used to assess the statistical significance.

### Publication Abstract
Progenitor cells at the basal layer of skin epidermis play an essential role in maintaining tissue homeostasis and enhancing wound repair in skin. The proliferation, differentiation, and cell death of epidermal progenitor cells have to be delicately regulated, as deregulation of this process can lead to many skin diseases, including skin cancers. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms involved in skin homeostasis remain poorly defined. In this study, with quantitative proteomics approach, we identified an important interaction between KDF1 (keratinocyte differentiation factor 1) and IKK&#x3b1; (I&#x3ba;B kinase &#x3b1;) in differentiating skin keratinocytes. Ablation of either KDF1 or IKK&#x3b1; in mice leads to similar but striking abnormalities in skin development, particularly in skin epidermal differentiation. With biochemical and mouse genetics approach, we further demonstrate that the interaction of IKK&#x3b1; and KDF1 is essential for epidermal differentiation. To probe deeper into the mechanisms, we find that KDF1 associates with a deubiquitinating protease USP7 (ubiquitin-specific peptidase 7), and KDF1 can regulate skin differentiation through deubiquitination and stabilization of IKK&#x3b1;. Taken together, our study unravels an important molecular mechanism underlying epidermal differentiation and skin tissue homeostasis.

### Keywords
Deubiquitination, Kdf1, Silac, Skin, Ikkα, Epidermal differentiation, Qe-ms

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, the University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyang Wu
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, the University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.


