### Accession
PXD010576

### Title
Development of the eRush system revealed a role for Rab7  in the neosynthetic secretory pathway

### Description
Our study proposes the eRush as a powerful tool to further study the secretory pathway and sheds light on Rab7 for its involvement in the neosynthetic transport of the TfR.

### Sample Protocol
IP, stacking gel, trypsin digestion, NanoLC-MS/MS analyses of the tryptic peptides were performed on a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance_LC-system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed in MaxQuant (v 1.5.8.3). Peak lists were searched against a composite database including Homo Sapiens and Bos Taurus protein sequences, which were downloaded from Uniprot (27-09-2018; 181.712 sequences, Taxonomy ID: 9913 and 9606 respectively) using the MSDA software suite. Sequences of common contaminants (247 entries) were automatically using the Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant. Maxquant parameters were set as follows: MS tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, MS/MS tolerance set to 40 ppm, maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2, Carbamidomethyl (C) set as fixed modification, Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated based on the number of hits after searching a reverse database and was set to 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins. Data normalisation and protein quantification was performed using the LFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant using a “minimal ratio count” of one. “Match between runs” was enabled using a 2 minutes time window after retention time alignment. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default.  Shapiro-Wilk and Bartlett tests, ANOVA with Tukey

### Publication Abstract
The biosynthetic secretory pathway is particularly challenging to investigate as it is underrepresented compared to the abundance of the other intracellular trafficking routes. Here, we combined the retention using selective hook (RUSH) to a CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing approach (eRUSH) and identified Rab7-harboring vesicles as an important intermediate compartment of the Golgi-to-plasma membrane transport of neosynthesized transferrin receptor (TfR). These vesicles did not exhibit degradative properties and were not associated to Rab6A-harboring vesicles. Rab7A was transiently associated to neosynthetic TfR-containing post-Golgi vesicles but dissociated before fusion with the plasma membrane. Together, our study reveals a role for Rab7 in the biosynthetic secretory pathway of the TfR, highlighting the diversity of the secretory vesicles' nature.

### Keywords
Membrane traffic; transferrin receptor; tgn exit; vesicular transport; rab gtpase

### Affiliations
CNRS
BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry laboratory (LSMBO) Institut Plurisciplinaire Hubert Curien   University of Strasbourg. France

### Submitter
Francois Delalande

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry laboratory (LSMBO) Institut Plurisciplinaire Hubert Curien   University of Strasbourg. France


