### Accession
PXD015056

### Title
The Aspergillus fumigatus secretome alters the proteome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to stimulate bacterial growth: implications for co-infection.

### Description
The airways of cystic fibrosis patients are chronically colonized by a diverse range of microbial pathogens, the composition of which changes throughout life  Alteration to the pulmonary environment caused by inter-microbial interactions and pathogen-host interactions influence the type of microbes that can engage in sustained  infection. The opportunistic bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the primary cause of morbidity and mortality amongst individuals with cystic fibrosis and it is estimated that 60 – 80 % of cystic fibrosis patients experience chronic P. aeruginosa  infection by the age of 20 years Aspergillus fumigatus is the most prevalent fungal pathogen isolated from cystic fibrosis airways, affecting up to 58% of patients. It is the causative agent of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), a hypersensitivity disorder resulting from the inhalation of fungal conidia. Although co-colonization of the cystic fibrosis airways by P. aeruginosa  and A. fumigatus is rare (3.1 – 15.8 %) disease prognosis is poor when both are present. However, sequential infection is more common. It has recently been suggested that A. fumigatus is more prevalent in juvenile cystic fibrosis patients that has been initially reported due to inconsistencies in the culture methods used to detect A. fumigatus. Despite the prevalence and persistence of A. fumigatus, P. aeruginosa predominates as the primary pathogen in the cystic fibrosis lung, suggesting that interactions with other pathogens such as A. fumigatus may influence the pathogenicity of P. aeruginosa by altering its virulence.  We report here an investigation of the effect of culturing P. aeruginosa in the presence of A. fumigatus by measuring differences in growth rate and the overall proteome of the bacteria.  It was hypothesized that A. fumigatus creates an environment that promotes a metabolic-driven increase in P. aeruginosa that results in it outcompeting the fungus. The molecular basis of this increased proliferation was investigated further using Label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics to characterise the proteome changes in P. aeruginosa  when exposed to the supernatant of i) A. fumigatus alone ii) the supernatant of an A. fumigatus/P. aeruginosa co-culture and iii) P. aeruginosa alone. LFQ proteomics involves the simultaneous identification and quantification of thousands of proteins (the ultimate determinants of phenotype) from a single sample has recently been employed to characterise the P. aeruginosa proteome in response to iron limiting conditions, resolving how how the bacteria survives and proliferates in such environments.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa  (PAO1) was cultivated on nutrient agar (Oxoid) at 37°C. A sterile loop was used to inoculate Czapek Dox media with the bacteria. Bacterial cultures were incubated for 48 hours at 37°C in an orbital incubator, at 200 rpm. The concentration of the bacterial suspension was measured by obtaining the optical density at 600nm (OD600). The bacteria was separated from the supernatant by centrifugation (15 minutes, 2000 g). P. aeruginosa - culture supernatant was sterilised by passing through 0.2 µm filtropur S filters (Sarstedt) and is referred to as P. aeruginosa CF.  A. fumigatus conidia (5 x 105 conidia/ml) and P. aeruginosa  (loopful) was cultured in Czapek-Dox liquid media for 24 hours at 37°C in an orbital incubator at 200 rpm. The P. aeruginosa suspension was added to the A. fumigatus culture. The Co-culture was incubated under the same conditions for a further 24 hours after which the hyphae were removed from the culture and the bacteria were removed by centrifugation (20 minutes at 1000 g). The Co-culture filtrate was passed through 0.2 µm filtropur S filters (Sarstedt) and is referred to as Co-culture CF.  A. fumigatus CF, P. aeruginosa CF and Co-culture CF was also produced as described above. P. aeruginosa was cultured over-night in Czapek-Dox, (25 ml) and exposed to culture filtrates produced in corresponding growth media (75 ml). Bacteria were incubated for a further 24 hours at 37°C in an orbital incubator, at 200 rpm. Growth was measured by obtaining the optical density at 600 nm.  Bacteria was separated from the culture filtrate by centrifugation (15 minutes, 2000 g). Bacterial pellet was washed twice with PBS. Ex situ cell lysis was performed by re-suspending the bacterial cell pellet in 1 ml cell lysis buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, and 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O), supplemented with protease inhibitors (aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin A, and TLCK (10 μg/ml) an PMSF (1mM/ml). Cell lysates were sonicated a sonication probe (Bendelin Senopuls), three times for 10 seconds at 50% power. The cell lysate was subjected to centrifugation (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5418) for 8 minutes at 14500 g to pellet cellular debris. The supernatant was removed and quantified using the Bradford method. 100 µg of each sample was subjected to overnight acetone precipitation.  P. aeruginosa proteins were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,500 g. The acetone was removed and the protein pellet was re-suspended in 25µl sample resuspension buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O). An aliquot (2 µl) was removed from each sample and quantified using the QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Ammonium bicarbonate (125 µl, 50 mM) was added to the remaining 20 µl of each sample. The protein sample was reduced by adding 1 μl 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55M iodoacetamide at room temperature, in the dark for 15 minutes. Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) (1 µl, 1 % w/v) and Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (0.5 µg/µl) was added to the proteins and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Digestion was terminated by adding Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (1 µl, 100 %) to each tryptic digest sample, and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13000 rpm and purified for mass spectrometry using either the ZipTip pipette procedure (Millipore) for the A. fumigatus CF or C18 Spin Columns (Pierce) for the P. aeruginosa proteins, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v TFA to give a final peptide concentration of 1 µg/µl. The samples were sonicated for five minutes to aid peptide resuspension, followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 14,500 g. The supernatant was removed and used for mass spectrometry. Four independent biological replicates for each group were analysed in this study. Sample List: 1 P. aeruginosa CF rep 1 2 P. aeruginosa CF rep 2 3 P. aeruginosa CF rep 3 4 P. aeruginosa CF rep 4 5 Co-culture CF rep 1 6 Co-culture CF rep 2 7 Co-culture CF rep 3 8 Co-culture CF rep 4 9 A. fumigatus CF rep 1 10 A. fumigatus CF rep 2 11 A. fumigatus CF rep 3 12 A. fumigatus CF rep 4

### Data Protocol
750 ng of each digested P. aeruginosa protein sample was loaded onto a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a BioBasic™ C18 Picofrit™ column (100 mm length, 75 mm inner diameter), using a 65 minutes reverse phase gradient for the A. fumigatus CF and a 133 minutes reverse phase gradient for the P. aeruginosa proteins at a flow rate of 300 nL/min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 70,000 resolution and a range of 400 – 1600 m/z, was followed by an MS/MS scan at 17,500 resolution, with a range of 200-2000 m/z to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.  To analyse the P. aeruginosa proteins, protein quantification and LFQ normalization of the MS/MS data was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.3 (http://www.maxquant.org) following the general procedures and settings outlined in Hubner et al., (2010). The Andromeda search algorithm incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data against the Uniprot-SWISS-PROT database for P. aeruginosa  PAO1 and A. fumigatus Af293 (downloaded 11/09/2018). The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptides and proteins, and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when observed in three replicates of one sample group.  Perseus v.1.5.5.3 (www.maxquant.org/) was used for data analysis, processing and visualisation. Normalised LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measurement of protein abundance for subsequent analysis. The data matrix was first filtered for the removal of contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group, i.e. P. aeruginosa  exposed to P. aeruginosa -conditioned medium (control) versus P. aeruginosa -exposed to A. fumigatus-conditioned medium or coculture medium. Proteins not found in three out of four replicates in at least one group were omitted from the analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 2 times the mean standard deviation (SD) of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this SD.  Normalised intensity values were used for a principal component analysis (PCA). Exclusively expressed proteins (those that were uniquely expressed or completely absent in one group) were identified from the pre-imputation dataset and included in subsequent analyses.  Gene ontology (GO) mapping was also performed in Perseus using the UniProt gene ID for all identified proteins to query the Perseus annotation file (downloaded September 2018) and extract terms for biological process, molecular function and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) name.

### Publication Abstract
Individuals with cystic fibrosis are susceptible to co-infection by <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> Despite the persistence of <i>A. fumigatus</i> in the cystic fibrosis lung <i>P. aeruginosa</i> eventually predominates as the primary pathogen. Several factors are likely to facilitate <i>P. aeruginosa</i> colonization in the airways, including alterations to the microbial environment. The cystic fibrosis airways are hypoxic, nitrate-rich environments, and the sputum has higher amino acid concentrations than normal. In this study, significant growth proliferation was observed in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> when the bacteria were exposed to <i>A. fumigatus</i> culture filtrates (CuF) containing a high nitrate content. Proteomic analysis of the <i>A. fumigatus</i> CuF identified a significant number of environment-altering proteases and peptidases. The molecular mechanisms promoting bacterial growth were investigated using label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics to compare the proteome of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> grown in the <i>A. fumigatus</i> CuF and in CuF produced by a <i>P. aeruginosa-A. fumigatus</i> co-culture, to that cultured in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> CuF. LFQ proteomics revealed distinct changes in the proteome of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> when cultured in the different CuFs, including increases in the levels of proteins involved in denitrification, stress response, replication, amino acid metabolism and efflux pumps, and a down-regulation of pathways involving ABC transporters. These findings offer novel insights into the complex dynamics that exist between <i>P. aeruginosa</i> and <i>A. fumigatus</i> Understanding the molecular strategies that enable <i>P. aeruginosa</i> to predominate in an environment where <i>A. fumigatus</i> exists is important in the context of therapeutic development to target this pathogen.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas; proteomics, Lfq, Aspergillus; cystic fibrosis

### Affiliations
Biology
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland


