### Accession
PXD031099

### Title
Selective modulation of nuclear receptor LRH-1 through target-ing buried and surface regions of the binding pocket

### Description
Liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1) is a phospholipid-sensing nuclear receptor that has shown promise as a target for alleviat-ing intestinal inflammation and disease states characterized by metabolic dysregulation in the liver. LRH-1 contains an unu-sually large ligand binding pocket, and generating synthetic modulators has been challenging. Leveraging a hexahydropen-talene (6HP) core, we have had recent success in generating potent and efficacious agonists through two distinct strategies. We targeted residues deep within the pocket to enhance compound binding, while residues at the mouth of the pocket were targeted to mimic interactions made by endogenous phospholipids. Here, we unite these two designs into one hybrid mole-cule that is the most potent LRH-1 agonist to date. Through a combination of global transcriptomic, biochemical, and struc-tural studies, we show that selective modulation can be driven through contacting deep vs. surface polar regions in the pock-et. While deep pocket contacts convey high-affinity, contacts with the pocket mouth dominate allostery and provide a phos-pholipid-like transcriptional response in cultured cells.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare LRH-1 ligand complex for HDX analysis, 20 µM of FL-LRH-1 protein was incubated with 30 µM of a 12bp LRH-1 binding element from the Oct4 promoter and 100 µM of each ligand, followed by overnight incubation at 4°C to ensure complete ligand exchange. The complex was fur-ther purified in buffer containing 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl and 0.5 mM TCEP using SEC on S200 In-crease 10/300 column.  The final purified complex was further spiked with 2X ligand before HDX measurement. Solution-phase amide HDX experiments were carried out with a fully automated system (CTC HTS PAL, LEAP Tech-nologies, Carrboro, NC; housed inside a 4°C cabinet) as de-scribed,94 with slight modifications. Peptides were identi-fied using tandem MS (MS/MS) experiments performed on a QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) over a 70 min gradient. Product ion spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode and the five most abundant ions were selected for the product ion analysis per scan event. The MS/MS *.raw data files were converted to *.mgf files and then submitted to MASCOT (version 2.3 Matrix Science, London, UK) for peptide identification. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 4 with the mass tol-erance for precursor ions ± 0.6 Da and for fragment ions ± 8ppm. Pepsin was used for digestion and no specific en-zyme was selected in MASCOT during the search. Peptides included in the peptide set used for HDX detection had a MASCOT score of 20 or greater. The MS/MS MASCOT search was also performed against a decoy (reverse) se-quence and false positives were ruled out if they did not pass a 1% false discovery rate. For differential experiments, the LRH-1:12bpOct4 com-plexes with either phospholipid or compound bound were thawed and diluted to 10 μM. Next, the complexes (5 μl) were mixed with 20 μl of D2O-containing HDX buffer (20 mM HEPES pD 7.9, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP) and incu-bated at 4°C for 0, 10, 30, 60, 900 or 3,600 s. Following on-exchange, unwanted forward- or back-exchange was min-imized, and the protein was denatured by the addition of 25 μl of a quench solution (1.2 M guanidine HCl, 1.8% FA pH 2). Samples were then immediately passed through an immobilized pepsin column (prepared in house) at 150 μl min-1 (0.1% v/v TFA, 4°C) and the resulting peptides were trapped and desalted on a 2 mm × 1 cm C8 trap column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher). The bound peptides were then gradient-eluted (4-40% CH3CN v/v and 0.3% v/v formic acid) across a 2.1 mm × 5 cm C18 separation column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher) for 5 min. Sample handling and peptide separation were conducted at 4°C. The eluted peptides were then subjected to electrospray ionization directly coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Exac-tive, ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Each differential HDX experiment was performed with three technical replicates. The intensity weighted mean m/z centroid value of each peptide envelope was calculated and subsequently converted into a percentage of deuterium incorporation. This is accomplished by deter-mining the observed averages of the undeuterated and fully deuterated spectra using the conventional formula. The fully deuterated control, 100% deuterium incorporation, was calculated theoretically, and corrections for back-exchange were made on the basis of an estimated 70% deuterium recovery and accounting for 80% final deuterium concentration in the sample (1:5 dilu-tion in D2O HDX buffer).  Deuterium uptake for each peptide is calculated as the average of %D for all on-exchange time points and the dif-ference in average %D values between the unbound and bound samples is presented as a heat map with a color code given at the bottom of the figure (warm colors for deprotection and cool colors for protection). Statistical sig-nificance for the differential HDX data is determined by an unpaired t-test for each time point, a procedure that is inte-grated into the HDX Workbench software. Peptides are colored by the software automatically to display significant differences, determined either by a >5% difference (less or more protection) in average deuterium uptake between the two states, or by using the results of unpaired t-tests at each time point (p-value < 0.05 for any two time points or a p-value < 0.01 for any single time point). Peptides with non-significant changes between the two states are colored grey. Each peptide bar in the heat map view displays the average Δ %D values, associated standard deviation, and the charge state. Additionally, overlapping peptides with a similar protection trend covering the same region are used to rule out data ambiguity.  The HDX data from all overlapping peptides were con-solidated to individual amino acid values using a residue averaging approach. Briefly, for each residue, the deuteri-um incorporation values and peptide lengths from all over-lapping peptides were assembled. A weighting function was applied in which shorter peptides were weighted more heavily and longer peptides were weighted less. Each of the weighted deuterium incorporation values were then averaged incorporating this weighting function to produce a single value for each amino acid. The initial two residues of each peptide, as well as prolines, were omitted from the calculations. This approach is similar to that previously described. The consolidated HDX data is mapped onto the protein model in ChimeraX.

### Publication Abstract
Liver receptor homologue-1 (LRH-1) is a phospholipid-sensing nuclear receptor that has shown promise as a target for alleviating intestinal inflammation and metabolic dysregulation in the liver. LRH-1 contains a large ligand-binding pocket, but generating synthetic modulators has been challenging. We have had recent success generating potent and efficacious agonists through two distinct strategies. We targeted residues deep within the pocket to enhance compound binding and residues at the mouth of the pocket to mimic interactions made by phospholipids. Here, we unite these two designs into one molecule to synthesize the most potent LRH-1 agonist to date. Through a combination of global transcriptomic, biochemical, and structural studies, we show that selective modulation can be driven through contacting deep versus surface polar regions in the pocket. While deep pocket contacts convey high affinity, contacts with the pocket mouth dominate allostery and provide a phospholipid-like transcriptional response in cultured cells.

### Keywords
Lrh-1, Hdx-ms

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.

### Submitter
Valentine Courouble

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Griffin
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.


