### Accession
PXD031253

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Study Unmasks Fibrinogen Pathway in Polycystic Liver Disease

### Description
(1) Background: Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is a heterogeneous group of congenital disorders characterized by bile duct dilatation and cyst development derived from cholangiocytes. Nevertheless, the cystogenesis mechanism is currently unknown and the PLD treatment is limited to liver transplantation. Novel and efficient therapeutic approaches are th6us needed. In this context, the present work has a principal aim to find novel molecular pathways, as well as new therapeutic targets, involved in the hepatic cystogenesis process. (2) Methods: Quantitative proteomics based on SWATH–MS technology were performed comparing hepatic proteomes of Wild Type and mutant/polycystic livers in a polycystic kidney disease (PKD) murine model (Pkd1cond/cond;Tam-Cre−/+). (3) Results: We identified several proteins altered in abundance, with twofold cut-off up-regulation or down-regulation and an adjusted p-value significantly related to hepatic cystogenesis. Then, we performed enrichment and a protein–protein analysis identifying a cluster focused on hepatic fibrinogens. Finally, we validated a selection of targets by RT-qPCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry, finding a high correlation with quantitative proteomics data and validating the fibrinogen complex. (4) Conclusions: This work identified a novel molecular pathway in cystic liver disease, highlighting the fibrinogen complex as a possible new therapeutic target for PLD.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, we used a murine Pkd1 conditional-knockout animal model, the C57/BL6 k Pkd1cond/cond;Tam-Cre [1,2].Protein Extraction and Digestion: The whole liver was ground in liquid nitrogen using a liquid nitrogen-cooled mortar (Biolab® No. 088763). Half of  tissue used to protein extraction and half to RNA extraction. Protein extracts were prepared with RIPA lyses buffer (10 Mm TRIS, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% TRITON X-100 and 1% sodium deoxycholate). 1% protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma® No. P8340 y No. P0044) were also added. This tissue lysate underwent a centrifugation process (for 30 min at 4 °C and 14,000 rpm). The supernatant was then recollected and quantified by the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad® No. 5000001). Protein aliquots (100 µg) were concentrated in a single band in a 10% sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), cut and submitted for manual digestion as previously described [3]. Finally, the extracted peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for further analysis. 2.3. Proteomics DDA-Data Dependent Analysis:4 µL of each sample (over 4 µg of protein) were analyzed by shotgun data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach by micro-LC–MS/MS. The samples were separated by the Ekspert nLC425 micro- LC system (Eksigen®) using a YMC-TRIART C18 trap column with a 3 mm particle size and 120 Å pore size (YMC Technologies, Teknokroma) and a column Chrom XP C18 150 mm × 0.30 mm, 3 mm particle size and 120 Å pore size (Eksigen®) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. The solvents used were solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (ACN, 0.1% formic acid). The gradient was from 5% to 95% B for 30 min, 5 min at 90% B and, finally, other 5 min at 5% B for column equilibration, for a total time of 40 min. The mass spectrometer coupled was a hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer, 6600 (SCIEX®) operating with a data dependent acquisition system in positive ion mode. Using the mass spectrometer, a 250 ms survey scan was performed at 400 to 1250 m/z followed by MS/MS experiments at 100 to 1500 m/z (25 ms of acquisition time) for a total cycle time of 2.8 s. Fragmented precursors were added to the dynamic exclusion list for 15 s, any ion with charge +1 was excluded from the MS/MS analysis. MS raw file and database searches were combined and performed using ProteinPilot software v.5.0.1. (SCIEX®) using a mouse-specific UniProt Swiss-Prot database. It is necessary to specify iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation as fixed modification and trypsin digestion. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 for peptides and proteins with a confidence score greater than 99% [4]. Generation of the References Spectral Library: The spectral library was performed by a DDA method as described above, but instead each independent sample, a pool of each group was performed with 4 µL of each sample (over 4 µg of protein) were run in order to obtain more representative protein identification in the spectral library. All raw files were launched together into the Uniprot database to obtain the spectral library using the protein pilot conditions mentioned in the previous section. Quantification by SWATH and Data Analysis :we used a DIA method. We used 4 groups with 4 biological replicates per group and 3 technical replicates per sample. The tissues were analyzed and, compared in Wild Type (from Pkd1cond/cond;Tam-Cre-mouse) and Mutant (from Pkd1cond/cond;Tam-Cre+ mouse) conditions. 4 µg of protein per sample and technical replicates were run using a SWATH method. For each set of samples, the width of the 100 variable windows was optimized according to the ionic density found in the library DDA runs using a Sciex SWATH variable window spreadsheet. Therefore, the SWATH method was based on a cycle of repetitions that consisted of the acquisition of 100TOF MS/MS scans (400 to 1500 m/z, high sensitivity mode, 50 ms acquisition time) of isolation windows of sequential overlapping precursor variables with widths (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400 to 1250 m/z mass range with a previous TOF MS scan (400 to 1500 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle. Total cycle time was 6.3 s. 1. Piontek, K.B.; et al. A functional floxed allele of Pkd1 that can be conditionally inactivated in vivo. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2004. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.ASN.0000144204.01352.86.  2. Piontek, K.; et al A critical developmental switch defines the kinetics of kidney cyst formation after loss of Pkd1. Nat. Med. 2007, 13, 1490–1495. https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1675. 3. Shevchenko, A.; et al. A strategy for identifying gel-separated proteins in sequence databases by MS alone. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 1996, 24, 893–896. 4. Shilov, I.V.; et al The paragon algorithm, a next generation search engine that uses sequence temperature values sequence temperature values and feature probabilities to identify peptides from tandem mass spectra. Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2007, 6, 1638–1655. https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.T600050-MCP200.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis  All proteins in the ion library that were identified by ProteinPilot with an FDR below 1% were quantified by the SWATH method. Once individual samples were acquired, the spectral alignment and targeted data extraction were performed by PeakView v.2.2. (SCIEX®) matching the reference spectral library as described below [1,2]. The retention times of the peptides that were selected for each protein, were realigned in each run according to the iRT peptides present in each sample and were eluted along the wholetime axis. The extracted ion chromatograms were then generated for each ion of the selected fragment; the peak areas for the peptides were obtained by adding the peak areas of the ions of the corresponding fragments. PeakView computed an FDR and a score for each assigned peptide according to the chromatographic and spectra components; only peptides with an FDR below 5% were used for protein quantitation. Similarly, to obtain the areas for protein quantification as a function of signal intensity, up to 10 peptides per protein and seven fragments per peptide were selected. All shared and modified peptides were excluded from processing. Five-minute windows and 30 ppm widths were used to extract the ion chromatograms. Integrated area peaks (processed “.mrkvw” files from PeakView) were exported directly to MarkerView software (SCIEX®) for relative quantitative analysis. The export generates three files that contain quantitative information about individual ions, the summed intensity of different ions for a particular peptide and the summed intensity of different peptides for a particular protein [3]. MakerView uses processing algorithms that accurately find chromatographic and spectral peaks directly from raw SWATH data. MarkerView data alignment compensates for minor variations in both mass and retention time values, ensuring that identical compounds in different samples are accurately compared to each other. To control the possible uneven loss of samples in the different samples during the sample preparation process, we performed a TAS (total area sum) normalization [4]. Version R 3.6.2 and a set of packages has been used for the analysis [5]. Volcano plots were used to graphically visualize the results that were generated by plotting the log (2)-fold changes for all proteins identified against their -log (10) p-value. Unsupervised cluster analysis heatmap figures of proteins with significant differences according to SWATH-MS analysis were generated to detect different cluster of proteins in different studied groups.  Signaling Pathway Analysis  Different functional analysis was performed using differentially expressed proteins in order to evaluate the most relevant interaction networks, related pathways or cellular components and other associated proteins or pathways. UniProt protein accession numbers (https://www.uniprot.org/) were used. Proteins with differences in protein abundance were subjected to: String® (https://string-db.org/) using Gene Ontology (GO) terms and FunRich® (http://funrich.org/index.html) to study protein networks and biological association between proteins; and to Reactome® (https://reactome.org/) to study the pathways involved in relation or interaction with significantly expressed proteins. 1. Del Pilar Chantada-Vázquez, M.; López, A.C.; Vence, M.G.; Vázquez-Estévez, S.; Acea-Nebril, B.; Calatayud, D.G.; Jardiel, T.; Bravo, S.B.; Núñez, C. Proteomic investigation on bio-corona of Au, Ag and Fe nanoparticles for the discovery of triple negative breast cancer serum protein biomarkers. J. Proteom. 2020, 212, 103581. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2019.103581.  2. Varela-Rodríguez, B.M.; Juiz-Valiña, P.; Varela, L.; Outeiriño-Blanco, E.; Bravo, S.B.; García-Brao, M.J.; Mena, E.; Noguera, J.F.; Valero-Gasalla, J.; Cordido, F.; et al. Beneficial Effects of Bariatric Surgery-Induced by Weight Loss on the Proteome of Abdominal Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue. J. Clin. Med. 2020, 9, 213. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9010213.  3. Meyer, J.G.; Schilling, B. Clinical applications of quantitative proteomics using targeted and untargeted data-independent acquisition techniques. Expert Rev. Proteom. 2017, 14, 419–429.  4. Lambert, J.P.; Ivosev, G.; Couzens, A.L.; Larsen, B.; Taipale, M.; Lin, Z.Y.; Zhong, Q.; Lindquist, S.; Vidal, M.; Aebersold, R.; et al. Mapping differential interactomes by affinity purification coupled with data-independent mass spectrometry acquisition. Nat. Methods 2013, 10, 1239–1245. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2702.  5. Warnes, G.R.; Boljer, B.; Bonebakker, L.; Gentleman, R.; Huber Andy Liaw, W.; Lumley, T.; Maechler, M.; Magnusson, A.; Moeller, S.; Schwartz, M.; et al. gplots: Various R Programming Tools for Plotting Data. R package version 3.0.1.1. gplots Var. R Program. Tools Plotting Data 2019.

### Publication Abstract
(1) Background: Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is a heterogeneous group of congenital disorders characterized by bile duct dilatation and cyst development derived from cholangiocytes. Nevertheless, the cystogenesis mechanism is currently unknown and the PLD treatment is limited to liver transplantation. Novel and efficient therapeutic approaches are th6us needed. In this context, the present work has a principal aim to find novel molecular pathways, as well as new therapeutic targets, involved in the hepatic cystogenesis process. (2) Methods: Quantitative proteomics based on SWATH-MS technology were performed comparing hepatic proteomes of <i>Wild Type</i> and mutant/polycystic livers in a polycystic kidney disease (PKD) murine model (<i>Pkd1<sup>cond/cond</sup></i>;<i>Tam-Cre<sup>-/+</sup></i>). (3) Results: We identified several proteins altered in abundance, with two-fold cut-off up-regulation or down-regulation and an adjusted <i>p</i>-value significantly related to hepatic cystogenesis. Then, we performed enrichment and a protein-protein analysis identifying a cluster focused on hepatic fibrinogens. Finally, we validated a selection of targets by RT-qPCR, <i>Western blotting</i> and immunohistochemistry, finding a high correlation with quantitative proteomics data and validating the fibrinogen complex. (4) Conclusions: This work identified a novel molecular pathway in cystic liver disease, highlighting the fibrinogen complex as a possible new therapeutic target for PLD.

### Keywords
Pld; swath; quantitative proteomics; therapeutic targets

### Affiliations
FIDIS
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Belén Bravo López
Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Santiago de Compostela


