### Accession
PXD018886

### Title
Using CC strains to dissect the genetic regulation of the proteome

### Description
Proteins perform a wide range of biological functions and are often exhibit to multi-factorial regulatory patterns. To better understand the roles of genetics and sex in protein regulation, we quantitatively analyze and compare the liver proteomes from related genetically diverse mouse populations, representing inbred genetic backgrounds.

### Sample Protocol
Pulverized CC liver tissue were syringe-lysed in 8 M urea and 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor. BCA assay was performed to determine protein concentration of each sample. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 15 mM DTT. 200 µg protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and re-suspended in 200 µL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Protein was digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio overnight at room temperature with gentle shaking. Trypsin was used for further digestion for 6 hours at 37°C at the same ratio with Lys-C. After digestion, 50 µL of each sample were mixed in a separate tube and used the 11th sample in all 12 TMT11plex. 100 µL of each sample were aliquoted, and 30 µL acetonitrile (ACN) was added into each sample to 30% final volume. 200 µg TMT reagent (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 130N, 131C) in 10 µL ACN was added to each sample. After 1 hour of labeling, 2 µL of each sample was combined, desalted, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. Total intensities were determined in each channel to calculate normalization factors. After quenching using 0.3% hydroxylamine, eleven samples were combined in 1:1 ratio of peptides based on normalization factors. The mixture was desalted by solid-phase extraction and fractionated with basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), collected onto a 96 six well plate and combined for 24 fractions in total. Twelve fractions were desalted and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from an indexed Ensembl database version 90 (downloaded:10/09/2017). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative trait loci, Collaborative cross, Tmt

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


