### Accession
PXD015355

### Title
Myogenesis modelled by human pluripotent stem cells uncovers Duchenne muscular dystrophy phenotypes prior to skeletal muscle commitment

### Description
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) causes severe disability of children and death of young men, with an incidence of approximately 1/5,000 male births. Symptoms appear in early childhood, with a diagnosis made around 4, a time where the amount of muscle damage is already significant, preventing early therapeutic interventions that could be more efficient at halting disease progression. In the meantime, the precise moment at which disease phenotypes arise – even asymptomatically – is still unknown. Thus, there is a critical need to better define DMD onset as well as its first manifestations, which could help identify early disease biomarkers and novel therapeutic targets. In this study, we have used human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) from DMD patients to model skeletal myogenesis, and compared their differentiation dynamics to healthy control cells by a comprehensive multi-omics analysis. Transcriptome and miRnome comparisons combined with protein analyses at 7 time points demonstrate that hiPSC differentiation 1) mimics described DMD phenotypes at the differentiation endpoint; and 2) homogeneously and robustly recapitulates key developmental steps - mesoderm, somite, skeletal muscle - which offers the possibility to explore dystrophin functions and find earlier disease biomarkers.  Starting at the somite stage, mitochondrial gene dysregulations escalate during differentiation. We also describe fibrosis as an intrinsic feature of skeletal muscle cells that starts early during myogenesis. In sum, our data strongly argue for an early developmental manifestation of DMD whose onset is triggered before the entry into the skeletal muscle compartment, data leading to a necessary reconsideration of dystrophin functions during muscle development.

### Sample Protocol
Cells at day 17 were collected and resuspended in 90% FBS (Hyclone), 10% DMSO (A3672.0050, VWR), cooled down until -90°C with the CryoMed™ device (ThermoFisher Scientific), before storage in liquid nitrogen. Cells were then thawed and washed 5 times with cold PBS and air was replaced by Argon to thoroughly dry the pellet that was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. 5-10 times the approximate cell pellet volume of 0.5 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 0.05% SDS was added to the cell pellet for protein extraction. Cell pellet was re-suspended and triturated by passing through a 23-gauge needle and 1ml syringe for 30 times. Samples were then sonicated on ice at amplitude of 20% for 30 x 2 sec bursts and centrifuged at 16000g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatant was transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube. Protein was quantified by nanodrop. 100-150µg of protein was aliquoted for each individual sample and 2µl TCEP (50mM tris-2-carboxymethyl phosphine) was added for every 20µl of protein used for reducing the samples. After 1 hr incubation at 60°C, 1µl MMTS (200mM methylmethane thiosulphonate) was added for every 20µl of protein used for alkylating/’blocking’ the samples. Finally, after a 10 min incubation at RT, samples were trypsinised by addition of 6-7.5µl of 500ng/µl trypsin. The ration between enzyme: substrate was 1:40. Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C in the dark. TMT labelling: When TMT reagents reached room temperature, 50µl of isopropanol/[acetonitrile] was added to each TMT 8-plex reagent and was incubated at RT for 2 hrs, in the dark. 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine was added to neutralise the reaction. Each sample was separately lyophilised at 45oC. Samples have been stored at -20oC or used immediately.  Offline C4 High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC): All 8 samples were pooled together in 60µl of 97% mobile phase A (99.92% % H2O, 0.08% NH4OH) and 3% mobile phase B (99.92% % Acetonitrile, 0.02% NH4OH) by serially reconstituting each sample. Extra 40µl of mobile phase was added to sample 1, after sample has been well vortexed, all the contents of sample 1 tube were transferred to the tube with the sample 2 (and serially repeated until all samples were pooled). Final volume of samples needed to be 100µl. After sample was centrifuged at 13000g for 10 min, supernatant was collected with an HPLC injection syringe. 100µl was injected onto the sample loop. Fractions were collected in a peak dependent manner. Finally, fractions were lyophilised at 45oC and stored at -20oC until required. The used column was a Kromasil C4 column 100Å pore size, 3.5µm particle size, 2.1mm inner diameter and 150mm length. The gradient for C4 separation was (RT in min - %B): 0-3; 10-3; 11-5; 16-5; 65-20; 100-30; 15-80; 120-80; 125-3.  Solid Phase Extraction Cleaning of peptides fractions: A GracePureTMT SPE C18-Aq cartridge was used for pre-cleaning of samples (Support: Silica, % Carbon: 12.5%, With endcapping, Surface area: 518m2/g, Particle size: 50μm, Pore size: 60Å, Water-wettable). Samples were reconstituted using in total 400μl of 1% ACN, 0.01% FA. Cartridge was washed with 600μl of ACN. ACN was then completely flushed out of the column at dropwise speed. This activated the ligands. Then 1% ACN, 0.01% FA (600μl) was flushed through the cartridge to equilibrate the sorbent. 400μl of the sample was loaded in the cartridge. It was then very slowly flushed through the cartridge and recovered into a fresh tube. This process was repeated 3 times. 2 volumes of 250μl of 1%ACN, 0.01%FA were used to clean and de-salt the sample. It was flushed through very slowly. 2 volumes (250μl each) were used per step (2% ACN, 10% ACN, 30% ACN, 50% ACN, 70% ACN). This cycle was repeated twice. Each particular concentration was pooled in one tube. Samples were dried to dryness in a Speedvac at RT overnight and stored at -20oC. Like previously, samples were pooled with 100µl of 97% mobile phase A (99.92% % H2O, 0.08% NH4OH) and 3% mobile phase B (99.92% % Acetonitrile, 0.02% NH4OH) and injected onto the sample loop. Fractions were collected in a peak dependent manner. The gradient for SPE cleaned peptides C4 separation (RT in min - %B): 0-2; 10-2; 20-5; 25-5; 35-20; 55-35; 60-35; 70-80; 75-80; 80-3. Online C18 High Precision Liquid Chromatography (HPLC): 30µl of loading phase (2% acetonitrile, 1.0% formic acid) was added to each fraction-containing Eppendorf tube. Samples were vortexed and centrifuged. Blanks (30µl mobile phase) were added into well A1 to A12. 30µl of sample 1 was pipetted into well B1, sample 2 in well B2 and so on. An orthogonal 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the ultra-high-resolution nano ESI LTQ-Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
HCD and CID tandem mass spectra were collected and submitted to Sequest search engine implemented on the Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 for peptide and protein identifications. All spectra were searched against the UniProtKB SwissProt. The level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database searching. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05, and validation was based on the q-Value. Protein ratios were normalised to protein median and peptides with missing TMT values were rejected from protein quantification. Phosphorylation localisation probability was estimated with the phosphoRS node. Protein ratios were transformed to log2 ratios and significant changes were determined by one sample T-test. To reduce the impact of possible false positive identifications, more parameters were set: 1) only proteins with more than two quantified unique peptides. 2) DMD/Healthy ratio ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.75 and 3) only FDR corrected p value ≤ 0.05 were retained for bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Dmd, Tmt, Hipscs

### Affiliations
Proteome Exploration Laboratory
Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Michael Sweredoski

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros Garbis
Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology


