### Accession
PXD029711

### Title
Sulfamethoxazole triggers specific microbial activities under aerobic heterotrophic conditions: A metaproteomic approach

### Description
The global sanitary crisis derived from antibiotic multi-resistant bacteria entails the need to reduce sulfamethoxazole (SMX) concentrations in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). The key microorganisms and the biotransformation mechanisms leading to SMX removal remain incompletely characterized, particularly under aerobic heterotrophic conditions, which are becoming increasingly relevant in the design of novel, more energy-efficient, WWTPs. In this study, sequential batch reactors were inoculated with activated sludge, operated in heterotrophic conditions and spiked with six different initial SMX concentrations ranging between 0 and 2000 µg L-1. The goal was to determine the influence of SMX in the microbiome and its enzymatic expression through genomic, metaproteomic and transformation product analyses. The results allowed us to identify the metabolite 2,4(1H,3H)-pteridinedione-SMX (PtO-SMX), pointing to the role of the pterin-conjugation pathway in the biotransformation of SMX. Additionally, at increased SMX concentrations, through metaproteomics and 16S rRNA gene sequencing, it was determined a higher abundance of the genus Corynebacterium and a differential expression of five enzymes involved in its central metabolism, suggesting the relevant role of this bacteria to mitigate SMX risks.

### Sample Protocol
In solution shotgun proteomics (Zhang et al., 2013) was performed. Firstly, equal amounts of each sample pool (approximately 10 µg) were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 37 °C and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The samples were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:40 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. After 16 h of digestion at 37 °C, the samples were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid until reaching approximately a pH 3. The digested peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips (3M Empore SPE-C18 disk, 47 mm, Sigma Aldrich) and finally dried under speed-vacuum (Thermo, USA). The dried eluates were reconstituted in water with 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% FA for direct LC-MS. The peptide mixture (200 ng) was loaded in a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics) nano-flow LC coupled to a high-resolution TIMS-QTOF (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics) with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). Liquid chromatography was performed at 50 °C and with a constant flow of 500 nL/min on a reversed-phase column (15 cm x 75 m i.d.) with a pulled emitter tip, packed with 1.9 m C18-coated porous silica beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Chromatographic separation was carried out using a linear gradient of 5-35% buffer B (100% ACN and 0.1% FA) over 60 min. After ESI ionization, peptides were analyzed in data-dependent mode with the Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) enabled.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with PEAKS Studio 10.6 build 20201221 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The MS/MS spectra were matched to in silico derived fragment mass values of tryptic peptides against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (release 2021_02). The search parameters were: Parent Mass Error Tolerance: 15.0 ppm; Fragment Mass Error Tolerance: 0.05 Da; Enzyme: Trypsin; Fixed Modifications: Carbamidomethylation; Variable Modifications: Acetylation (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (N-term); Max Variable PTM Per Peptide: 3. Matches were filtered for 1% FDR at the peptide level.  The raw data was deposited in ProteomeXchange repository (COD. PENDIENTE).  Samples from day 25 were analyzed as a batch using the “Label-free” semiquantification module from PEAKS. The value Spec was used as an indicator for the relative abundance of the proteins in each sample and is based on peptide spectrum matches (PSM) (Ma et al., 2003). The proteins identified with less than 2 unique peptides were excluded from the analyses and, for the taxonomic approach, proteins were grouped at the genus level. The obtained list of peptide sequences was processed with the UniPept Desktop v.1.2.1. for molecular function categorization. To explore whether an increase in expression was detected in any enzyme that could be attributed to the biotransformation of SMX, the list of identified proteins in the metaproteomic analyses was studied following two different strategies: i) a manual search for enzymes previously linked to the biotransformation of SMX by other authors (Table S4), and ii) a search for overexpressed enzymes at increased SMX concentrations.

### Publication Abstract
The growing concern about antibiotic-resistant microorganisms has focused on the sludge from wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) as a potential hotspot for their development and spread. To this end, it seems relevant to analyze the changes on the microbiota as a consequence of the antibiotics that wastewater may contain. This study aims at determining whether the presence of sulfamethoxazole (SMX), even in relatively low concentrations, modifies the microbial activities and the enzymatic expression of an activated sludge under aerobic heterotrophic conditions. For that purpose, we applied a metaproteomic approach in combination with genomic and transformation product analyses. SMX was biotransformed, and the metabolite 2,4(1<i>H</i>,3<i>H</i>)-pteridinedione-SMX (PtO-SMX) from the pterin-conjugation pathway was detected at all concentrations tested. Metaproteomics showed that SMX at 50-2000 &#x3bc;g/L slightly affected the microbial community structure, which was confirmed by DNA metabarcoding. Interestingly, an enhanced activity of the genus <i>Corynebacterium</i> and specifically of five enzymes involved in its central carbon metabolism was found at increased SMX concentrations. Our results suggest a role of <i>Corynebacterium</i> genus on SMX risks mitigation in our bioreactors.

### Keywords
Activated sludge; antibiotics; biotransformation; enzymes; micropollutants; proteome; transformation products; wastewater

### Affiliations
Biogroup - Group of Environmental Biotechnology  Department of Chemical Engineering . Universidade de Santiago de Compostela
INIBIC

### Submitter
Valentina Calamia

### Lab Head
Dr Alba Trueba Santiso
Biogroup - Group of Environmental Biotechnology  Department of Chemical Engineering . Universidade de Santiago de Compostela


