### Accession
PXD022406

### Title
Cross-species proteomic comparison of whole cell lysates, outer membrane vesicles and membrane fractions of Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis versus subsp. holarctica

### Description
Secretion of outer membrane vesicles (OMV) presents an important phenomenon in Gram-negative bacteria and they play multiple roles in their lifestyle including virulence and host-pathogen interaction. Francisella tularensis secretes unusually shaped tubular OMV. We here present a proteomic comparison of whole cell lysates, OMV and membrane fractions derived from two F. tularensis strains: a moderately virulent subsp. holarctica strain FSC200 and highly virulent subsp. tularensis SchuS4 strain. We describe a novel approach to the cross-species proteomic comparison based on creating an intersection protein database from the individual single-species databases. This approach proved to be less prone to quantification errors arising from differences in the protein sequences than using the individual databases. The consecutive comparison of the subproteomes of OMV and membranes of the two strains allowed us to distinguish the differences in protein amounts caused by global expression changes from those caused by preferential protein packing to OMV or membrane. Amongst the most different proteins we detected proteins involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism of the bacterial envelope components like O-antigen, lipid A, phospholipids, and fatty acids, as well as some of the major structural outer membrane proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of OMV OMV were isolated from cell-free brain-heart infusion medium after cultivation to late logarithmic phase of growth. Bacteria were removed by centrifugation, the supernatants were filtered through 0.22 mm filter and concentrated using Amicon® Stirred Ultrafiltration Cell through a 100kDa cut-off filter. Concentrated supernatants were pelleted at 100,000 g and the pellet was fractionated by OptiPrep density gradient centrifugation. OMV-containing fractions were combined and OptiPrep residues were removed by washing in HEPES buffer and centrifugation. Four biological replicates of OMV samples were prepared from each strain.  Preparation of whole cell lysates and membrane fractions Bacteria from the above described cultivation were washed by PBS, resuspended in 50mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with protease inhibitors cocktail, and disrupted in French pressure cell. The lysate was treated with benzonase and unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation followed by filter sterilization. Aliquots of whole cell lysates were pelleted  at 100,000 g to yield the insoluble membrane fragments. The pellets were washed and the final membrane pellet was suspended in 50mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with protease inhibitors. Four biological replicates of whole cell lysates and membrane fractions were prepared from each strain.  Protein extraction and digest Whole cell lysates, membrane fractions and OMV samples were adjusted to final protein concentration of 0.5 µg/µL, lysed in 5% sodium deoxycholate, reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Sodium deoxycholate was extracted to ethyl-acetate and samples were desalted. The peptide mixtures were then analyzed by nano-LC coupled on-line with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Each biological replicate was measured once.

### Data Protocol
Database search and relative quantification was performed by MaxQuant ver. 1.6.14 coupled with Andromeda search engine.  First part of the study was focused on proper setting of the cross-species comparison. In this part only whole cell lysates of the two strains were evaluated. Three separate MaxQuant searches were performed: first two against the individual original databases of the two strains and the third one against an intersection database. The proteome set of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica strain FSC200 was downloaded from NCBI in July 2017 (1438 sequences). The downloaded database contains two identical sets of Francisella pathogenicity island (FPI) proteins and three copies of hypothetical protein FTS_0261 (AFT92250.1). One set of FPI and two copies of AFT92250.1 were removed manually (resulting in 1420 sequences) in order to simplify the pairing of homologous proteins from SchuS4 database. The reference proteome set of F. tularensis subsp. tularensis strain SchuS4 was downloaded from UniProt in March 2019 (1528 sequences). The intersection database was created by combining the two databases by the following workflow. Homologous proteins from the two strains were paired, the databases were in silico digested by trypsin and matching peptides were searched among the paired proteins. The new intersection database then contained only the non-unique peptides shared by the two strains and identifiers corresponding to both strains. Perl script used for the intersection database creation is attached. OMV vs. membrane fractions were further evaluated using only the intersection database. MaxQuant-implemented database was used for the identification of common contaminants. OMV and membrane samples from the two strains were evaluated in a single MaxQuant search.  The identification and quantification parameters of MaxQuant were set as follows: fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M), Gln to pyro-Glu and Glu to pyro-Glu; maximum number of variable modifications: 3 per peptide; digestion with trypsin/P with maximum of 2 missed cleavages; mass tolerance for the first search at 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra at 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled). Minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids; maximal mass of peptide was 4600 Da; mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 20 ppm, taking the 12 most intensive peaks per 100 Da for search. False discovery rate (FDR) was based on the target decoy approach using reverted database and it was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identification. Minimal Andromeda score for unmodified peptides was set to 24, for modified peptides it was set to 40 and minimal delta score for modified peptides was 6. The biological replicates were analyzed as separate experiments. Matching between runs was only allowed amongst the biological replicates of each sample by setting them the same fraction number and it was prevented amongst different samples by assigning non-contagious fraction numbers. Matching between runs was enabled with match time window of 1 min and alignment time window of 20 min. Label-free quantification was enabled with LFQ minimal ratio count of 2 and all peptides were taken for quantification.  Downstream analysis was performed in Perseus software ver. 1.6.14.0 on the data imported from MaxQuant “proteinGroups.txt” output tables. The comparison of whole cell lysates was performed identically at the output tables from the three distinct searches against the three databases. The analysis of OMV and membrane fractions from the two strains was split into four separate comparisons: 1) OMV vs. membrane fraction in FSC200, 2) OMV vs. membrane fraction in SchuS4, 3) OMV from SchuS4 vs. OMV from FSC200 and 4) membrane fraction from SchuS4 vs. membrane fraction from FSC200.

### Publication Abstract
Release of outer membrane vesicles (OMV) is an important phenomenon in Gram-negative bacteria playing multiple roles in their lifestyle, including in relation to virulence and host-pathogen interaction. <i>Francisella tularensis</i>, unlike other bacteria, releases unusually shaped, tubular OMV. We present a proteomic comparison of OMV and membrane fractions from two <i>F. tularensis</i> strains: moderately virulent subsp. <i>holarctica</i> strain FSC200 and highly virulent subsp. <i>tularensis</i> strain SchuS4. Proteomic comparison studies routinely evaluate samples from the same proteome, but sometimes we must compare samples from closely related organisms. This raises quantification issues. We propose a novel approach to cross-species proteomic comparison based on an intersection protein database from the individual single-species databases. This is less prone to quantification errors arising from differences in the sequences. Consecutively comparing subproteomes of OMV and membranes of the two strains allows distinguishing differences in relative protein amounts caused by global expression changes from those caused by preferential protein packing to OMV or membranes. Among the proteins most differently packed into OMV between the two strains, we detected proteins involved in biosynthesis and metabolism of bacterial envelope components like O-antigen, lipid A, phospholipids, and fatty acids, as well as some major structural outer membrane proteins. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022406.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Cross-species proteomic comparison, Schus4, Outer membrane vesicles, Fsc200, Francisella tularensis

### Affiliations
Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic
Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Jana Klimentova

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences, University of Defense, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic


