### Accession
PXD011979

### Title
An oxygen-sensing network of RNA-binding proteins controls glycolysis via hypoxic translatome remodeling.

### Description
System-wide remodeling of protein synthesis is a keystone of cellular stress adaptation. Accumulating evidence suggests that changes in protein output (translatome) are controlled predominantly by translational mechanisms that restructure mRNA translation efficiencies (TEs), rather than simple fluctuations in mRNA expression. At the core of this phenomenon lies the key outstanding issue as to the drivers of such stimuli-induced translatome reprogramming, especially from an unbiased, systemic perspective. Oxygen deficiency (hypoxia) is frequently encountered in health and disease. In this study, we report the RNA-binding protein (RBP) nexus that governs oxygen-sensitive translatome reprogramming. Global MATRIX analysis produced an impartial, activity-based blueprint of dynamic RBP utilization, revealing hypoxia-augmented translational activities of HuR hnRNP A2/B1, PCBP1, PCBP2, and PTBP1. Translatome analysis by TMT-pSILAC of each aforementioned RBP revealed a synergistic network that effectuates oxygen-dependent translatome reorganization to enable hypoxic adaptation. Specifically, each RBP is tasked with activating a distinct portfolio of targets and cellular processes that synergistically contribute toward a comprehensive hypoxic response. Notably, the activation of glycolysis and hypoxic cell survival are critically dependent on this RBP network. The hypoxia-inducible factor 2α (HIF-2α) operates as the critical translation-regulating oxygen-sensor that collaborates with this RBP network to regulate mRNA TE and steady-state levels. These observations reveal an RBP/HIF-2α axis that restructures protein output in response to oxygen fluctuations. Conceptually, these findings demonstrate that stress-sensing RBP networks act as gatekeepers of mRNA utilization for global translational remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation and runs were performed by the SPARC Biocentre, The Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Canada). Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested, and TMT labeled using the TMT10plexTM Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific, #90110) according to manufacturer’s directions. Labeled peptides from all samples were combined and lyophilized. Peptides were then resuspended in 20 μl of ddH2O and subjected to high pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation using a Waters XBridge C18 column. A 90 min gradient using buffer A (ddH2O, adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide) and buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide) was run as follows:  0-3 min 1-12% B; 3-60 min 12-30% B; 60-65 min 30-60% B; 65-70 min 60-99% B, 70-75 min 99-1% B, 75-90 min 1% B.  Ultra violet (UV) absorbance was measured throughout the gradient at 214 nm and 280 nm using a Waters 2489 UV/Visible detector.  Fractions were collected from the beginning of the gradient in 1.2 minute time intervals for 60 fractions.    MS Analysis for TMT-pSILAC for Hypoxia Studies (Mar 2018 Data) Each of the 60 high pH fractions were lyophilized, resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and loaded onto an Evotip C18 trap column (Evosep Biosytems, Denmark) as per manufacturer’s instructions.  Samples were injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific)  using an Evosep One LC instrument (Evosep Biosystems).  The standard pre-set method ofb60 samples per day was used.  Peptides were introduced by nano-electrospray into the mass spectrometer.  Data was acquired using the MultiNotch MS3 acquisition with synchronous precursor selection (SPS) with a cycle time of 2 sec. MS1 acquisition was performed with a scan range of 550 m/z - 1800 m/z with resolution set to 120 000, maximum injection time of 50 ms and AGC target set to 4e5. Isolation for MS2 scans was performed in the quadrupole, with an isolation window of 0.7. MS2 scans were done in the linear ion trap with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a normalized collision energy of 35%. For MS3 scans, HCD was used, with a collision energy of 30% and scans were measured in the orbitrap with a resolution of 50000, a scan range of 100 m/z - 500 m/z, an AGC Target of 3e4, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count with an exclusion duration of 45 sec.  MS Analysis for TMT-pSILAC for Acidosis Studies Fractionated samples were concatenated from 60 sampels to 15 samples by mixing early, middle, and late fractiosn together.  Samples were were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) outfitted with a nanospray and Evosep One LC system (Evosep). Lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a C18 Evotip (Evosep). Samples were eluted and loaded onto a 15-C18 analytical column (100 μm ID, 3 μm beads) by Easy nLC1200 LC system (Thermo Scientific).  A linear gradient of 0-42% Buffer A (0.1% Formic Acid in water) to Buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid) was used with a 90 minute run time.   Data was acquired using the MultiNotch MS3 acquisition with synchronous precursor selection (SPS) with a cycle time of 5 sec. MS1 acquisition was performed with a scan range of 550 m/z - 1800 m/z with resolution set to 120 000, maximum injection time of 50 ms and AGC target set to 4e5. Isolation for MS2 scans was performed in the quadrupole, with an isolation window of 0.6. MS2 scans were done in the linear ion trap with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a normalized collision energy of 35%. For MS3 scans, HCD was used, with a collision energy of 30% and scans were measured in the orbitrap with a resolution of 50000, a scan range of 100 m/z - 500 m/z, an AGC Target of 3e4, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was applied using a maximum exclusion list of 500 with one repeat count with an exclusion duration of 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The MS data was searched against the Human Uniprot Database (downloaded April 10 2017) consisting of only reviewed entries using the Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search engines (Eng et al,1994; Dorfer et al, 2014).  For both search algorithms, the parent and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively.  Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification, as was N-terminal acetylation at the protein terminus.  Static modifications of TMT at the peptide N-terminus, and Carbidomethylation of cysteines were also considered.  When looking for all Heavy Labelled proteins, fixed modifications of Heavy TMT (237.177 Da) on Lysine and Heavy 13C(6)15N(4) label on Arginine were set.  For all identificaftions, TMT and Heavy TMT were considered as dynamic modifications on Lysine residues, as were Heavy Arginine.  In each case, 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  Search engine results were also processed through Percolator (JPR 2009) with q-valies set to 0.01 for strict and 0.05 for relaxed.  TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 reporter ions quantifier node with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm, on the MS order of MS3

### Publication Abstract
Protein expression evolves under greater evolutionary constraint than mRNA levels, and translation efficiency represents a primary determinant of protein levels during stimuli adaptation. This raises the question as to the translatome remodelers that titrate protein output from mRNA populations. Here, we uncover a network of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that enhances the translation efficiency of glycolytic proteins in cells responding to oxygen deprivation. A system-wide proteomic survey of translational engagement identifies a family of oxygen-regulated RBPs that functions as a switch of glycolytic intensity. Tandem mass tag-pulse SILAC (TMT-pSILAC) and RNA sequencing reveals that each RBP controls a unique but overlapping portfolio of hypoxic responsive proteins. These RBPs collaborate with the hypoxic protein synthesis apparatus, operating as a translation efficiency checkpoint that integrates upstream mRNA signals to activate anaerobic metabolism. This system allows anoxia-resistant animals and mammalian cells to initiate anaerobic glycolysis and survive hypoxia. We suggest that an oxygen-sensitive RBP cluster controls anaerobic metabolism to confer hypoxia tolerance.

### Keywords
Translation, Ptbp1, Pcbp2, Hur, Hif, Hif-2α, Pcbp1, Hnrnp a2/b1, Glycolysis, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Professor Director, Executive Ph.D. Program Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center Miller School of Medicine University of Miami Gauthier Build, room 216 Laboratory, rooms 215, 218, 225 Miami, FL 33101-6129 Tel: (305) 243-5177 cell: (305) 877-9731

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Lee
Professor Director, Executive Ph.D. Program Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center Miller School of Medicine University of Miami Gauthier Build, room 216 Laboratory, rooms 215, 218, 225 Miami, FL 33101-6129 Tel: (305) 243-5177 cell: (305) 877-9731


