### Accession
PXD010967

### Title
First viruses infecting the marine diatom Guinardia delicatula

### Description
The marine diatom Guinardia delicatula is a cosmopolitan species that dominates seasonal blooms in the English Channel and the North Sea. Several eukaryotic parasites are known to induce the mortality of this key-stone species. Here, we report the isolation and the characterization of the first viruses that infect G. delicatula. Viruses were isolated from the Western English Channel (SOMLIT-ASTAN station) during the late summer bloom decline of G. delicatula. A combination of laboratory approaches revealed that these lytic viruses (GdelRNAV) are small untailed particles of 35-38 nm in diameter that replicated in the host cytoplasm where both unordered particles and crystalline arrays were formed. GdelRNAV displayed a linear single-stranded RNA genome of ~9 kb, including two open reading frames encoding for replication and structural polyproteins. Phylogenetic relationships based on the RNA-dependent-RNA-polymerase gene marker showed that GdelRNAV were new members of the Bacillarnavirus, a monophyletic genus belonging to the order Picornavirales. GdelRNAV were specific to several strains of G. delicatula, they were produced rapidly (< 12h) and in numbers (9.34 x 104 virions per host cell). We recorded a substantial delay (72 h) between virions release and host cell lysis. Our analysis points to variable viral susceptibilities of the host during the early exponential growth phase. Interestingly, we consistently failed to isolate viruses during spring and early summer while G. delicatula developed rapid and massive blooms. While our study suggests that viruses do contribute to the decline of G. delicatula late summer bloom, they may not be the primary mortality agents during the remaining blooms at SOMLIT-ASTAN. Future studies should focus on the relative contribution of the viral and eukaryotic pathogens to the control of Guinardia blooms to understand the fate of these prominent organisms in marine systems.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot of purified viral suspension (75 µl) was boiled in 4x Laemmli buffer (25 µl) for 5min and laid on ice for 30 min. The mixture was then loaded on SDS-PAGE gel (NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel, Life Technologies) using an XCell SureLock Mini-Cell (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 200V for 45 min. After migration, the gel was rinsed 3 times in MilliQ water and stained overnight with ProSieve EX Safe Stain (Lonza Rockland, Inc). The gel was destained in MilliQ water baths and visualized with a white light table. Bands were excised and digested with trypsin for analysis by mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap instrument (LTQ-OrbitrpXL, Thermo Scientific) on Protim platform (https://www.protim.eu/, Rennes, France) as previously described (Lavigne et al., 2012, PMID: 21997732).

### Data Protocol
MS data were saved in RAW file format (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCalibur 2.0.7 with tune 2.4. The data analysis was performed with the Mascot Distiller v2.6.1.0 software connected to the Mascot (Mascot server v2.5.01; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine for peptide and protein identification using its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were compared to the GdelRNAV-01 genome sequence. Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine. Identification results from Mascot (.dat files) were imported into the ProLine Studio software version 1.5 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr). This software was then used to validate protein identification with a peptide rank = 1 and a FDR of 1% on the score at the peptide spectrum matches level.

### Publication Abstract
The marine diatom <i>Guinardia delicatula</i> is a cosmopolitan species that dominates seasonal blooms in the English Channel and the North Sea. Several eukaryotic parasites are known to induce the mortality of this species. Here, we report the isolation and characterization of the first viruses that infect <i>G</i>. <i>delicatula</i>. Viruses were isolated from the Western English Channel (SOMLIT-Astan station) during the late summer bloom decline of <i>G</i>. <i>delicatula</i>. A combination of laboratory approaches revealed that these lytic viruses (GdelRNAV) are small tailless particles of 35-38 nm in diameter that replicate in the host cytoplasm where both unordered particles and crystalline arrays are formed. GdelRNAV display a linear single-stranded RNA genome of ~9 kb, including two open reading frames encoding for replication and structural polyproteins. Phylogenetic relationships based on the RNA-dependent-RNA-polymerase gene marker showed that GdelRNAV are new members of the <i>Bacillarnavirus</i>, a monophyletic genus belonging to the order <i>Picornavirales</i>. GdelRNAV are specific to several strains of <i>G</i>. <i>delicatula</i>. They were rapidly and largely produced (&lt;12 h, 9.34 &#xd7; 10<sup>4</sup> virions per host cell). Our analysis points out the host's variable viral susceptibilities during the early exponential growth phase. Interestingly, we consistently failed to isolate viruses during spring and early summer while <i>G</i>. <i>delicatula</i> developed important blooms. While our study suggests that viruses do contribute to the decline of <i>G</i>. <i>delicatula</i>'s late summer bloom, they may not be the primary mortality agents during the remaining blooms at SOMLIT-Astan. Future studies should focus on the relative contribution of the viral and eukaryotic pathogens to the control of <i>Guinardia</i>'s blooms to understand the fate of these prominent organisms in marine systems.

### Keywords
Western english channel, Genomics, Diatoms, Host-virus dynamics, Single-stranded rna viruses

### Affiliations
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085, Rennes, France
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085, Rennes, France


