### Accession
PXD036932

### Title
Stromal cells support the survival of human primary chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells

### Description
In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the tumor cells receive survival support from stromal cells through direct cell contact, soluble factors and extracellular vesicles. The tyrosine protein kinase Lyn, is aberrantly expressed in the malignant and stromal cells in CLL tissue. We therefore studied the role of Lyn in the EV-based communication and tumor support. We compared the Lyn-dependent EV release, uptake and functionality using Lyn-proficient and deficient stromal cells and primary CLL cells. Lyn-proficient cells caused a significantly higher EV release and EV uptake as compared to Lyn-deficient ones. Also, they induced stronger support of primary CLL cells. Proteomic comparison of the EVs from Lyn-proficient and deficient stromal cell highlighted 72 significantly differentially expressed proteins, many of which belonging to the extracellular matrix organization, such as collagen, nidogen, fibronectin and endosialin (CD248). CD248, a marker of certain tumors and of cancer associated fibroblast (CAF) was significantly depleted in Lyn-deficient HS-5 cells. A knockdown of CD248 in Lyn+ HS-5 cells resulted in a diminished B-CLL cells survival feeding capacity compared to wildtype or scrambled control cells. The presented data provide preclinical evidence, that the tyrosine kinase Lyn crucially influences the EV-based communication between stromal and primary B-CLL cells by raising the EV release and their concentration of functional molecules, such as endosialin.

### Sample Protocol
HS-5 cells were cultivated under serum-free conditions (StromaNKtert with 5% vesicle-depleted serum) at 5 x106/mL for 16 h. The cell supernatant was collected and cleared by three consecutive centrifugation steps, i.e. 5 min at 300 xg, 10 min at 3000 xg, 20 min at 10000 x g. Cleared supernatants were sedimented in an ultracentrifuge for 90 min at 100,000 xg. The EV pellet was suspended in 500 µL PBS and purified on qEVoriginal 35 nm (IZON Science). The EV-containing fractions were controlled by NTA (Nanosight NS300, Malvern Instruments) and the protein concentration determined by NanoDrop and BCA protein assay  All samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-4% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 4-27% solvent B within 119.0 min, 27-50% solvent B within 19.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 30.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against a canonical human Uniprot fasta file (UP000005640, downloaded at: 26.08.2020) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications for whole proteome searches. In addition, Phospho (STY) was used for phosphopeptide searches. The match-between runs option was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Lyn kinase, Endosialin, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne, Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf; Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne; Center of Excellence on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hallek
University of Cologne, Department I of Internal Medicine, Center for Integrated Oncology Aachen Bonn Cologne Duesseldorf; Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne; Center of Excellence on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases, 50931 Cologne, Germany


