### Accession
PXD018077

### Title
ChIP-MS of Glucocorticoid Receptor in primary mouse macrophages

### Description
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are the most effective anti-inflammatory drugs in current clinical settings, yet their genomic modes of action are poorly understood. GCs bind to the Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR), which acts as a transcription factor to control gene expression in the immune system. Understanding the molecular mechanism that delineates gene repression of pro-inflammatory target genes from gene activation of metabolic genes will help to improve GC therapy and overcome adverse effects.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin of primary mouse macrophages was sonicated to an average size of 200 bp. After incubation with primary α-GR antibody (#sc-1004X SantaCruz) and with protein-G coupled beads, beads were washed three times with wash buffer A (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1 % Triton), once with wash buffer B (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 0mM NaCl, 1 % Triton), and twice with TBS. Beads were incubated for 30min with elution buffer 1 (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 mM DTT, 20 µg/ml trypsin) followed by a second elution with elution buffer 2 (2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM Chloroacetamide) for 5 min. Both eluates were combined and further incubated at room temperature over night. Tryptic peptide mixtures were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted with Stage Tips containing three layers of C18 reverse phase material and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated on 50 cm columns packed with ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY‐nLC 1200 ultra‐high‐pressure system coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) and separated applying a non-linear gradient of 5 – 60 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 120 min. Data acquisition switched between a full scan (60 K resolution, 20 ms max. injection time, AGC target 3e6) and 10 data‐dependent MS/MS scans (15 K resolution, 60 ms max. injection time, AGC target 1e5). Isolation window was set to 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 27. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.5.1.1). Peak lists were searched against the mouse UniprotFASTA database (2015_08 release) combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. ‘Match between runs’ (MBR) with a maximum time difference of 0.7 min was enabled. Relative protein amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm with a minimum ratio count of two.

### Publication Abstract
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are effective anti-inflammatory drugs; yet, their mechanisms of action are poorly understood. GCs bind to the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a ligand-gated transcription factor controlling gene expression in numerous cell types. Here, we characterize GR's protein interactome and find the SETD1A (SET domain containing 1A)/COMPASS (complex of proteins associated with Set1) histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methyltransferase complex highly enriched in activated mouse macrophages. We show that SETD1A/COMPASS is recruited by GR to specific cis-regulatory elements, coinciding with H3K4 methylation dynamics at subsets of sites, upon treatment with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and GCs. By chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and RNA-seq, we identify subsets of GR target loci that display SETD1A occupancy, H3K4 mono-, di-, or tri-methylation patterns, and transcriptional changes. However, our data on methylation status and COMPASS recruitment suggest that SETD1A has additional transcriptional functions. Setd1a loss-of-function studies reveal that SETD1A/COMPASS is required for GR-controlled transcription of subsets of macrophage target genes. We demonstrate that the SETD1A/COMPASS complex cooperates with GR to mediate anti-inflammatory effects.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Immunology, Epigenetics, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany


