### Accession
PXD024696

### Title
Quantitative proteomics identifies secreted diagnostic biomarkers as well as tumor-dependent prognostic targets for clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma

### Description
Clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) is the third most common and most malignant urological cancer, with a 5-year survival rate of 10% for patients with advanced tumors. Here, we identified 10,160 unique proteins by in-depth quantitative proteomics, of which 955 proteins were significantly regulated between tumor and normal adjacent tissues. We verified 4 putatively secreted biomarker candidates, namely PLOD2, FERMT3, SPARC and SIRPα, as highly expressed proteins that are not affected by intra- and inter-tumor heterogeneity. Moreover, SPARC displayed a significant increase in urine samples of ccRCC patients, making it a promising marker for clinical screening assays. Furthermore, based on molecular expression profiles, we propose a biomarker panel for the robust classification of ccRCC tumors into two main clusters, which significantly differed in patient outcome with an almost three times higher risk of death for cluster 1 tumors compared to cluster 2 tumors. Moreover, among the most significant clustering proteins, 13 were targets of repurposed inhibitory FDA-approved drugs. Our rigorous proteomics approach identified promising diagnostic and tumor-discriminative biomarker candidates which can serve as therapeutic targets for the treatment of ccRCC.

### Sample Protocol
Normal adjacent and tumor tissue samples from 13 patients were subjected to protein isolation using 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture (0.5 tablet for 5 mL, Thermo Fisher Scientific), phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture (0.5 tablet for 5 mL, Roche) and 1% n-octylglucoside in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, pH 8.0). For extensive protein extraction, 20-30 mg of tissue samples were homogenized with the Bullet Blender Tissue Homogenizer (Next Advance) using 0.5 mm zirconium oxide beads. The cells were further disrupted by passing the sample through a fine syringe needle (26G) 10 times on ice. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by reduction of disulfide bonds with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 56 °C and cysteine alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min in the dark at room temperature. The urea concentration was reduced to 1 M with 50 mM ABC and trypsin was added at 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. The protein digest took place at 37 °C overnight and was quenched by acidification using 10% formic acid (FA). The protein samples were desalted on SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) using 0.1% FA for washing (RP A solution) and 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) for elution (RP B solution).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was done with Proteome Discoverer (PD) (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SequestHT search engine. Peptide spectral matches were searched against a Swissprot database containing 21,039 entries for Homo sapiens retrieved from Uniprot in March 2016. Trypsin was selected as hydrolytic enzyme with a maximum number of allowed missed cleavages of 2. Regarding peptide identification, a mass tolerance of ±20 ppm for precursor masses and ±0.05 Da for fragment ions were selected. For quantitation, the 2plex dimethyl heavy/light method with a mass precision of 2 ppm for precursor measurements was used. Light and heavy dimethylation of peptide N termini and of lysine residues, as well as methionine oxidation, were set as dynamic modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The False Discovery Rates (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications were set to 1%. Only peptides with medium or high identification confidence, with a sequence length between 7 and 25 and with a peptide rank of minimum 1 were allowed.  Quantification ratios of samples with labeling swap were transformed to heavy/light (H/L) format. H/L ratios for biological replicates were average values from two technical replicates. The obtained data was filtered for proteins quantified at least in one of the 13 patients (5,799 proteins), which are hereafter denoted as “quantified proteins”. The H/L values were sample-wise normalized by the sample median and log2 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the third most common and most malignant urological cancer, with a 5-year survival rate of 10% for patients with advanced tumors. Here, we identified 10,160 unique proteins by in-depth quantitative proteomics, of which 955 proteins were significantly regulated between tumor and normal adjacent tissues. We verified four putatively secreted biomarker candidates, namely, PLOD2, FERMT3, SPARC, and SIRP&#x3b1;, as highly expressed proteins that are not affected by intratumor and intertumor heterogeneity. Moreover, SPARC displayed a significant increase in urine samples of patients with ccRCC, making it a promising marker for the detection of the disease in body fluids. Furthermore, based on molecular expression profiles, we propose a biomarker panel for the robust classification of ccRCC tumors into two main clusters, which significantly differed in patient outcome with an almost three times higher risk of death for cluster 1 tumors compared with cluster 2 tumors. Moreover, among the most significant clustering proteins, 13 were targets of repurposed inhibitory FDA-approved drugs. Our rigorous proteomics approach identified promising diagnostic and tumor-discriminative biomarker candidates which can serve as therapeutic targets for the treatment of ccRCC. IMPLICATIONS: Our in-depth quantitative proteomics analysis of ccRCC tissues identifies the putatively secreted protein SPARC as a promising urine biomarker and reveals two molecular tumor phenotypes.

### Keywords
Urine, Renal cell carcinoma, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Drug repurposing

### Affiliations
Koc University
Koç University Rumelifeneri Yolu 34450 Istanbul Turkey

### Submitter
Aydanur Senturk

### Lab Head
Dr Nurhan Ozlu
Koç University Rumelifeneri Yolu 34450 Istanbul Turkey


