### Accession
PXD029817

### Title
human pancreatic cancer LC-MS/MS

### Description
selecte tissues from seven patients with pancreatic cancer and then investigated the Khib modification in them by using proteomics technology.

### Sample Protocol
collected the tissues during surgery of pancreaatic cancer and then rapidly dipped into MACS, then stored at -80℃.Then, protein extraction, trypsin digestion and affinity enrichment of Khib for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was performed with applying UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was applied to identify protein pathway. Motif-X algorithm was used to analyze the motif characteristics of the modification sites. Wolfpsort software was carried out to predict subcellular localization.

### Publication Abstract
As a new type of post-translational modification (PTM), lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (K<sub>hib</sub>) was firstly identified in histones and functioned as a regulator of transactivation in mammals. However, the role of K<sub>hib</sub> proteins remains to be investigated. Here, we firstly identified 10,367 K<sub>hib</sub> sites on 2,325 modified proteins in seven patients with pancreatic cancer by applying liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) qualitative proteomics techniques. Among them, 27 K<sub>hib</sub>-modified sites were identified in histones. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the K<sub>hib</sub>-modified proteins were mainly distributed in the cytoplasm and enhanced in metabolic pathways, including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle), and fatty acid degradation. In an overlapping comparison of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, succinylation, and acetylation in humans, 105 proteins with 80 sites were modified by all three PTMs, suggesting there may be a complex network among the different modified proteins and sites. Furthermore, MG149, which was identified as a Tip60 inhibitor, significantly decreased the total Khib modification level in pancreatic cancer (PC) and strongly suppressed PC's proliferation, migration, and invasion ability. Overall, our study is the first profiling of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome and provides a new database for better investigating K<sub>hib</sub> in PC.

### Keywords
Tissue, Lc-ms/ms, Human pancreatic cancer

### Affiliations
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong UniveTrsity of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei

### Submitter
yun lu

### Lab Head
Dr Lu Yun
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong UniveTrsity of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei


