### Accession
PXD016583

### Title
Time-resolved phosphoproteomic analysis of OT-I CD8+ T cells stimulated with MHC-I tetramers loaded with N4 agonist peptide

### Description
T cell receptor (TCR) signaling is essential for the function of T cells. Here we monitor and quantify the dynamics of phosphorylation sites in OT-I CD8+ TCR transgenic T cells that have been stimulated with pMHC-I tetramers conjugated with the SIINFEKL (N4) peptide for 0, 15, 30, 120, 300 and 600 seconds. Cells were lysed in urea, proteins were digested into tryptic peptides, and phosphorylated peptides were enriched using titanium (TiO2) beads. A fraction of the eluate was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS, while the remaining sample was further enriched using phospho-Tyrosine (pTyr) immuno-precipitation. The eluate of the anti-pTyr immuno-precipitation was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS in a second serie of MS runs. We performed 3 independent experiments, each containing 6 time-points of stimulation. All samples were analyzed in triplicate MS runs. This dataset contains the raw LC-MS/MS files of the TiO2-enriched peptides (TiO2, 18 samples, 54 MS raw files), and the pTyr enriched peptides (Ptyr, 18 samples, 54 MS raw files).

### Sample Protocol
OT-I CD8+ T cells were purified from pooled lymph nodes and spleens with a Dynabeads Untouched Mouse CD8+ T Cell Kit (Life Technologies), expanded for 48 hours with plate-bound anti-CD3 (145-2C11) and soluble anti-CD28 (37-51; both from American Type Culture Collection), then grown in the presence of IL-2 (5–10 U/ml) for 48 h. A total of 100 x 106 short-term expanded CD8+ T cells from wild-type mice were left unstimulated or stimulated at 37°C. In the latter case, CD8+ T cells were incubated with tetramers conjugated with the SIINFEKL (N4) peptide (20 nM; provided by the NIH tetramer core facility) for the indicated times at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by snap-freezing cells in liquid nitrogen.  Stimulated cells were thawed in urea buffer (8 M Urea; 50 mM Tris/HCl pH8; 1 mM Sodium orthovanadate; PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche; cOmplete Mini EDTA-free from Roche) to reach a final urea concentration of 6 M and lysed with a Sonics-Vibracell. Cysteine residues were reduced with 10 mM final of dithiothreitol for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 20 mM for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. Urea concentration was reduced to 1 M by a 6-fold dilution with 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate before trypsin digestion 1:100 (w:w trypsin:peptides) overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted through C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters). Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed with Titansphere TiO2 beads (5 µm; GL Sciences 5020 75000). Peptide pellets were resuspended in TiO2 loading buffer (80% MeCN, 5% TFA, 1 M glycolic acid), and incubated with TiO2 beads (6 mg of beads per mg of peptides) for a 1 h incubation under agitation at room temperature. Beads were sequentially washed with (i) loading buffer; (ii) 80% MeCN, 1% TFA; and (iii) 10% MeCN, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide (pH 11.3). A second elution was performed with 1% ammonium hydroxide, 40% MeCN (pH 11.3). The two eluates were pooled and filtered through an Empore cartridge C8-SD (4mm/1mL) before drying down under vacuum. 10% of these samples were subjected to MS analysis for phospho-serine/threonine relative quantification (labeled « TiO2 »). 90% of the TiO2 eluates were further enriched for phospho-tyrosine containing peptides using PTMScan Phospho-Tyrosine rabbit mAb Kits (P-Tyr-1000; Cell Signaling technology). Phospho-peptides were resuspended on ice in cold IAP buffer (14 mg/mL), and incubated with pre-washed PTMScan beads (80 µl of  P-Tyr bead slurry for 20 mg of protein starting material) for incubation overnight at 4°C under mild agitation. Phospho-peptides were eluted with 0.15% TFA and dried down before MS analysis for phospho-tyrosine relative quantification (labeled « pTyr »). Peptides and phospho-peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, Bremen, Germany). Dried samples were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA spiked with iRT standard peptides (Biognosis) and loaded onto a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm, Dionex) at 20 µL/min in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with a 75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). TiO2-enriched phospho-peptide samples were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate using a 240 min gradient of solvent B (4 to 12% in 44 min, 12 to 30% in 184 min, 30 to 40% in 12 min). The pY-enriched peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate using a 110 min gradient of solvent B (5% to 25% in 80 min, 25% to 50% in 30 min). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. The survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap over m/z 400-1600  with a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected at 3 m/z and fragmented by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 30. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target value of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms for TiO2-enriched phospho-peptide samples, and an AGC target value of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms for pY-containing peptide samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Data were searched with the Andromeda search engine against mouse entries of the Swissprot protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Knowledgebase release2015_05, Mouse taxonomy, 16,699 entries), the Biognosys iRT peptides, and a list of potential contaminant sequences provided in MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. The search included methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after lysine or arginine, and three missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search, and the mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 25 mmu. Validation was performed through a false discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level determined by target-decoy search in MaxQuant (with additional filters for peptide validation: minimum length of 6 amino acids and a minimum Andromeda score of 40 for modified peptides). The minimal ratio count was set to 1 for calculation of LFQ intensities. MaxQuant processing of files from phosphorylated peptides was performed independently for each enrichment step (TiO2, pY), with the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant enabled for label-free relative quantification of peptide ions across biological replicates, stimulation time points and injection replicates.

### Publication Abstract
T-cell receptor (TCR) ligation-mediated protein phosphorylation regulates the activation, cellular responses, and fates of T cells. Here, we used time-resolved high-resolution phosphoproteomics to identify, quantify, and characterize the phosphorylation dynamics of thousands of phosphorylation sites in primary T cells during the first 10&#xa0;min after TCR stimulation. Bioinformatic analysis of the data revealed a coherent orchestration of biological processes underlying T-cell activation. In particular, functional modules associated with cytoskeletal remodeling, transcription, translation, and metabolic processes were mobilized within seconds after TCR engagement. Among proteins whose phosphorylation was regulated by TCR stimulation, we demonstrated, using a fast-track gene inactivation approach in primary lymphocytes, that the ITSN2 adaptor protein regulated T-cell effector functions. This resource, called LymphoAtlas, represents an integrated pipeline to further decipher the organization of the signaling network encoding T-cell&#xa0;activation. LymphoAtlas is accessible to the community at: https://bmm-lab.github.io/LymphoAtlas.

### Keywords
Cd8+ t cells, Signaling, Tcr, Phosphoproteomics, Agonist peptide, Ot1

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse


