### Accession
PXD024737

### Title
neisserial OTases have different protein specificies

### Description
Proteomic investigation on the glycosylation substrates and proteome effects of altering neisserial OTases within the proteome of N. gonorrhoeae MS11

### Sample Protocol
Digestion of proteome samples. Precipitated proteome samples were prepared using S-trap columns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly samples were resuspended in 5% SDS by boiling and then protein amounts quantified using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 100 μg of each sample were then reduced with 10mM DTT at 95°C for 10 minutes, allowed to cool to room temperature then alkylated with 40mM of chloroacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were then acidified with phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2% mixed with seven volumes of 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 before being applied to S-trap mini columns. Samples were washed four times with 90% methanol/100mM TEAB pH 7.1 to remove SDS then 8ug of trypsin/lys-c (Promega, USA) in 100mM TEAB pH8.5 spun through the S-trap columns. Samples were digested for 4 hours at 47°C then collected from the S-traps by washing with 100mM TEAB pH8.5 followed by 0.2% Formic acid followed by 0.2% Formic acid/50% acetonitrile. Peptide washes were pooled, dried and then resuspended in Buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile) before being cleaned up with home-made high-capacity StageTips composed of 1 mg Empore™ C18 material (3M) and 5 mg of OLIGO R3 reverse phase resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Columns were wet with Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) and conditioned with Buffer A*  prior to use. Resuspended samples were loaded onto conditioned columns, washed with 10 bed volumes of Buffer A* and bound peptides were eluted with Buffer B before being dried then stored at -20˚C.  Stagetip cleaned up samples were re-suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 145-minute gradients were run for each sample altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B to 28% B over 126 minutes, then from 28% B to 40% B over 9 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 3 minutes, the composition was held at 80% B for 2 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 minutes and held at 2% B for another 3 minutes. The Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a stepped FAIMS data-dependent mode at three different FAIMS CVs -25, -45 and -65. For each FAIMS CV a single Orbitrap MS scan (350-2000 m/z, maximal injection time of 50 ms, an AGC of maximum of 4*10^5 ions and a resolution of 60k) was acquired every 1.35 seconds followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (NCE 30%, maximal injection time of 80 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 1.25*10^5 ions and a resolution of 30k). HCD scans containing the oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545, 366.1396, 229.1189 or 211.1082 m/z) triggered three additional product-dependent MS/MS scans (4) of potential glycopeptides; a Orbitrap EThcD scan (NCE 15%, maximal injection time of 250 ms, AGC set to a maximum of 2*105 ions with a resolution of 30k and using the extended mass range setting to improve the detection of high mass glycopeptide fragment ions); a ion trap CID scan (NCE 35%, maximal injection time of 40 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 5*10^4 ions) and a stepped collision energy HCD scan (using NCE 35% with 5% Stepping, maximal injection time of 250 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 2*10^5 ions and a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis: Datafiles were separated into individual FAIMS fractions using the FAIMS MzXML Generator (5) and processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0.). Searches were performed against the N. gonorrhoeae MS11 proteome (Unipro Accession: UP000016457, 2047 proteins) and the N. elongata pglL sequence (Uniprot: D4DS59). Searches were undertaken using “Trypsin” enzyme specificity with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and the glycan Bac-Hex2 (Chemical composition: C22H36O14N2; 552.2166 Da) were included as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. To enhance the identification of peptides between samples, the Match between Runs option was enabled with a precursor match window set to 2 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes with the label free quantitation (LFQ) option enabled. The resulting outputs were processed within the Perseus (v1.6.0.7) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior to further analysis. For LFQ comparisons biological replicates were grouped and missing values were then imputed based on the observed total peptide intensities with a range of 0.3σ and a downshift of 2.5σ using Perseus. Student t-tests were undertaken at the protein and modified peptide levels to compare between groups and the resulting data exported to be visualized using ggplot2 within R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O-linked glycosylation, Neisseria

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Biosciences, Center for Integrative Microbial Evolution, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Koomey
Department of Biosciences, Center for Integrative Microbial Evolution, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway


