### Accession
PXD003400

### Title
Filter-aided sample preparation depends on filter unit shape

### Description
One of the main goals of shotgun proteomics studies is to identify by mass spectrometry as many proteins as possible, often from low-protein samples, in order to help answer important biological questions. All experimental steps need to be optimized to achieve a thorough proteomic analysis.  One of the most important is an optimal extraction and solubilization of proteins through the use of detergents, chaotropes, and reducing agents. Although very efficient in solubilizing membrane proteins, the presence of these detergents, such as SDS, negatively affects the LC/MS analysis and limits protein identifications, and therefor they need to be removed before LC-MS analysis. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) is a generally accepted method for removal of detergents and chaotropes used for protein extraction as well as non-proteinaceous compounds such as salts, nucleic acids and lipids. Another critical aspect of proteomic analyses is the starting amount of protein in the sample. There is still little information about the efficacy of FASP method for protein-limited samples. The aim of this study was to compare two methods for SDS removal, ethanol precipitation versus FASP and we evaluate the effectiveness of FASP method using different filtration devices, as well as RIPA (0.1% SDS) and high-SDS (2%SDS) lysis buffers applied to low (1µg) and high (10-100µg) protein amounts.

### Sample Protocol
SDS and RIPA protein extracts were precipitated with 100% ethanol in presence of 100mM sodium acetate. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer and incubated for 1h at 60oC with 8 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) diluted in 50 mM ABC. Subsequently, samples were alkylated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark using 150 mM iodacetamide (IAM) in 50 mM ABC. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37oC (enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:50). FASP procedure was performed as described previously (Wisniewski at al 2009). Briefly, all centrifugation steps were performed at 14 000 x g at room temperature. The aliquots of protein extracts containing 1, 10 and 100ug were applied to 30kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Amicon Ultra, Millipore, Cat No UFC503024; Microcon, Millipore Cat No MRCF0R030; Filtres centrifuges VWR Collection Cat No 516-0231), mixed with 200µl of urea (UA) buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.9) and centrifuged. This step was repeated twice. Alkylation was carried out by incubation for 20min in the dark with UA buffer containing 50mM iodoacetamide. Filters were then washed twice with UA buffer followed by two washes with ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Finally, trypsin (Promega, France) was added in 1:50 ratio and digestion was achieved by overnight incubation at 37oC. Peptides were collected by two washes with ABC buffer, vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 10% acetonitrile (ACN). For each run, estimated 0.5 µg were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Dionex). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides from CFBE cells were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (38 min), 40% to 80% (6 minutes). At 44 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 16 minutes before the next injection. Peptides from single pancreatic islet were eluted from the column with the following gradient: 5% to 40% B (240 min), 40% to 80% (6 min). At 246 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks, each with two 25 min-linear gradient, were run between samples to prevent carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106counts with 200ms for the injection time, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with 120ms for the injection time. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. All analyses were performed in biological triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated by Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the human subset (20,203 sequences) from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot complete proteome database (release 2015_07; 549,008 sequences) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.2.07; Matrix Science). Default parameters used were: fixed modification (Carbamidomethyl (C)), and variable modification (Oxidation (M)) were allowed as well as one missed cleavage. Enzyme was trypsin, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was ± 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was ± 0.02 Da. Only proteins identified with peptides with the ion score higher than 25 were retained. For pancreatic islets samples were also analysed using Maxquant software suite using the same search parameters. Volcano plot were obtained using Perseus comparing the three biological replicates of the murine islet prepared by ethanol precipitation and by FASP (t test, FDR<0.01, S0=2). Protein classes were defined according to GO cellular component annotation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Fasp

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure federative de recherche SFR Necker, Universite Paris Descartes, Paris, FRANCE

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure federative de recherche SFR Necker, Universite Paris Descartes, Paris, FRANCE


