### Accession
PXD024574

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei histones are heavily modified with combinatorial post-translational modifications and mark Pol II transcription start regions with hyperacetylated H2A.

### Description
Trypanosomes diverged from the main eukaryotic lineage about 600 million years ago, and display some unusual genomic and epigenetic properties that provide valuable insight into the early processes employed by eukaryotic ancestors to regulate chromatin-mediated functions. We sequenced Trypanosoma brucei core histones by high mass accuracy middle-down mass spectrometry to map core histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) and elucidate cis histone combinatorial PTMs (cPTMs). T. brucei histones are heavily modified and display intricate cPTMs patterns, with numerous hypermodified cPTMs that could contribute to the formation of non repressive euchromatic states. The T. brucei H2A C terminal tail is hyperacetylated, containing up to 5 acetylated lysine residues. MNase-ChIP-seq revealed a striking enrichment of hyperacetylated H2A at Pol II transcription start regions, and showed that H2A histones that are hyperacetylated in different combinations localised to different genomic regions, suggesting distinct epigenetic functions. Our genomics and proteomics data provide insight into the complex epigenetic mechanisms used by this parasite to regulate a genome that lacks the transcriptional control mechanisms found in higher eukaryotes. The findings further demonstrate the complexity of epigenetic mechanisms that were probably shared with the last eukaryotic common ancestor.

### Sample Protocol
Core histones were extracted using an acid extraction protocol adapted for T. brucei (Nardelli et al., 2015). For bloodstream-form cells, 1x10^10 cells/sample, and for procyclic-form cells, 1x10^9 cells/sample were harvested. Histone pellets were resuspended in 50 µl ddH2O by sonication (5 min) followed by agitation under rotation for one hour at 4°C. This was done four times for a total of four hours, and insoluble debris pelleted at 16,000 RCF for 10 min, 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined by the BCA method with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). For protein digestion and middle-down MS analysis, a total of 30 µg protein/sample was diluted with 75 mM ammonium acetate (pH 4.0) to a final concentration of 1 µg/ µl. Proteolytic digestion was performed using Glu-C or Asp-N endoproteinases (Calbiochem) with an enzyme:sample ratio of 1:20 and 1:40, at room temperature and 37°C, for 6 hours and overnight, respectively. Peptides were separated using a nanoliter-flow Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Sidoli et al., 2014). The nano LC was equipped with a two-column set-up comprised of a 5 cm pre-column (100 μm internal diameter) packed with C18 bulk material (ReproSil, Pur C18AQ 5 μm), and an 18 cm analytical column (75 μm internal diameter) packed with PolycatA resin (3 μm particles, 1500 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). Sample loading buffer contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ddH2O. Buffers A and B were prepared as previously described (Young et al., 2009). Peptides were separated using a gradient of 100% Buffer A (75% v/v acetonitrile (ACN); 20 mM propionic acid; pH 6.0) for 10 min, followed by 30-95% Buffer B (25% v/v ACN; pH 2.5) for 105 min, and 95-100% Buffer B (10 min) for column washing. The flow rate for analysis was set to 230 nl/min. The nano LC was coupled inline with an Orbitrap Fusion ETD MS controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). A nano-electrospray ion source was used with spray voltage set at 2.4 kV and capillary temperature set at 275°C. Data acquisition was performed in the Orbitrap instrument for precursor and product ions, with a mass resolution of 60,000 for MS and 30,000 for MS/MS. The MS acquisition window was set at m/z 400 – 750 with dynamic exclusion disabled. Precursor ion charges for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 5 12, and isolation width was set at 2 m/z units. The six most intense precursor ions (MS signal > 5,000 counts) were isolated for ETD MS/MS fragmentation, with an activation time of 20 ms. Three microscans were used for each MS/MS spectrum, with automatic gain control target set to 2×10^5.

### Data Protocol
Middle-down MS data files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific), spectra deconvoluted with the Xtract tool (Thermo Scientific) and searched using Mascot (v2.7.0.1, Matrix Science, London, U.K.). Mascot searches were carried out with the following parameters: MS peptide mass tolerance: 1.05 Da; MS/MS fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.015 Da; enzyme: Glu C or Asp-N with no missed cleavages; Mass values: monoisotopic; Dynamic modifications: N-terminal acetylation, mono- and di-methylation (K,R), tri methylation (K), acetylation (K), oxidation (P,M,W,Y), phosphorylation (T,S). To search the MS/MS spectra, canonical and variant histone protein sequences encoded in the T. brucei 427 genome were retrieved from TriTryDB (v25, http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/) and used to construct a custom protein database that included (protein: GeneID): H2A: Tb427.07.2830; H2A.Z: Tb427.07.6360; H2B: Tb427.10.10460; H2B.V: Tb427tmp.02.5250; H3: Tb427.01.2430; H3.V: Tb427.10.15350; H4: Tb427.05.4170; and H4.V: Tb427.02.2670.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription, Histone hyperacetylation, Epigenetics, Combinatorial histone post-translational modification, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Centre for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Stellenbosch, South Africa
Villanova University

### Submitter
JP Maree

### Lab Head
Dr Hugh George Patterton
Centre for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Stellenbosch, South Africa


