### Accession
PXD010144

### Title
RhoGAP/GEF Interactome - In this project we cloned 141 mammalian RhoGAPs/GEFs (112 human, 26 mouse, 2 rat, 1 chimpanzee) and performed a systematic study of their interactome, localisation and specificity. Here we submit the mass spectrometry data from the interactome screen.

### Description
In this project we cloned 141 mammalian RhoGAPs/GEFs (112 human, 26 mouse, 2 rat, 1 chimpanzee) and performed a systematic study of their interactome, localisation and specificity. Here we submit the mass spectrometry data from the interactome screen.

### Sample Protocol
We used 3xFLAG- and mCitrine YFP-tagged RhoGAP and RhoGEF expression plasmids to eliminate bias for prey interactions inherent in either epitope tag. These were transiently transfected into HEK293T cells using polyethylenimine (PEI) and, as an additional experiment, mCitrine YFP-tagged RhoGEFs/GAPs constructs were stably integrated (selection marker G418) in HEK293T cells. Cells from 2 x 150 mm plates were lysed in NP40 lysis buffer supplemented with 10% glycerol, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 μg/ml aprotinin, pepstatin and leupeptin, 100 μM NaVO4, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1:1000 phosphatase inhibitor cocktail II (Calbiochem), calyculin A and benzonase, and the lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 20.000xg for 10 min.  Bait proteins and associated polypeptides were isolated from the lysate by adding 30 μl packed anti-FLAG M2 (Sigma) or 15 ul packed GFP-trap (Chromotek) sepharose beads and nutating at 4oC for 15 min (GFP-trap) or 45 min (Flag-M2).  Beads were washed 2x with 750 μl lysis buffer and 1-2x with 750 μl 20 mM Hepes pH7.5. Proteins were then eluted three times with 30 μl 50 mM phosphoric acid pH1.8 for 5-10 min each.  Samples were processed using a solid-phase digest protocol using proteomic reactors(Ethier et al., 2006); (So et al., 2015)  or spin-tips. For the proteomic reactor, 3 cm of PolySulfoethyl A beads (particle size, 12 mm; pore size, 300 Å) (Western Analytical) was packed into 200-mm (internal diameter) fused silica tubing using a pressure bomb (nitrogen gas, 100 to 500 psi). Protein eluates were loaded on the column and washed with 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 3) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)–grade water. Bound proteins were reduced in DTT solution (100 mM DTT/10 mM  ammonium bicarbonate pH 8) for 30 min and washed with HPLC-grade water. Reduced proteins were alkylated and trypsin-digested for 1 to 2 h in trypsin solution [sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (2 mg/ml; Promega)/100 mM Tris/10 mM iodoacetamide (pH 8)]. Peptides were eluted in 15 μl of 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, and 1 μl of 50% formic acid was added to a final volume of 16 μl. For the spin tip method, steps were adapted from the column method of the proteomic reactor, with 30μm SCX beads (PolyLC) packed into a TopTip (Glygen). Centrifugal force (1000xg) was used to load samples, buffer exchange and add reagents to the immobilized proteins. Buffers, reagents and volumes closely followed the steps in the proteomic reactor, using adapters and Eppendorf tubes to recover flow through and final digested peptides.  A subset of samples (search tasks #285 and 748) were digested on-bead.  The beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 with 1 μg of trypsin. These samples were incubated overnight at 37oC on a rotating disc. An additional 0.5 μg of trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 was then added and samples were incubated for 2 h at 37oC with mixing. Beads were centrifuged at 400 x g for 1 min and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5 mL microfuge tube. Beads were rinsed twice with HPLC-grade water and the rinses were added to the original supernatant. These samples were acidified to 2% formic acid and dried in a centrifugal evaporator before being resuspended in 5% formic acid.  Digested samples were processed on a ThermoFisher LTQ linear ion trap, ThermoFisher LTQ-Orbitrap or SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 as indicated in the manuscript and Biostudies:S-BSST160.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched against the latest human proteome at the time (RefSeq v42 & v57 (O’Leary et al., 2016)) using the Mascot (Matrix Science) spectral matching program. Search engine results from each LC/MS/MS run were submitted to the ProHits platform (Liu et al., 2010). Conversion and Mascot parameters are detailed in supplementary table x and are provided in Biostudies:S-BSST160

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Rhogaps, Rho signaling, Rhogefs, Mammalian

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
EMBL-EBI

### Submitter
Evangelia Petsalaki

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Rocks
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine


