### Accession
PXD020866

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteomics of classical bordetellae elucidates the role of serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation in Bordetella biology and virulence

### Description
This study characterised the Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteome of classical Bordetella species and examined its role in Bordetella biology and virulence. This study found 70 unique phosphorylated proteins in the classical bordetellae group with a high degree of conservation observed and phosphorylation was a key regulator of Bordetella metabolism with proteins involved in gluconeogenesis, TCA cycle, amino acid and nucleotide synthesis significantly enriched. We also identified the phosphorylation of three key virulence pathways which separates classical from non-classical bordetellae including the type III secretion system, alcaligin synthesis (the primary siderophore produced by Bordetella) and the BvgAS master transcriptional regulatory system for virulence genes in Bordetella. Seven new phosphosites were identified in BvgA with 6 located in the DNA binding domain. Of the 7 new phosphosites, four  were not detected in non-classical bordetellae. This suggests that serine/threonine phosphorylation may play an important role in stabilising or destabilising BvgA binding to DNA for fine-tuning of virulence gene expression and that BvgA phosphorylation may be an important factor that separates classical from non-classical bordetellae. This study provides the first insight into the phosphoproteome of classical Bordetella species and the role Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation plays in Bordetella biology and virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Bordetella strains (L1423 (B. pertussis), RB50 (B. bronchiseptica) and 12822 (B. parapertussis)) were grown in 100 ml THIJS media for 24 h. After 24 h, the cultures were centrifuged, and the resulting cell pellet was washed three times with 25 mM NaHCO3. The cell pellet was then resuspended in disruption buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM EDTA and 0.4 mM PMSF) with phosphatase inhibitors (5 mM of each: NaF, β-glycerophosphate, Na Orthovanadate and Na pyrophosphate) and sonicated. The lysate was then centrifuged to remove cellular debris and concentrated using a 3 kDa ultra centrifugal unit (Amicon).   For digestion, 500 µg of proteins were trypsin digested and cleaned up with an Oasis HLB 1cc vac cartridge (Waters). After clean-up, phosphopeptides were sequentially enriched for monophosphorylated peptides followed by multi-phosphorylated peptides using TiO2 and IMAC, respectively. First, TiO2 enrichment was performed using Titansphere Phos-TiO Spin Tip kit (3 mg/200 µl) (GL Sciences) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Any uncaptured phosphopeptides in the flow through were cleaned up with an Oasis HLB 1cc vac cartridge and further enriched in a second IMAC fraction using the high-select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide enrichment kit (ThermoFisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  TiO2 and Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enriched samples were each resuspended in 10 µl of 1% formic acid, 0.05% heptafluorobutyric acid and 2% acetonitrile. The samples (2.5 - 5 µl) were then loaded onto the Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher) connected to an UltiMate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex). The peptides were initially concentrated and desalted with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.2 % TFA) at 15 µl/min on a micro C18 precolumn (300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex). After a 4 min wash, the micro C18 precolumn was switched (Valco 10 port UPLC valve, Valco) into line to a fritless nano column (75µ x ~15cm) which contained C18AQ media (1.9µ, 120 Å Dr Maisch). Peptides were then separated on a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 0.2 µl/min over 30 min. Positive ions were generated with electrospray ionisation at 2000V. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed with survey scan from m/z of 350 to 1750, resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, accumulation target value of 400,000 ions and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003). A top-speed approach with a cycle time of 2s was used for data-dependent tandem MS analysis. Ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with intensity threshold at 25,000. A mass tolerance of 10 ppm and dynamic exclusion of 20s was set.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed via Mascot Daemon (v2.5.1) for peak picking and identification with Oxidation (M), Carbamidomethyl (C), Phospho (ST) and Phospho (Y) set as variable modifications. The remaining search parameters were enzyme: Trypsin, max missed cleavage: 3, mass values: monoisotopic, peptide mass tolerance: 4.0 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 0.4 Da and instrument: ESI-TRAP. For B. pertussis, a search database consisting of B. pertussis strains: Tohama I (NC_002929.2, 3426 protein sequences), CS (NC_017223.1, 3456 protein sequences), B1917 (CP009751.1, 3458 protein sequences) and B1920 (CP009752.1, 3461 protein sequences) from Genbank were used, while for B. bronchiseptica and B. parapertussis searches, strains RB50 (NC_002927.3, 4994 protein sequences) and 12822 (NC_002928.3, 4129 protein sequences) were used.   The resulting Mascot files were loaded into Scaffold (v4.11.0) for verification using the ProteinProphet algorithm with protein probability: 99%, peptide probability: 95% and minimum number of peptides: 1. The A-score algorithm in Scaffold PTM (v3.3.0) was used to identify and localise phosphosites with the minimum localization confidence set at 95%. All PSM (peptide-spectral matches) for phosphorylation were then manually checked on Scaffold to ensure a prominent b and/or y ion series was present.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fusion lumos, Bvga, Bordetella bronchiseptica, Virulence, Bordetella parapertussis, Phosphoproteome, Bordetella pertussis, Whooping cough

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Ruiting Lan

### Lab Head
Dr Ruiting Lan
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia


