### Accession
PXD028813

### Title
p300 acetylates Ub and linear Ub dimers

### Description
In this project we present the identification of in vitro acetylation of Ub by the acetyltransferase p300. Free monomeric Ub or M1-linked linear Ub dimers (diUb) were incubated in vitro with p300 in presence or absence of acetyl-Coenzyme A (AcCoA). For identification of the acetylation status of the respective Ub variants parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), a targeted-MS approach, was used.

### Sample Protocol
For in vitro acetylation of Ub or M1-linked diUb, 200 ng of p300 (active motif) were incubated with 5 µM Ub or N-terminally Strep-tagged M1-linked diUb in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 20 µM acetyl-CoA (Sigma-Aldrich) and 5 mM butyrate. After incubation for 3 h at 37°C, reaction mixtures were subjected to SDS-PAGE and proteins were visualized by colloidal staining. Bands were excised, and in-gel digest was performed as previously described. In brief, gel pieces were destained, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 50 mM IAA. After shrinking and subsequent wetting with trypsin solution (0.0133 µg/µL) for 2 h at 4°C, in-gel digests were performed overnight at 37°C. Then, peptides were extracted by addition of acetonitrile and supernatant and extracts were combined and lyophilized. Peptides were dissolved and subjected to desalting using Pierce C18 spin tips. To acquire MS/MS data of peptides of interest, an inclusion list was added in the targeted MS2 mode. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass range of the Orbitrap mass analyser was set to 320- 1200 m/z and resolution of 60000 at 200 m/z on the MS1 level and 15000 at 200 m/z on the targeted MS2 level.

### Data Protocol
Obtained PRM data was analyzed via Skyline software 21.1.0.146. Therefore, trypsin max. missed cleavages were set to 1, min. peptide length to 4 and max. length to 25 without an exclusion of N-terminal amino acids. As structural modifications carbamidomethyl on C, oxidation on M and acetyl on K were enabled. Peptide quantification was performed on the MS2 level only. For transition settings, precursor charges were set to 2 and 3, ion charges to 1,2,3 and ion types to p,b,y. Product ion selection was from ion one to the last ion. Ion match tolerance was set to 0.5 m/z and 10 product ions were picked. The obtained peptide total areas from the Skyline results grid of the respective peptides were exported and visualized via GraphPad Prism 6.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent attachment of ubiquitin (Ub) to proteins is a highly versatile posttranslational modification. Moreover, Ub is not only a modifier but itself is modified by phosphorylation and lysine acetylation. However, the functional consequences of Ub acetylation are poorly understood. By generation and comprehensive characterization of all seven possible mono-acetylated Ub variants, we show that each acetylation site has a particular impact on Ub structure. This is reflected in selective usage of the acetylated variants by different E3 ligases and overlapping but distinct interactomes, linking different acetylated variants to different cellular pathways. Notably, not only electrostatic but also steric effects contribute to acetylation-induced changes in Ub structure and, thus, function. Finally, we provide evidence that p300 acts as a position-specific Ub acetyltransferase and HDAC6 as a general Ub deacetylase. Our findings provide intimate insights into the structural and functional consequences of Ub acetylation and highlight the general importance of Ub acetylation.

### Keywords
Acetyltransferase p300, Acetylation, Ub

### Affiliations
University of Konstanz
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany

### Submitter
Simon Kienle

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Martin Scheffner
Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany


