### Accession
PXD040382

### Title
Proteome analysis of mouse cerebellar synaptosomes

### Description
In this study we have compared the proteomes from cerebellar synaptosome of early symptomatic Cstb-/- and wild type mice to gain insight into disease onset and progression of cystatin B deficiency. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in the CSTB gene cause progressive myoclonus epilepsy of Unverricht-Lundborg type (EPM1). In the mouse model of EPM1, CSTB deficiency manifests from one month of age as progressive neurodegeneration, myoclonus and ataxia, which is preceded by neuroinflammation, alterations in GABAergic signaling, and a widespread rearrangement of the mitochondrial proteome in synapses.

### Sample Protocol
Lipids were removed from synaptosome samples (n=5+5 mice/genotype) as previously described (PMID: 33281550). Briefly, samples were incubated overnight at -20°C in five volumes ice-cold acetone and centrifuged twice at 1000 x g for 10 min at +4°C with an additional acetone wash in between. Pellets were air dried for 5 min and resuspended in freshly prepared 6.0 M urea/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein concentrations (µg/µl) were determined spectrophotometrically using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For proteome analysis, 5 µg of each sample was reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA), and the urea concentration was diluted to 1 M, followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega Corporation, WI, USA) at +37°C. Peptides were desalted and concentrated by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disk (3M Empore). Samples were eluted with 0.1% formic acid/60% acetonitrile, dried, and solubilized in 7 µl 0.1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed using an EASY-nLC system coupled to the QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with the EASY Spray PepMap®RSLC column (C18, 2 µl, 100 Å, 75 µm x 25 cm) using a 120 min LC separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.6.2.10 for protein identification and label-free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term), and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique + razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was employed with default settings. The Uniprot database with ‘mouse’ entries (January 2019) was used for the database searches.

### Publication Abstract
The involvement of mitochondrial dysfunction in cystatin B (CSTB) deficiency has been suggested, but its role in the onset of neurodegeneration, myoclonus, and ataxia in the CSTB-deficient mouse model (<i>Cstb<sup>-/-</sup></i>) is yet unknown. CSTB is an inhibitor of lysosomal and nuclear cysteine cathepsins. In humans, partial loss-of-function mutations cause the progressive myoclonus epilepsy neurodegenerative disorder, EPM1. Here we applied proteome analysis and respirometry on cerebellar synaptosomes from early symptomatic (<i>Cstb<sup>-/-</sup></i>) mice to identify the molecular mechanisms involved in the onset of CSTB-deficiency associated neural pathogenesis. Proteome analysis showed that CSTB deficiency is associated with differential expression of mitochondrial and synaptic proteins, and respirometry revealed a progressive impairment in mitochondrial function coinciding with the onset of myoclonus and neurodegeneration in (<i>Cstb<sup>-/-</sup></i>) mice. This mitochondrial dysfunction was not associated with alterations in mitochondrial DNA copy number or membrane ultrastructure. Collectively, our results show that CSTB deficiency generates a defect in synaptic mitochondrial bioenergetics that coincides with the onset and progression of the clinical phenotypes, and thus is likely a contributor to the pathogenesis of EPM1.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Synaptosome, Cystatin b, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


