### Accession
PXD008320

### Title
ALKBH7, a mitochondrial member of AlkB family, binds histones in vitro, part 3

### Description
Human genome encodes 9 AlkB family members, one of which is ALKBH7. In this study, we found recombinant ALKBH7 could bind bulk histones in GST pull-down and attenuate the signal of H4K20me2 in demethylation assays. With mass spectrometry, we also identified several potential ALKBH7-interacting proteins, such as NDUFS2, MRPS7 etc.; and found the expression of NDUFA4 and COX6C was down-regulated upon knockdown of ALKBH7. With these results, we can obtain a novel sight into the function of this protein

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in crude mitochondrial fraction was captured in the IP assay, and then separated by SDS-PAGE in a 4-12% gradient Noves Bis-Tris gel(Invitrogen). The gels were lightly stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R250 for 15 min. 5 regions of gel with distinctive proteins bands were cut off and diced into 1 mm3 cubes, followed by in-gel digested as previously described(1).Briefly, each gel slice was desiccated with acetonitrile, treated with 10 mM DDT for 1 hour at 55 °C and then with 25 mM IAA for 0.5 hour in the dark at room temperature. They were then digested by 12.5 ng/l trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 16 h for following LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The in-gel MS/MS raw data were analysis through the Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) against the against the human proteome in the UniProt Swiss-Prot database (released June 19nd, 2016). The criteria for searching were set as follows according to the software recommendations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alkbh7;mitochondrion;histone

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; No. 5 Dongdansantiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; No. 5 Dongdansantiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China


