### Accession
PXD012426

### Title
Searching for binding partners of the SLX4 577-795 region and assessing the impact of the SLX4 D614G and L618P cancer patient-derived mutations on their association with SLX4

### Description
The project was aimed at identifying new binding partners of SLX4 that associate with a region spanning the conserved amphipathic helix of SLX4 and the downstream BTB domain. It was also aimed at assessing which of those partners might have their association with SLX4 abrogated by the cancer patient-derived D614G and L618P SLX4 mutations. The goal was ultimately to determine whether RTEL1 which we had identified as a novel binding partner of SLX4 and that does not bind SLX4 D614G or SLX4 L618P mutant proteins, is the only SLX4 binding partner to be impacted by those mutations. A YFP-SLX4 577-795 wt or mutated fragment produced in Hela Flp-In TRex cells was immunoprecipitated using a GFP-nanobody. YFP-pull downs were washed 5 times with 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0] buffer elution of the proteins bound to the GFP-nanobody directly in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) for 5 min at 95˚C.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–Tris acrylamide gels according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Migration was stopped as soon as proteins stacked in a single band. Gel were stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce), and protein containing bands were cut from the gel, reduced, alkylated in presence of iodoacetamide and digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) before mass spectrometry analysis. Extracted peptides were injected in 2 or 3 technical replicates and identified in liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Sample were injected in duplicate on the system. Peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column from Dionex (PepMap RSLC C18, 50 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate and 40°C and an EASY-Spray nanosource was used for peptide ionization. A two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45-45% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1 % formic acid for 30 min. The separation of the peptides was monitored by a UV detector (absorption at 214 nm). The spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. The mass spectrometer was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 375-1500 at a FWHM resolution of 60 000 measured at 200 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0x10E5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision induced dissociation fragmentation at 35% was performed and analyzed in the ion trap using the “Inject Ions for All Available Parallelizable time” option with a maximum injection time of 105 ms and an AGC target of 1.0x10E5. Charge state screening was enabled to include precursors with 2 and 7 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and a duration of 60s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo fisher Scientific). This software was used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.1; Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) against the Human database subset (20,413 entries) of the SwissProt database (version 2018.11). Database search were done using the following settings: a maximum of two trypsin miscleavage allowed, methionine oxidation and N terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamido-methylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were allowed for search analysis. Only peptides with higher Mascot threshold (identity) were selected. False discovery rate was set to 1% for protein identification. Protein abundance was measured using both approaches. First a spectral counting approach based on the number of peptide-to-spectrum matching (PSM) events and then a Top3 method available in Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
The SLX4 tumor suppressor is a scaffold that plays a pivotal role in several aspects of genome protection, including homologous recombination, interstrand DNA crosslink repair and the maintenance of common fragile sites and telomeres. Here, we unravel an unexpected direct interaction between SLX4 and the DNA helicase RTEL1, which, until now, were viewed as having independent and antagonistic functions. We identify cancer and Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome-associated mutations in SLX4 and RTEL1, respectively, that abolish SLX4-RTEL1 complex formation. We show that both proteins are recruited to nascent DNA, tightly co-localize with active RNA pol II, and that SLX4, in complex with RTEL1, promotes FANCD2/RNA pol II co-localization. Importantly, disrupting the SLX4-RTEL1 interaction leads to DNA replication defects in unstressed cells, which are rescued by inhibiting transcription. Our data demonstrate that SLX4 and RTEL1 interact to prevent replication-transcription conflicts and provide evidence that this is independent of the nuclease scaffold function of SLX4.

### Keywords
Protein-protein binding domain, Interactome, Cancer associated mutations, Slx4 scaffold

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, CRCM

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr MarseilleProteomics CRCM and Gaillard PH Lab
Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, CRCM


