### Accession
PXD015787

### Title
Identification of EGLN2 binding partners using AP-MS

### Description
Protein binding parnters of EGLN2 were identified in response to DMOG treatment.

### Sample Protocol
GST pull-downs were performed, and samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin overnight. Peptides were desalted then analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 - QExactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were search against a Uniprot human database with Sequest within Proteome Discoverer 2.1.  Parameters used: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance 0.02 Da product ion mass tolerance up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification oxidation of M, acetyl of N-term, and phospho of S,T,Y were set as variable modifications Data filtering: Protein and peptide false discovery rates of 5% was used to filter all results Raw Data ID Sample Name S1 GST-CTL NORMOXIA S2 GST-CTL HYPOXIA + DMOG S3 GST-EGLN2 NORMOXIA S4 GST-EGLN2 HYPOXIA + DMOG

### Publication Abstract
Protein hydroxylation affects protein stability, activity, and interactome, therefore contributing to various diseases including cancers. However, the transiency of the hydroxylation reaction hinders the identification of hydroxylase substrates. By developing an enzyme-substrate trapping strategy coupled with TAP-TAG or orthogonal GST- purification followed by mass spectrometry, we identify adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) as an EglN2 hydroxylase substrate in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). ADSL expression is higher in TNBC than other breast cancer subtypes or normal breast tissues. ADSL knockout impairs TNBC cell proliferation and invasiveness in vitro and in vivo. An integrated transcriptomics and metabolomics analysis reveals that ADSL activates the oncogenic cMYC pathway by regulating cMYC protein level via a mechanism requiring ADSL proline 24 hydroxylation. Hydroxylation-proficient ADSL, by affecting adenosine levels, represses the expression of the long non-coding RNA MIR22HG, thus upregulating cMYC protein level. Our findings highlight the role of ADSL hydroxylation in controlling cMYC and TNBC tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Proteomics

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Department of Pathology UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhang
Department of Pathology UT Southwestern Medical Center


