### Accession
PXD039846

### Title
Comparative Wnt dependent Hydra ECM proteome

### Description
Comparative proteome of extracted Hydra vulgaris AEP extracellular matrix form Wnt9/10 knock out and Azakenpaullone treated animals. Used to analyse the changes in molecular composition of the mesoglea (ECM) of normal and Wnt depleted animals

### Sample Protocol
The raw output files of IsobarQuant (protein.txt – files) were processed using R. Only proteins quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. 183 proteins passed the quality control filters. Raw TMT intensities (signal_sum columns) were first cleaned for batch effects using limma [4] and further normalized using vsn (variance stabilization normalization). Different normalization coefficients were estimated for DMSO AEP, AEP-ALP treated and Wnt3 Knockdown conditions in order to maintain the abundance difference. Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package. The replicate information was added as a factor in the design matrix given as an argument to the ‘lmFit’ function of limma. A protein was annotated as a hit with a false discovery rate (fdr) smaller 5 % and a fold-change of at least 100 % and as a candidate with a fdr below 20 % and a fold-change of at least 50 %. All annotated protein identifiers were aligned with known Hydra vulgaris proteins (Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST), NCBI). The hit proteins and candidate proteins were paired with the corresponding BLAST results (Table S1). An InterProScan analysis (EMBL-EBI) was performed on all protein domains to annotate them with a list of ECM identifiers published by Naba et al .

### Data Protocol
The raw output files of IsobarQuant (protein.txt – files) were processed using R. Only proteins quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. 183 proteins passed the quality control filters. Raw TMT intensities (signal_sum columns) were first cleaned for batch effects using limma [4] and further normalized using vsn (variance stabilization normalization) [5]. Different normalization coefficients were estimated for DMSO and AEP conditions in order to maintain the abundance difference. Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package. The replicate information was added as a factor in the design matrix given as an argument to the ‘lmFit’ function of limma. A protein was annotated as a hit with a false discovery rate (fdr) smaller 5 % and a fold-change of at least 100 % and as a candidate with a fdr below 20 % and a fold-change of at least 50 %. All annotated protein identifiers were aligned with known Hydra vulgaris proteins (Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST), NCBI). The hit proteins and candidate proteins were paired with the corresponding BLAST results (Table S1). An InterProScan analysis (EMBL-EBI) was performed on all protein domains to annotate them with a list of ECM identifiers published by Naba et al [6].

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) plays crucial roles in animal development and diseases. Here, we report that Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling induces the ECM remodeling during <i>Hydra</i> axis formation. We determined the micro- and nanoscopic arrangement of fibrillar type I collagen along <i>Hydra's</i> body axis using high-resolution microscopy and X-ray scattering. Elasticity mapping of the ECM <i>ex&#xa0;vivo</i> revealed distinctive elasticity patterns along the body axis. A proteomic analysis of the ECM showed that these elasticity patterns correlate with a gradient-like distribution of metalloproteases along the body axis. Activation of the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway in wild-type and transgenic animals alters these patterns toward low ECM elasticity patterns. This suggests a mechanism whereby high protease activity under control of Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling causes remodeling and softening of the ECM. This Wnt-dependent spatiotemporal coordination of biochemical and biomechanical cues in ECM formation was likely a central evolutionary innovation for animal tissue morphogenesis.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix, Mesoglea, Wnt, Hydra

### Affiliations
EMBL
Molecular Evolution and Genomics, Centre for Organismal Studies, Heidelberg University, D69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Suat Oezbek
Molecular Evolution and Genomics, Centre for Organismal Studies, Heidelberg University, D69120 Heidelberg, Germany


