### Accession
PXD000548

### Title
Proteome analyses of the human anterior temporal lobe

### Description
Characterization of the human Anterior Temporal Lobe and Corpus Callosum: C-HPP

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples extracted from human brains in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea,4% CHAPS, 2% ASB-14, and 70 mM DTT. Proteins were pre-fractionated by SDS-PAGE and submitted to in-gel digestion. Peptides were separated in a nano HPLC, coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were extracted in the MS2 format using the PatternLab for Proteomics RawReader employing the NeXtProt database.

### Publication Abstract
Defining the proteomes encoded by each chromosome and characterizing proteins related to human illnesses are among the goals of the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) and the Biology and Disease-driven HPP. Following these objectives, we investigated the proteomes of the human anterior temporal lobe (ATL) and corpus callosum (CC) collected post-mortem from eight subjects. Using a label-free GeLC-MS/MS approach, we identified 2454 proteins in the ATL and 1887 in the CC through roughly 7500 and 5500 peptides, respectively. Considering that the ATL is a gray-matter region while the CC is a white-matter region, they presented proteomes specific to their functions. Besides, 38 proteins were found to be differentially expressed between the two regions. Furthermore, the proteome data sets were classified according to their chromosomal origin, and five proteins were evidenced at the MS level for the first time. We identified 70 proteins of the chromosome 15 - one of them for the first time by MS - which were submitted to an in silico pathway analysis. These revealed branch point proteins associated with Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes and dyskeratosis congenita, which are chromosome-15-associated diseases. Data presented here can be a useful for brain disorder studies as well as for contributing to the C-HPP initiative. Our data are publicly available as resource data to C-HPP participant groups at http://yoda.iq.ufrj.br/Daniel/chpp2013. Additionally, the mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000547 for the corpus callosum and PXD000548 for the anterior temporal lobe.

### Keywords
['Brain; anterior temporal lobe; human proteome project; chromosome-based hpp']

### Affiliations
['Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology', 'Ludwig-Maximiliam-University of Munich']

### Submitter
['Daniel Martins-de-Souza']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Ludwig-Maximiliam-University of Munich', 'email': 'danms90@gmail.com', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Daniel Martins-de-Souza', 'id': '5620100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['anterior temporal lobe']
Characteristics[disease]: ['cardiopulmonary insufficiency' 'lung embolism' 'heart infarction']
Characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
comment[fractionation method]: ['NT=SDS PAGE;AC=PRIDE:0000568']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap XL;AC=MS:1000556']
comment[separation]: ['NT=High-performance liquid chromatography;AC=PRIDE:0000565']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;MT=fixed;AC=UNIMOD:4']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']

