### Accession
PXD045792

### Title
Don’t Waste Time – Ensure Success in Your Cross-Linking Mass Spectrometry Experiments Before You Begin.

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is becoming a more popular tool for researchers to turn towards for studying proteins and their complexes of interest especially in complex samples such as lysates or whole-cells. Studying a targeted proteins in a complex mixture can be difficult as data on other higher abundant proteins may dominate, leaving little information on complexes of interest. Although it is known that cross-linking favours proteins of higher abundances, it is yet unclear what it means to be “abundant” to expect good cross-linking data. In this paper, we show that proteins of interest should be at least in the top 20 % abundance range to expect more than one cross-link found per protein. Furthermore, we show that a classical bottom-up LC-MS/MS experiment and iBAQ analysis can help determine the abundance level of proteins and a simple method to follow their enrichment if necessary. We hope that this guideline can be a starting point for researchers who would like to use XL-MS to study their protein of interest and help ensure a successful cross-linking experiment from the beginning.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell and membrane pellet samples of Neisseria meningitidis 8013 (Nm) were processed in this experiment. For both Nm cells were grown on GBC plates. In the case of isolating the membrane pellet, eight plates were harvested, lysed, and sonicated. A low-speed centrifugation was first performed at 4,000 rpm for 30 min to remove unbroken cells and debris. The supernatant was then subjected to an ultracentrifugation step at 100,000 x g for 45 minutes at 4 °C to achieve the membrane pellet.  To analyze protein abundances in samples, a classical bottom-up LC-MS/MS proteomics experiment was performed. Briefly samples were denatured in urea, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C in appropriate digestion conditions. Peptides were cleaned the next day with C18 and analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse with a 2 hr gradient.  For cross-linking, membrane pellets were resuspended in HEPES pH 8 buffer and 600 nmol of cross-linker (NNP9) was added for 3 hrs. samples were then washed on filters and digested overnight with trypsin and 1 % sodium deoxycholate. Peptides were recovered the next day and enriched using click chemistry with photocleavable agarose beads. After binding, beads were washed then placed under UV for 1 hr for elution. Cross-link samples were analyzed on using LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Eclipse with a 3 hr gradient and HCD fragmentation (NCE at 27 %) for charge states 3-8.  For the whole-cell cross-linking analysis, data was taken from a previous publication (Rey et al, 2021).

### Data Protocol
For the non-cross-linked bottom-up proteomics samples, raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant with the iBAQ quantification tool enabled. Proteins were then ranked based in order of most to least abundant based on descending iBAQ values.  For cross-linked membrane samples, raw files were analyzed using MassSpec Studio with a percent E threshold of 50 and an alpha percent E value of 0.01. Fragment charge states of up to 3 were included with a minimum peptide length of 4. Processed data was exported as spectrum matches and processed using in-house scripts to remove duplicates and automatically assign cross-link sites.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has become a very useful tool for studying protein complexes and interactions in living systems. It enables the investigation of many large and dynamic assemblies in their native state, providing an unbiased view of their protein interactions and restraints for integrative modeling. More researchers are turning toward trying XL-MS to probe their complexes of interest, especially in their native environments. However, due to the presence of other potentially higher abundant proteins, sufficient cross-links on a system of interest may not be reached to achieve satisfactory structural and interaction information. There are currently no rules for predicting whether XL-MS experiments are likely to work or not; in other words, if a protein complex of interest will lead to useful XL-MS data. Here, we show that a simple iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) analysis performed from trypsin digest data can provide a good understanding of whether proteins of interest are abundant enough to achieve successful cross-linking data. Comparing our findings to large-scale data on diverse systems from several other groups, we show that proteins of interest should be at least in the top 20% abundance range to expect more than one cross-link found per protein. We foresee that this guideline is a good starting point for researchers who would like to use XL-MS to study their protein of interest and help ensure a successful cross-linking experiment from the beginning. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD045792.

### Keywords
Protein abundance, Cross-linking, Ibaq, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Université Paris Cité, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UAR 2024, Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, Paris 75015, France.
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Lucienne Nouchikian

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Université Paris Cité, Institut Pasteur, CNRS UAR 2024, Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, Paris 75015, France.


