### Accession
PXD023374

### Title
A Universal 384-Well Proteomic Sample Preparation Platform for High-Throughput Screening and Biomarker Discovery

### Description
Major advances have been made to improve the sensitivity of mass analyzers, spectral quality, and the speed of data processing enabling more comprehensive proteome discovery and quantitation. While focus has recently begun shifting toward robust proteomic sample preparation efforts, a high throughput proteomics sample preparation is still lacking. We report the development of a highly-automated universal 384-well plate sample preparation platform with high reproducibility and adaptability for extraction of proteins from cells within a culture plate. Digestion efficiency was excellent in comparison to a commercial digest peptide standard with minimal sample loss while improving sample preparation throughput by 20- to 40-fold (<1 min/sample for entire process from cells to clean peptides). Analysis of six human cell types, which included two primary cell samples, identified and quantified approximately 4,000 proteins for each sample in a single HPLC-MS/MS injection with only 100 -10,000 cells, thus demonstrating universality of the platform.

### Sample Protocol
The automated portion of the sample preparation workflow was executed on an Agilent Bravo Liquid Handling Platform equipped with a 384ST liquid handling head using disposable 70 µL tips, a Peltier thermal station, and an orbital shaker (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The Agilent Bravo teach points were set using a piece of standard printer paper and one 384ST 70 µL tip equipped in the A1 position of the Agilent Bravo 384ST liquid handling head. The teach points were set when the printer paper was 0.1 mm above a complete “pinning” of the paper from the tip, which meant the printer paper could not be removed without significantly moving the tip. The paper should be able to move and barely brush against the bottom surface of the tip. The deck layout is included in Fig. 1a and included the following labeled plates and their respective deck positions: pos 1 – wash station; pos 2 – vacuum station; pos 3 – tips; pos 4 – analyte; pos 5 – empty; pos 6 – cells; pos 7 – MeCN/waste/FA; pos 8 – LyDeR Rapid Buffer; pos 9 – IAA/trypsin. Since the protocol spans two days due to the overnight digestion, the procedure was divided into two automation steps (i.e., digestion and FA quenching) in the VWorks Automation Control software (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The LyDeR Rapid Buffer stock solution was transferred to a Nunc™ 384-well polypropylene storage microplate for Bravo system, then to the target Corning® CellBIND® 384-well flat clear bottom black plate by Agilent Bravo automated liquid transfer where the cell samples were plated. The IAA, trypsin, and FA stock solutions were prepared and  transferred to a Nunc™ 384-well polypropylene storage microplate by a multi-channel pipette, then to their respective target plates by Agilent Bravo automated liquid transfer. All Agilent Bravo liquid handling parameters can be found in Fig. 1d. The protocol includes six key steps, which are (i) addition of lysis buffer to the wells of the cultured cell plate followed by incubation at 4 °C for 1 h then 40 °C for 30 min, (ii) transfer of protein solution in lysis buffer to a new plate after centrifugation, (iii) addition of IAA followed by incubation at room temperature in the absence of light for 20 min, (iv) addition of MeCN at 4 °C to precipitate the protein followed by centrifugation, and removal of the MeCN, (v) addition of trypsin for digestion at 37 °C overnight, and (vi) addition of FA to quench the reaction prior to HPLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the Sequest algorithm were used for peptide identification and quantitation. The MS raw data were searched against a Swiss-Prot Human database (version January 2019, reviewed database) consisting of 20,350 entries using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavage sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Peptide identification false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to a maximum of 0.01 using identifications from a concatenated database from the non-decoy and the decoy databases. Label-free quantification analysis used the “Precursor Ions Quantifier” node from Proteome Discoverer and normalized by total peptide amount. The output from Proteome Discoverer was used to generate radar plots, violin plots, and heat maps using R (v3.4.2) and the following packages: “ggplot2” and “grid.”

### Publication Abstract
Major advances have been made to improve the sensitivity of mass analyzers, spectral quality, and speed of data processing enabling more comprehensive proteome discovery and quantitation. While focus has recently begun shifting toward robust proteomics sample preparation efforts, a high-throughput proteomics sample preparation is still lacking. We report the development of a highly automated universal 384-well plate sample preparation platform with high reproducibility and adaptability for extraction of proteins from cells within a culture plate. Digestion efficiency was excellent in comparison to a commercial digest peptide standard with minimal sample loss while improving sample preparation throughput by 20- to 40-fold (the entire process from plated cells to clean peptides is complete in &#x223c;300 min). Analysis of six human cell types, including two primary cell samples, identified and quantified &#x223c;4,000 proteins for each sample in a single high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry injection with only 100-10K cells, thus demonstrating universality of the platform. The selected protein was further quantified using a developed HPLC-multiple reaction monitoring method for HeLa digests with two heavy labeled internal standard peptides spiked in. Excellent linearity was achieved across different cell numbers indicating a potential for target protein quantitation in clinical research.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Biomarker, Proteomics, Compound screen, Hplc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) Division of Pre-clinical Innovation (DPI)

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Dingyin Tao
National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) Division of Pre-clinical Innovation (DPI)


