### Accession
PXD006626

### Title
Capturing protein communities by structural proteomics in a thermophilic eukaryote

### Description
The arrangement of proteins into complexes is a key organizational principle for many cellular functions. Although the topology of many complexes has been systematically analyzed in isolation, their molecular sociology in situ remains elusive. Here, we show that crude cellular extracts of a eukaryotic thermophile, Chaetomium thermophilum, retain basic principles of cellular organization. Using a structural proteomics approach, we simultaneously characterized the abundance, interactions and structure of a third of the C. thermophilum proteome within these extracts. We identified 27 distinct protein communities that include 108 interconnected complexes, which dynamically associate with each other and functionally benefit from being in close proximity in the cell. Furthermore, we investigated the structure of fatty acid synthase within these extracts by cryoEM and this revealed multiple, flexible states of the enzyme in adaptation to its association with other complexes, thus exemplifying the need for in situ studies. As the components of the captured protein communities are known – at both the protein and complex level – this study constitutes another step forward towards a molecular understanding ofsubcellular organization.

### Sample Protocol
100 μl of concentrated lysate (approximately 30 mg/ml) was separated by a Biosep SEC-S4000 (7.8 x 600) size exclusion column on an EttanLC (HPLC) system running at 0.25 ml/min in 100 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 95 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2. 250 μl fractions were collected. Protein amount was determined by BCA assay for each fraction.  For cross-linking of C. thermophilum protein complexes, consecutive fractions were pooled. Native protein complexes in fraction pools were cross-linked using 1:1 protein mass: cross-linker (BS3 from Thermo Scientific) mass ratio at 4°C, 600 rpm, for 2 hours min. The cross-linking reaction was quenched by the addition of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 4°C, 600 rpm, for 30 min. Cross-linked protein complexes were denatured by addition of 4 M Urea/0.1% 0.2% (w/v) Rapigest® and subjected to carbamidomethylation and digestion as described above. Purified peptide mixtures of cross-linked samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C until further use. Cross-linked peptides derived from each fraction pool were enriched using peptide gel filtration as described previously (Leitner et al, 2014). In brief, samples were reconstituted (30% (v/v) acetonitrile / 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid) and fractionated using a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE) on an Äktamicro LC system (GE) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min. Fractions eluting between 0.9 and 1.4 ml based on the 215 nm UV absorbance profile were collected (3 fractions total for each of the original fraction pools) and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Fractions were reconstituted in 20-40 μl buffer containing 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were analyzed using a UltiMate 3000 Nano LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an EasySpray Source(Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 19.9% water. Peptides were loaded onto a 500 mm C-18 EasySpray column (75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) with 2% B at 300 nl/min flow rate for 11 min and eluted at 300 nl/min flow rate with a linear gradient from 2% - 40% B over 139 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were preprocessed with MaxQuant (v1.5.4.1), using the partial processing until step 5. Resulting peak files (APL format) were subjected to Xi (Giese et al, 2016), using the following settings: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; max. missed cleavages, 4; max. number of modifications, 3; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation on Cysteine; variable modifications: oxidation on Methionine; cross-linker: BS3 (mass modification: 109.0396 Da). Variable modifications of the cross-linker (‘BS3-NH2’, mass modification: 155.0946 Da; ‘BS3-OH’, 156.0786 Da) and looplinks (‘BS3-loop’, 138.0681 Da) were allowed. BS3 was assumed to react with Lysine, Serine, Threonine, Tyrosine or the protein N-terminus. FDR was estimated using at residue pair level using XiFDR (Fischer & Rappsilber, 2017) (minimum 4 fragments per peptide and delta score >0.5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec, Chaetomium thermophilum, Clms

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
1. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany, 2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany, 2. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, United Kingdom


