### Accession
PXD040622

### Title
Analysis of the cellular effect of 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 on lung NCI-H441 cells

### Description
Low serum levels or deficiency of 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (VD3) are associated with a higher mortality in trauma patients with sepsis or acute respiratory distress syndrome, although the molecular mechanisms behind this observation are not yet understood. VD3 is known to stimulate lung maturity, alveolar type II cell differentiation and pulmonary surfactant synthesis. This study aims to expand the knowledge by quantitative characterization of NCI-H441 cells upon VD3 treatment at the proteome level.

### Sample Protocol
NCI-H441 cells were seeded at a concentration of 0.15 x 10^6 cells/cm2 in culture medium (RPMI 1640 containing 10% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin and 20 µM L glutamine) in T75 cell culture flasks. Three biological replicates for both control and VD3-treated samples, respectively, were cultivated. Three days post seeding, cells were treated with 10 nM 1α,25-Dihydroxy-Vitamin D3 and 1 µM dexamethasone and harvested on day 7 for proteome analysis. Cells were washed twice with 5 mL PBS, incubated for 5 min at 37°C with 5 mL trypsin/EDTA, and pellet washed/centrifuged twice with PBS. Cells were lysed by resuspending in 50 mM TEAB, 1 % SDS, one cOmplete protease inhibitor tablet in 10 mL Milli Q water on ice, followed by sonication using a sonication probe for 10 sec (65 % power). Lysates were centrifuged at 21,000 x g at 2 °C for two hours and supernatant used for proteome analysis. Protein concentration was determined by standard BCA assay. Aliquots containing 120 µg protein per biological replicate were precipitated using methanol/chloroform, pellets redissolved in 20 µL 100 mM TEAB/0.25 % RapiGest, proteins reduced by Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP, final concentration: 10 mM) and incubated at 55 °C for one hour. Cysteine groups were protected by 2 chloroacetamide (CAA, final concentration: 50 mM) and incubated for 30 min light protected. Proteolytic processing was performed using trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (w:w) in 100 mM TEAB overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were derivatized using the tandem mass tags (TMT)-sixplex reagents set according to the manufacturers’ protocol; Control biological replicate 1-3: TMT 126, 128, 130; treatment replicate 1-3: TMT-127, 129, 131. After combining different reaction channels, formic acid was added for hydrolysis of RapiGest (1h, RT) followed by centrifugation (14.000 x g, 20 min, 4°C) and supernatants freeze dried. First dimension peptide separation was performed employing a Gemini C18 column (3 µm, 110 Å, 150 × 2 mm) on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC with one-minute fractionation over 60 min. Eluent A: 72 mM triethylamine, 0.35 % (v/v) acetic acid in Milli Q water, pH 10; eluent B: 72 mM triethylamine, 0.35 % (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile. Fractions were concatenated leading to seven pooled fractions, freeze dried and redissolved in 3 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA. Second dimension separation of pools 1-7 was performed using ion-paring reversed-phase chromatography employing an UHPLC Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System coupled online to a mass spectrometer with precolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 and analytical column Acclaim PepMap RSLC (2 μm, 110 Å, 75 μm × 500 mm). Flow rate: 300 µL/min; eluent A: 0.05 % formic acid in Milli Q water; eluent B: 0.05 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile in Milli Q water; gradient over 215 min. Online MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer in positive ion mode with HCD in data-dependent mode. Parameters MS1: resolution: 70,000, scan range: 350 – 1,400 m/z, maximum injection time: 50 ms, AGC target: 3 · 10^6, spray voltage: 1,5 kV, capillary temperature: 250 °C. Parameters MS2: resolution: 17,500; scan range: 100 – 2,000 m/z, isolation window: 1.2 m/z, maximum injection time: 100 ms, AGC target: 1 · 10^5, Top 15, dynamic exclusion: 30 s, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, ≥7; minimal intensity: 1 · 10^4, use lock masses: best, exclude isotopes: on. The seven pooled fractions from first dimension separation were each analyzed four times with fourth technical replicate using an exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein-quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 1.4.1.14). A human proteome dataset from UniProt (version July, 04. 2016, canonical and reviewed sequences only, no isoforms) was supplemented with common contaminants (cRAP laboratory and contact dust contaminants) and used to search spectra with the search algorithms Mascot (v2.2) and SequestHT. Parameters used: peptide length min. 6, max. 144 amino acids; max. miscleavages: 2; protease specificity: semi-tryptic; precursor mass tolerance: 7 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.04 Da. Dynamic modifications: Met: oxidation, Tyr: TMT-sixplex; static modifications: Cys: carbamidomethylation, Lys: TMT-sixplex, N-Term.: TMT-sixplex. Additional search nodes were used with dynamic modifications of methylation and acetylation of Lys and phosphorylation of Ser, Tyr and Thr. Percolator (v1.2) was used for posterior error calculation combining the results of the database searches with a false discovery rate restricted to α = 0.01 by q-value. Single peptide identifications were excluded and protein groups were assigned using strict parsimony rules.

### Publication Abstract
Low serum levels of 1&#x3b1;, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (VD3) are associated with a higher mortality in trauma patients with sepsis or ARDS. However, the molecular mechanisms behind this observation are not yet understood. VD<sub>3</sub> is known to stimulate lung maturity, alveolar type II cell differentiation, or pulmonary surfactant synthesis and guides epithelial defense during infection. In this study, we investigated the impact of VD<sub>3</sub> on the alveolar-capillary barrier in a co-culture model of alveolar epithelial cells and microvascular endothelial cells respectively in the individual cell types. After stimulation with bacterial LPS (lipopolysaccharide), gene expression of inflammatory cytokines, surfactant proteins, transport proteins, antimicrobial peptide, and <i>doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1)</i> were analyzed by real-time PCR, while corresponding proteins were evaluated by ELISA, immune-fluorescence, or Western blot. The effect of VD3 on the intracellular protein composition in H441 cells was analyzed by quantitative liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based proteomics. VD<sub>3</sub> effectively protected the alveolar-capillary barrier against LPS treatment, as indicated by TEER measurement and morphological assessment. VD<sub>3</sub> did not inhibit the IL-6 secretion by H441 and OEC but restricted the diffusion of IL-6 to the epithelial compartment. Further, VD<sub>3</sub> could significantly suppress the surfactant protein A expression induced in the co-culture system by LPS treatment. VD<sub>3</sub> induced high levels of the antimicrobial peptide LL-37, which counteracted effects by LPS and strengthened the barrier. Quantitative proteomics identified VD3-dependent protein abundance changes ranging from constitutional extracellular matrix components and surfactant-associated proteins to immune-regulatory molecules. DCLK1, as a newly described target molecule for VD<sub>3</sub>, was prominently stimulated by VD<sub>3</sub> (10 nM) and seems to influence the alveolar-epithelial cell barrier and regeneration.

### Keywords
Vitamin d3, Biomarker, Nci-h441 cells, Isobaric labelling, Alveolar-capillary barrier, Lung

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany


