### Accession
PXD005254

### Title
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii Mannosidase 1A and Xylosyltransferase1A N-glycosylation LC/MS-MS

### Description
We have identified insertional mutants of mannosidase 1A and xylosyltransferase 1A in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Mass spectrometric analyses of intact N-glycopeptides revealed that disruption of the genes altered the N-glycan composition of the alga (in single as well as double mutant). In contrast to wildtype, methylated hexoses and terminal xylose were nearly absent in N-glycopeptides from the Man1A mutant strain whereas the XylT1A mutant showed a lack of core xylose and excessively trimmed N-glycans. The double mutant did not show this excessive trimming, thus Man1A-dependent trimming can be concluded in C. reinhardtii. Furthermore, these data indicate that methylation of hexoses is tightly interlinked with Man1A function, pointing to an enzymatic cascade in the N-glycosylation pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Culture supernatant (secretome) from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was tryptically digested by filter-aided sample preparation. Chromatographic seperation of peptides was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). The sample was desalted on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and then separated on a separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 15 cm x 75 mm, 2 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 for MS1. Fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation for MS2 (resolution of 17,500) was triggered in a data-dependent manner dynamically choosing the 12 most abundant precursor ions. IS-CID (80 eV) was applied for the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides leading to the fragmentation of glycosidic bonds before MS1. For these measurements, the 12 most abundant precursor ions were chosen by mass tags using masses of +/- 203.079373 (corresponding to the neutral loss of one HexNAc) with charges from 1 - 4 and 5 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS2 spectra was performed using the Python framework Ursgal (v 0.4.0). Basically, the analysis pipeline consisted of a conversion of mzML to mgf files employing pymzML, search against a peptide database using X!Tandem, MS-GF+ and OMSSA and statistical postprocessing of unified results with qvality. The database contained protein sequences of the Chlamydomonas v5.5 gene models (Joint Genome Institute) merged with mitochondrial and chloroplast protein sequences from NCBI databases BK000554.2 and NC_001638.1 as well as sequences from the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) resulting in a database with 18,941 proteins. Additionally, decoy sequences generated by peptide shuffling were included for all target proteins. In general, the default profile ‘QExactive+’ was used including a precursor ion tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 20 ppm. When applied during sample preparation, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Additionally, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was included as potential post translational modifications for all samples. Furthermore, “HexNAc” and “HexNAc(2)” on asparagine were added as optional modifications. Resulting PSMs have been filtered by PEP ≤ 1 % and decoy hits were removed. For the identification of N-glycopeptides PSMs were filtered for peptides containing the N-glycosylation consensus sequence N-X-S/T. Further details on parameters can be gained from the Ursgal log JSONs that have been uploaded together with the mzml result files as well as the corresponding final Ursgal result files.

### Publication Abstract
At present, only little is known about the enzymatic machinery required for <i>N</i>-glycosylation in <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i>, leading to the formation of <i>N</i>-glycans harboring Xyl and methylated Man. This machinery possesses new enzymatic features, as <i>C. reinhardtii N</i>-glycans are independent of &#x3b2;1,2-<i>N</i>-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I. Here we have performed comparative <i>N</i>-glycoproteomic analyses of insertional mutants of mannosidase 1A (IM <i><sub>Man1A</sub></i> ) and xylosyltransferase 1A (IM <i><sub>XylT1A</sub></i> ). The disruption of <i>man1A</i> affected methylation of Man and the addition of terminal Xyl. The absence of XylT1A led to shorter <i>N</i>-glycans compared to the wild type. The use of a IM <i><sub>Man1A</sub></i> xIM <i><sub>XylT1A</sub></i> double mutant revealed that the absence of Man1A suppressed the IM <i><sub>XylT1A</sub></i> phenotype, indicating that the increased <i>N</i>-glycan trimming is regulated by core &#x3b2;1,2-Xyl and is dependent on Man1A activity. These data point toward an enzymatic cascade in the <i>N</i>-glycosylation pathway of <i>C. reinhardtii</i> with interlinked roles of Man1A and XylT1A. The results described herein represent the first step toward a functional characterization of the enzymatic <i>N</i>-glycosylation machinery in <i>C. reinhardtii</i>.

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Lc-ms/ms, N-gylcoproteomics

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster

### Submitter
Stefan Schulze

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Muenster


