### Accession
PXD029213

### Title
The effects of mild intermittent hypoxia exposure on the abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue proteome in overweight and obese men: A first-in-human randomized, single-blind, cross-over study

### Description
Adipose tissue (AT) oxygen tension (pO2) has been implicated in AT dysfunction and metabolic perturbations in both rodents and humans. Compelling evidence suggests that hypoxia exposure alters metabolism, at least partly through effects on AT. However, it remains to be elucidated whether mild intermittent hypoxia (MIH) exposure impacts the AT proteome. We performed a randomized, single-blind, cross-over study to investigate the effects of seven consecutive days of MIH (FiO2 15%, 3x2h/d) compared to normoxia (FiO2 21%) exposure, on the AT proteome in overweight/obese men. AT insulin sensitivity was determined by a two-step hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp, and abdominal subcutaneous AT biopsies were collected (n=11) under normoxic, fasting conditions following both exposure regimens. AT proteins were isolated and quantified using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. After correction for blood contamination, 1022 AT protein IDs were identified, of which 123 were differentially expressed following MIH (p < 0.05). These proteins were involved in redox systems, cell-adhesion, actin cytoskeleton organization, extracellular matrix composition and energy metabolism. We demonstrate for the first time that MIH exposure impacts the AT proteome. Moreover, differential AT TMOD3 expression is related to changes in AT insulin sensitivity, thereby linking MIH-induced effects on the AT proteome to metabolic changes in overweight/obese humans.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation and preparation for LC-MS Frozen AT (~100 mg) was ground in a mortar with liquid nitrogen. Per microgram of grounded powder, 2 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 5 M urea was added to dissolve the powder. The solution was freeze-thawed in liquid nitrogen 3 times after which it was vortexed for 5 min. The homogenate was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min at 10 °C. The supernatant was carefully collected and protein concentrations were determined with a Bradford-based protein assay (Bio-Rad, Veenendaal, the Netherlands).  A total of 100 µg protein in 50 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) with 5 M urea was used. 5 µL of DTT solution (20 mM final) was added and incubated at room temperature for 45 minutes. The proteins were alkylated by adding 6 µL of IAA solution (40 mM final). The reaction was taken place at room temperature for 45 minutes in the darkness. The alkylation was stopped by adding 10 µL of DTT solution (to consume any unreacted IAA) and incubated at room temperature for 45 minutes. For the digestion 2 µg trypsin/lysC was added to the protein and incubated at 37ºC for 2 hours. 200 µl of 50mM ABC was added to dilute the urea concentration and further incubate at 37ºC for 18 hours. The digestion mixture was centrifuge at 2.500 g for 5 minutes and the supernatant, which contains the peptide mixture, collected for the use of LCMS analysis.  Protein identification and quantification using LC-MS A nanoflow HPLC instrument (Dionex ultimate 3000) was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive  (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray Flex ion source (Proxeon). Each sample was runed separately for label free quantification. 5 µl of the peptide mixture was loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap C18 column, 75-μm inner diameter x 15 cm, 2-μm particle size). The peptides were separated with a 240 min linear gradient of 4–50% in buffer A (100% water with 0.1% TFA) with buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (280–1400 m/z) in positive mode. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s. Isolation of precursors was performed with a 1.8 m/z window and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 and the Normalized Collision Energy was 30 eV. The under-fill ratio was defined as 1.0%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled, but exclusion of singly charged and charge states of more than five.

### Data Protocol
Database search and quantification The MS data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 Sequest HT search engine (Thermo Scientiﬁc), against the UniProt human database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides, which had to have a minimum length of 6 amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance at 0.02 Da. One miss-cleavage was tolerated, oxidation of methionine were set as a dynamic modification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines were set as fixed modifications. Label free quantitation was conducted using the Minora Feature Detector node in the processing step and the Feature Mapper node combined with the Precursor Ions Quantifier node in the consensus step with default settings within Proteome Discoverer 2.252.   Protein signal normalization and adjustment for blood protein contamination The inter-run variation was normalized using ppm fractional normalization. To reduce the influence of the blood protein contamination on the AT proteome, we retrieved information from the UniProt database and GeneCards to set up a blood protein exclusion list with known proteins exclusively expressed in blood, including all immunoglobulins53,54. The amount of signal contributed by these blood proteins in our AT sample were found with a mean value of 76%. We defined valid human AT proteins based on these quality criteria: 1) not exclusively expressed in blood, 2) identification Score Sequest HT >=2.5,  3) present in > 50% (> =6 of 11) samples in at least one treatment group. The final signal of a valid human AT protein was the protein relative ppm abundance in a fixed amount (76%) blood contaminated AT sample. This final signal (below referred to as ‘signal’) was used in data analysis. Final signal [protein x, sample i]  = normalized signal [protein x, sample i] /(Σ normalized signal [sample i] − Σ Blood protein normalized signal [sample i])*1000000*(1-0.76)  Statistical analysis Only valid human AT proteins were taken into statistical analyses. First, missing values were imputed using random forest algorithm with R missForest package. Thereafter, data were log2 transformed. The effects of MIH compared to normoxia exposure on abdominal subcutaneous AT protein expression were assessed using two-sided paired Student’s t-tests. The fold change was expressed as back-transformed mean difference. False discovery rate (FDR) q-value was calculated to adjust proteomics data for multiple testing. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05 were regarded as differentially expressed, and were selected for further biological annotation and analysis. Subsequently, these differentially expressed proteins (p<0.05) were imported into Cytoscape plug-in ClueGO v2.5.7 for functional analysis55, based on GO biological process terms and KEGG pathways dated on 08.05.2020. Spearman’s rank correlation analysis was performed to determine correlations between changes in AT proteins and changes in AT insulin sensitivity (expressed as suppression (%) of FFA plasma concentration upon 10 mU∙m-2 insulin infusion). All statistical analyses were performed in R environment, version 3.5, with various packages (stats, missForest, gplots and pheatmap) and SPSS.

### Publication Abstract
Adipose tissue (AT) oxygen tension (pO<sub>2</sub>) has been implicated in AT dysfunction and metabolic perturbations in both rodents and humans. Compelling evidence suggests that hypoxia exposure alters metabolism, at least partly through effects on AT. However, it remains to be elucidated whether mild intermittent hypoxia (MIH) exposure impacts the AT proteome. We performed a randomized, single-blind, and cross-over study to investigate the effects of seven consecutive days of MIH (FiO<sub>2</sub> 15%, 3x2h/d) compared to normoxia (FiO<sub>2</sub> 21%) exposure on the AT proteome in overweight/obese men. <i>In vivo</i> AT insulin sensitivity was determined by the gold standard hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp, and abdominal subcutaneous AT biopsies were collected under normoxic fasting conditions following both exposure regimens (day 8). AT proteins were isolated and quantified using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. After correction for blood contamination, 1,022 AT protein IDs were identified, of which 123 were differentially expressed following MIH (<i>p</i>&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). We demonstrate for the first time that MIH exposure, which markedly reduces <i>in vivo</i> AT oxygen tension, impacts the human AT proteome. Although we cannot exclude that a single differentially expressed protein might be a false positive finding, several functional pathways were altered by MIH exposure, also after adjustment for multiple testing. Specifically, differentially expressed proteins were involved in redox systems, cell-adhesion, actin cytoskeleton organization, extracellular matrix composition, and energy metabolism. The MIH-induced change in AT TMOD3 expression was strongly related to altered <i>in vivo</i> AT insulin sensitivity, thus linking MIH-induced effects on the AT proteome to metabolic changes in overweight/obese humans.

### Keywords
Human hypoxia adipose tissue

### Affiliations
Human Biology
dept. Human Biology Maastricht University The Netherlands

### Submitter
freek bouwman

### Lab Head
Dr Freek Bouwman
dept. Human Biology Maastricht University The Netherlands


