### Accession
PXD006890

### Title
Oenothera glazioviana root LC-MS

### Description
Proteomic studies were performed to identify the proteins involved in copper (Cu) stress responses of Oenothera glazioviana seedlings. Exposure of 28-d-old seedlings to 50 μM CuSO4 for 3 d led to inhibition of shoot and root growth, and the level of lipid peroxidation in the roots was markedly increased. Compared to shoot, Cu absorbed by Oenothera glazioviana more easily accumulation in root. Label-free proteomic analysis indicated 58 differentially abundance proteins (DAPs) of 3149 total proteins in the roots of O. glazioviana seedlings, of which, 36 were upregulated and 22 were downregulated under Cu stress conditions. Gene Ontology analysis showed that most of the identified proteins could be annotated to signal transduction, detoxification, stress defence, carbohydrate, energy, and protein metabolism, development, and oxidoreduction. We also retrieved 13 proteins from the enriched Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes and the protein-protein interaction databases related to various pathways, including the citric acid (CA) cycle. Application of exogenous CA to O. glazioviana seedlings exposed to Cu caused alleviation of stress symptoms. Overall, this study provides new understanding into the molecular mechanisms at protein level of Cu response in candidate plants contributed to soil properties.

### Sample Protocol
The total proteins in the roots were extracted with a total protein extraction kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 250 mg of root tissue (10 plants pooled) was homogenized in liquid nitrogen. The homogenate was washed with methanol and acetone, and then, pelleted and dried with a SpeedVac (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The root tissue pellet was extracted with Type 4 Working Solution, containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM Trizma base, and 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate. After incubation for 15 min, the suspension was centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 30 min to remove the insoluble materials. The protein content in the supernatant was quantified using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Protein samples (200 µg of bovine serum albumin equivalent) were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation method69. Briefly, the protein extracts were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 56°C, alkylated by 55 mM of iodoacetamide for 45 min at 25°C in the dark, and buffer-exchanged with 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.5) using 10 KDa molecular weight cut-off Amicon Spin Tube (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Subsequently, 4 µg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WA, USA) was added to each sample for protein digestion at 37°C overnight (trypsin: protein, 1: 50). Digested peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and quantified using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed by MaxQuant version 1.5.2.5 employing the Andromeda algorithm and searched against the UniprotKB reference database for Viridiplantae (green plants) kingdom. In the Andromeda search, the precursor and fragment ions mass tolerances were 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. The maximum number of missed cleavages was two. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, with protein N-terminal oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. Protein abundances were calculated using the label-free quantitation algorithm70. Quantification was achieved using the LFQ (Label-Free Quantification). Unique peptides were used for LFQ quantification. According to this inspection the match between runs option was enabled, allowing a time window of 2 min to search for already identified peptides in all obtained chromatograms. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). We required proteins being quantified with a minimum of two ratio counts. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for contaminants, reverse hits, and number of unique peptides (≥ 1) using Perseus version 1.5.3.2.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic studies were performed to identify proteins involved in the response of Oenothera glazioviana seedlings under Cu stress. Exposure of 28-d-old seedlings to 50&#x2009;&#x3bc;M CuSO4 for 3 d led to inhibition of shoot and root growth as well as a considerable increase in the level of lipid peroxidation in the roots. Cu absorbed by O. glazioviana accumulated more easily in the root than in the shoot. Label-free proteomic analysis indicated 58 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) of the total 3,149 proteins in the roots of O. glazioviana seedlings, of which 36 were upregulated and 22 were downregulated under Cu stress conditions. Gene Ontology analysis showed that most of the identified proteins could be annotated to signal transduction, detoxification, stress defence, carbohydrate, energy, and protein metabolism, development, and oxidoreduction. We also retrieved 13 proteins from the enriched Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes and the protein-protein interaction databases related to various pathways, including the citric acid (CA) cycle. Application of exogenous CA to O. glazioviana seedlings exposed to Cu alleviated the stress symptoms. Overall, this study provided new insights into the molecular mechanisms of plant response to Cu at the protein level in relation to soil properties.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cu, Oenothera glazioviana, Proteomics, Differentially abundance proteins

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University
College of Life Sciences, Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Solid Organic Waste Resource, National Joint Local Engineering Research Center for Rural Land Resources Use and Consolidation, Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yahua Chen
College of Life Sciences, Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Solid Organic Waste Resource, National Joint Local Engineering Research Center for Rural Land Resources Use and Consolidation, Nanjing Agricultural University


