### Accession
PXD038433

### Title
Mass spectrum analysis foe GPR54-interacting proteins.

### Description
Anti-Gpr54 IP was performed on WCL derived from RAW264.7 cells treated with indicated dose of Kp-10 for 20 minutes. Beads were processed with mass spectrometry assay.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, anti-Gpr54 IP was performed with the whole-cell lysates derived from two 10-cm dishes of RAW264.7 cells with or without Kp-10 treatment for 20 minutes. The protein complexes after Co-IP were extensively washed with PBS, followed by onbead digestion. The beads were suspended in 8M urea containing 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 37 ºC for 30 minutes. The solution was cooled to room temperature and iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 15 mM. Beads were incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes in dark. The solution was then diluted to a final urea concentration of 2 M with 100 mM Tris-HCl, followed by in-solution trypsin digestion at 37 ºC overnight. The reaction was terminated by adding formic acid (FA) to 5% and centrifuged. Half of the peptide supernatant was used for liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry analysis to identify proteins. Peptides were then resuspended in 2% acetonitrile with 1% FA and loaded onto a micro-capillary column packed in-house with 15 cm of reversed-phase MagicC18 material (5 µm, 200 Å, Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA) using a built-in autosampler in a Proxeon NanoEasy LC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The HPLC separation was performed with a 10−35% acetonitrile (1% FA) gradient over 80 minutes followed by a 35-98% acetonitrile (1% FA) gradient over 20 minutes, then a 25 min isocratic loading at 2% acetonitrile and 1% FA. Mass spectra were acquired on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), with each duty cycle containing an MS scan at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z) followed by 10 MS/MS scans at 15,000 resolution (at 200 m/z).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the mouse IPI databases (version 3.86, released on June 28, 2012) using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA) utilizing a label-free quantification feature. A static modification of 57.021 Da on-cysteine residues  and differential oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionine residues was permitted. The protein level false discovery rate was set to be less than 1%. At least one peptide was required for the quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Mouse, Raw264.7

### Affiliations
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology

### Submitter
tianying xie

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenxi Li
University of Shanghai for Science and Technology


