### Accession
PXD047854

### Title
timsTOF HT improves protein identification and quantitative reproducibility for deep unbiased plasma protein biomarker discovery (Loading curve dataset)

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS) has emerged as a valuable tool for plasma proteome profiling and disease biomarker discovery. However, wide range of plasma protein concentrations along with technical and biological variabilities, continue to present significant challenges for deep and reproducible protein quantitation across large patient cohorts. Here we demonstrate the qualitative and quantitative performance gain of the timsTOF HT over the timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer in the analysis of neat (unfractionated) and Proteograph™ (PG)-processed plasma across a wide range of peptide loading masses and liquid chromatography (LC) gradients. We observed up to a 76% increase in total plasma peptide precursors identified and a >2-fold boost in quantifiable plasma peptide precursors (CV<20%) with timsTOF HT compared to timsTOF Pro 2. In an exploratory study of 20 late-stage cancer and 20 control sampleswe observed a ~50% increase in total and statistically significant plasma peptide precursors (q<0.05) with timsTOF HT compared to Pro 2. Our data demonstrated the superior performance of timsTOF HT in identifying and quantifying differences between biologically diverse samples, which can improve disease biomarker discovery in large cohort studies. Moreover, researchers can leverage datasets from this study to optimize their LCMS workflows for plasma protein profiling and biomarker discovery. See the details in a paper, entitled "timsTOF HT improves protein identification and quantitative reproducibility for deep unbiased plasma protein biomarker discovery".

### Sample Protocol
Pooled human control plasma samples (pooled control, PC; BioIVT) were denatured, alkylated, and digested using the PreOmics iST HT 192x kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (neat [unfractionated] plasma, PreOmics Inc.). A separate set of PC samples were processed via the Proteograph workflow with Proteograph Assay (PG plasma; Seer Bio Inc.). Neat and PG plasma samples were diluted in 0.5 mL Protein LoBind Tubes (Eppendorf AG) to a final concentration yielding 100-1200 ng (Table S1). Each sample was spiked with a constant amount of PQ500™ peptides (Biognosys AG), 0.75 µl of stock solution prepared according to manufacturer’s instructions in 20 µl of final plasma peptide sample across all different peptide loading masses. Samples were then loaded on the Evotips (Evosep Biosystems). An additional set of plasma samples from 20 patients with stage IV cancer and 20 non-cancer controls, which were expected to differ in proteomic profiles, underwent processing via the Proteograph workflow with Proteograph Assay. Samples were loaded on the Evotips prior to LC-MS acquisition. Additional information on sample preparation is available in the Supplemental Methods.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed with DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) using an in-house spectral library. Trypsin/P protease cleavage was specified with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. The 1% peptide precursor false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was applied and MS1 and MS2 mass tolerances were automatically determined by DIA-NN. For other settings, default DIA-NN settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a valuable tool for plasma proteome profiling and disease biomarker discovery. However, wide-ranging plasma protein concentrations, along with technical and biological variabilities, present significant challenges for deep and reproducible protein quantitation. Here, we evaluated the qualitative and quantitative performance of timsTOF HT and timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometers for analysis of neat plasma samples (unfractionated) and plasma samples processed using the Proteograph Product Suite (Proteograph) that enables robust deep proteomics sampling prior to mass spectrometry. Samples were evaluated across a wide range of peptide loading masses and liquid chromatography (LC) gradients. We observed up to a 76% increase in total plasma peptide precursors identified and a &gt;2-fold boost in quantifiable plasma peptide precursors (CV &lt; 20%) with timsTOF HT compared to Pro 2. Additionally, approximately 4.5 fold more plasma peptide precursors were detected by both timsTOF HT and timsTOF Pro 2 in the Proteograph analyzed plasma vs neat plasma. In an exploratory analysis of 20 late-stage lung cancer and 20 control plasma samples with the Proteograph, which were expected to exhibit distinct proteomes, an approximate 50% increase in total and statistically significant plasma peptide precursors (<i>q</i> &lt; 0.05) was observed with timsTOF HT compared to Pro 2. Our data demonstrate the superior performance of timsTOF HT for identifying and quantifying differences between biologically diverse samples, allowing for improved disease biomarker discovery in large cohort studies. Moreover, researchers can leverage data sets from this study to optimize their liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) workflows for plasma protein profiling and biomarker discovery. (ProteomeXchange identifier: PXD047854 and PXD047839).

### Keywords
Plasma, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Liquid chromatography, Mass spectrometry, Timstof

### Affiliations
PrognomiQ Inc.

### Submitter
Joon-Yong Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce Wilcox
PrognomiQ Inc.


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: plasma
- disease: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: timsTOF

