### Accession
PXD043487

### Title
Proteins from honey bee larval hemolymph as key candidate nutrients for Varroa destructor artificial rearing

### Description
Using artificial Parafilm™ dummies, we explored the nutrition of V. destructor females and assessed their survival when fed on hemolymph from bee larvae, pupae or adults. We compared the results to fully synthetic solutions and to filtered larval plasma. The results showed that the parasites could survive for several days or weeks on our different diets. Hemolymph from larva yielded the highest survival rates and filtered cell-free hemolymph was sufficient to maintain the mites for 14 days or more. This cell free solution thus theoretically contains all necessary nutrients for the mite survival. A proteomic analysis on the larval plasma outlined a list of 54 proteins among which several energy metabolism proteins such as vitellogenin, hexamerin or transferrin. These molecules represent key candidate nutrients that could be crucial for V. destructor survival.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from haemolymph samples were treated with HFIP solvent prior being reduced with DTT and alkylated using 4-VP. The proteins were then digested with trypsin and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Waters nanoUPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus from Thermo Scientific.

### Data Protocol
Datasets were processed with Proteome Discoverer using a fasta database file gathering protein sequences from hymenoptera species, varroa mites and bee viruses.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Varroa destructor</i>, a major ectoparasite of the Western honey bee <i>Apis mellifera</i>, is a widespread pest that damages colonies in the Northern Hemisphere. Throughout their lifecycle, <i>V. destructor</i> females feed on almost every developmental stage of their host, from the last larval instar to the adult. The parasite is thought to feed on hemolymph and fat body, although its exact diet and nutritional requirements are poorly known. Using artificial Parafilm&#x2122; dummies, we explored the nutrition of <i>V. destructor</i> females and assessed their survival when fed on hemolymph from bee larvae, pupae, or adults. We compared the results with mites fed on synthetic solutions or filtered larval hemolymph. The results showed that the parasites could survive for several days or weeks on different diets. Bee larval hemolymph yielded the highest survival rates, and filtered larval plasma was sufficient to maintain the mites for 14 days or more. This cell-free solution therefore theoretically contains all the necessary nutrients for mite survival. Because some bee proteins are known to be hijacked without being digested by the parasite, we decided to run a proteomic analysis of larval honey bee plasma to highlight the most common proteins in our samples. A list of 54 proteins was compiled, including several energy metabolism proteins such as Vitellogenin, Hexamerin, or Transferrins. These molecules represent key nutrient candidates that could be crucial for <i>V. destructor</i> survival.

### Keywords
Insect physiology, Mite ; artificial dummy; hemolymph; parasite; protein; nutrition

### Affiliations
CR, University Grenoble Alpes, IAB Inserm 1209, CNRS UMR5309, 38000 Grenoble, France. Plateforme BioPark d'Archamps, 74160 Archamps, France.
Biopark Archamps

### Submitter
Karim Arafah

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Bulet
CR, University Grenoble Alpes, IAB Inserm 1209, CNRS UMR5309, 38000 Grenoble, France. Plateforme BioPark d'Archamps, 74160 Archamps, France.


