### Accession
PXD037863

### Title
Intra-colony venom diversity contributes to maintaining eusociality in a cooperatively breeding ant

### Description
Background: Eusociality is widely considered to evolve through kin selection, where the reproductive success of an individual’s close relative is favored at the expense of its own. High genetic relatedness is thus considered a prerequisite for eusociality. While ants are textbook examples of eusocial animals, not all ants form colonies of closely related individuals. One such example is the ectatommine ant Rhytidoponera metallica, which predominantly forms predominantly queen-less colonies that have such a low intra-colony relatedness that they have been proposed to represent a transient, unstable form of eusociality. However, R. metallica is among the most abundant and widespread ants on the Australian continent. This apparent contrast provides an example of how inclusive fitness may not by itself explain the maintenance of eusociality and raises the question of what other selective advantages maintain their eusocial lifestyle.  Results: We provide a comprehensive portrait of the venom of R. metallica and show that the colony-wide venom consists of a, for an ant, exceptionally high diversity of functionally distinct toxins. These toxins have evolved under strong positive selection, which is normally expected to reduce genetic variance. Yet, R. metallica exhibits remarkable intra-colony variation, with workers sharing only a relatively small proportion of toxins in their venoms. We also find that this variation is not due to the presence of chemical castes, but that it has a genetic foundation that is at least in part explained by toxin allelic diversity. Conclusions: Taken together, our results suggest that the toxin diversity contained in R. metallica colonies may be maintained by a form of group selection, which selects for colonies that can exploit more resources and defend against a wider range of predators. We propose that increased intra-colony genetic variance resulting from low kinship may itself provide a selective advantage in the form of an expanded pharmacological venom repertoire. These findings provide an example of how group selection on adaptive phenotypes may contribute to maintaining eusociality where a prerequisite for kin selection is diminished.

### Sample Protocol
A combination of top-down of native and reduced and alkylated venom, and bottom-up proteomics of reduced, alkylated and trypsin-digested venom was used to examine the venom composition of R. metallica. Two aliquots of venom (10 µg each) were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Gas phase reduction and alkylation was performed according to the protocol described by Hale et al. (2004). 100 µL of reduction/alkylation reagent (50% (v/v) ammonium carbonate, 48.75% acetonitrile (ACN), 1% 2-iodoethanol, 0.25% triethylphosphine) was added to the lid of each 1.5 mL tube containing dried venom, which was then inverted, closed, and incubated at 37°C for 90 min. One aliquot of reduced and alkylated venom was then digested by incubating with trypsin (20 ng/µL) overnight at 37°C, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Three venom samples (10 µg each)—native venom, reduced and alkylated venom, and reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested venom—were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were separated on a Nexera uHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with a Zorbax stable-bond C18 column (2.1 x 100 mm; particle size, 1.8 µm; pore size, 300 Å; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), using a flow rate of 180 µL/min and a gradient of 1 to 40% solvent B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid [FA]) in 0.1% FA over 25 min, 40 to 80% solvent B over 4 min, and analyzed on an AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA; operated with Analyst TTF v1.8) mass spectrometer equipped with a Turbo-V source heated to 550°C. MS survey scans were acquired at 300 to 1800 mass/charge ratio (m/z) over 250 ms, and the 20 most intense ions with a charge of +2 to +5 and an intensity of at least 120 counts were selected for MS/MS. The unit mass precursor ion inclusion window mass within 0.7 Da and isotopes within 2 Da were excluded from MS/MS, with scans acquired at 80 to 1400 m/z over 100 ms and optimized for high resolution. Using ProteinPilot v5.0 (SCIEX), MS/MS spectra were searched against the translated venom apparatus transcriptome. For gel electrophoresis and in-gel digestion, R. metallica venom (10 g) was denatured (70°C, 10 min) in sample buffer and separated on 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus gels (150 V, 22 min; Life Technologies, CA). Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250. Four protein bands > 20 kDa were excised and reduced and alkylated, in gel, according to the protocol described by Hale et al. [31]: Excised bands were destained for 1 h with 50% ACN in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate, incubated for 90 min at 37°C in reduction/alkylation reagent (50% (v/v) ammonium carbonate, 48.75% ACN, 1% 2-iodoethanol, 0.25% triethylphosphine), rinsed with water then dehydrated with 100% ACN. Trypsin (20 ng/L), prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), was added to the gel pieces and then incubated for 16 h at 37°C. Reactions were quenched with FA (1% final concentration) and the samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described above.

### Data Protocol
Transcripts identified as encoding venom components in the first ProteinPilot search were used to generate a BLAST database, which, in an effort to identify all venom component homologues in the assembled transcriptome, was aligned using BLASTn (e value 1e-6) back to the complete transcriptome. Transcripts encoding venom components and identified homologues were then manually examined using the Map-to-Reference tool of Geneious v10.2.6 [32], where numerous “masked” homologues were extricated from assembled transcripts and erroneous transcripts discarded. These were then reincorporated back into the complete transcriptome, estimation of transcript abundance repeated, and a second, final ProteinPilot search performed. Peptides identified by ProteinPilot were validated by comparison of experimentally derived MS/MS peaks against a theoretical peak list generated using MS-Product in ProteinProspector v5.22.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Formicidae; kin selection; group selection; eusocial; peptide; toxin

### Affiliations
Centre for Advanced Imaging, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. Centre for Biodiversity Dynamics, Department of Biology, NTNU, N-7491 Trondheim, Norway Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Vanessa Schendel

### Lab Head
Dr Eivind A. B. Undheim
Centre for Advanced Imaging, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. Centre for Biodiversity Dynamics, Department of Biology, NTNU, N-7491 Trondheim, Norway Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, 0316 Oslo, Norway


