### Accession
PXD005191

### Title
DDX54 regulates transcriptome dynamics during DNA damage response, DDX54 BioID

### Description
The cellular response to genotoxic stress is a well-characterized network of DNA surveillance pathways. The contribution of posttranscriptional gene regulatory networks to the DNA damage response (DDR) has not been extensively studied. Here, we systematically identified RNA-binding proteins differentially interacting with polyadenylated transcripts upon exposure of human breast carcinoma cells to ionizing irradiation (IR). Interestingly, more than 260 proteins showed increased binding to poly(A) RNA in IR-exposed cells and were comprised of many nucleolar proteins. The functional analysis of DDX54, a candidate genotoxic stress responsive RNA helicase, revealed that DDX54 is an immediate-to-early DDR regulator required for the splicing efficacy of its target IR-induced pre-mRNAs. Upon IR exposure, DDX54 acts by increased interaction with a well defined class of pre-mRNAs which harbor introns with weak acceptor splice sites, as well as by protein-protein contacts within components of U2 snRNP and spliceosomal B complex, resulting in lower intron retention and higher processing rates of its target transcripts. Since DDX54 promotes survival after exposure to IR its expression and/or mutation rate may impact DDR-related pathologies. Our work indicates the relevance of many uncharacterized RBPs potentially involved in the DDR.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated with methanol-chloroform extraction and resuspended in 50 µL of 8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were first digested by lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako) at a LysC-to-protein ratio of 100:1 (w/w) at room temperature for 3 h. Then, the sample solution was diluted to final concentration of 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (Promega) digestion was performed at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 100:1 (w/w) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16 h. Peptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were analyzed and processed by MaxQuant (v1.3.0.5 or 1.5.1.2). Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidymethyl fixed modification, and variable modifications including methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. The peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm. Database search was performed with against UniProt/Swiss-Prot human database (downloaded on June 2012) with common serum contaminants and enzyme sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide and at protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular response to genotoxic stress is mediated by a well-characterized network of DNA surveillance pathways. The contribution of post-transcriptional gene regulatory networks to the DNA damage response (DDR) has not been extensively studied. Here, we systematically identified RNA-binding proteins differentially interacting with polyadenylated transcripts upon exposure of human breast carcinoma cells to ionizing radiation (IR). Interestingly, more than 260 proteins, including many nucleolar proteins, showed increased binding to poly(A)<sup>+</sup> RNA in IR-exposed cells. The functional analysis of DDX54, a candidate genotoxic stress responsive RNA helicase, revealed that this protein is an immediate-to-early DDR regulator required for the splicing efficacy of its target IR-induced pre-mRNAs. Upon IR exposure, DDX54 acts by increased interaction with a well-defined class of pre-mRNAs that harbor introns with weak acceptor splice sites, as well as by protein-protein contacts within components of U2 snRNP and spliceosomal B complex, resulting in lower intron retention and higher processing rates of its target transcripts. Because DDX54 promotes survival after exposure to IR, its expression and/or mutation rate may impact DDR-related pathologies. Our work indicates the relevance of many uncharacterized RBPs potentially involved in the DDR.

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Rbpome, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Kyoto University
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association

### Submitter
Koshi Imami

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association


