### Accession
PXD004427

### Title
Identification of proteins using iTRAQ and VIGS revealed that three proteins were involved into cold response in bread wheat

### Description
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methods were applied to identify protein spots involved in cold responses in wheat. By comparing the differentially accumulated proteins from the derivatives (UC1110 x PI 610750), as well as the F10 recombinant inbred line (RIL) population differing in cold-tolerance, a total of 223 proteins with significantly altered abundance were identified, respectively. These proteins were classified into several main groups, as follows: protein metabolism, stress/defense, carbohydrate metabolism, lipid metabolism, RNA metabolism, energy production, cell-wall and cytoskeleton metabolism, membrane and transportation, signal transduction, other metabolic processes, and unknown biological processes. The 22 differentially expressed protein spots were chosen for quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) to investigate expression changes at the RNA level. The results indicated that the transcriptional expression patterns of 10 genes were consistent with their protein expression models. Furthermore, quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) results implied that abiotic stresses increased the expression of four candidate protein genes Heat shock protein 90 (TaHsp90.2), Bowman-Birk type protease inhibitor (Bowman), REP14, and VER2 in wheat leaves. VIGS (virus-induced gene silencing)-treated plants generated for TaHsp90.2, Bowman, and REP14 were subjected to cold limitation, and had more serious droop and wilt, increased rate of relative electrolyte leakage and reduced relative water content (RWC) when compared to viral control plants. These results indicated that TaHsp90.2, Bowman, and REP14 possibly played the important roles in conferring cold tolerance in wheat. This study could provide useful information for dissection of molecular and genetics basis of cold stress in bread wheat.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Preparation and iTRAQ Labeling Proteins  from leaves of CSPs and CTPs were extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/ acetone method, and three biological replications were performed, respectively [29]. Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure previously described [30] and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl STD buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 30 kD). Then 100 μl 0.05 M iodoacetamide (IAA) in UA buffer was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 20 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl DS buffer [50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) at pH 8.5] twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl DS buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. For labeling, each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 70 μl of ethanol and added to the respective peptide mixture. 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). The samples were labeled as (CTPs-1)-113, (CTPs-2)-114, (CTPs-3)-115, (CSPs-1)-116, (CSPs-2)-117, and (CSPs-3)-118, and were multiplexed and vacuum dried (CTPs represent control, CSPs represent treatment).  Peptide Fractionation with Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Chromatography iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with 2 ml buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL4.6 x 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLCInc, Maryland, U.S.A.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0%–8% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) for 22 min, 8–52% buffer B during 22-47 min, 52%–100% buffer B during 47-50 min, 100% buffer B during 50-58 min, and buffer B was reset to 0% after 58 min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma). Each fraction was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid Chromatography (LC)-Electrospray Ionization (ESI) Tandem MS (MS/MS) Analysis by Q Exactive. Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Sequence Database Searching and Data Analysis MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.) run against the UniProt Poacese database (released at September 17, 2015, 1248700 sequences). For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex(K), iTRAQ8plex(N-term), Variable modification：Oxidation(M), Database pattern: Decoy, Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01, Protein Quantification: The protein ratios are calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein, Experimental Bias: Normalizes all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization.  Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed for significant downregulation or upregulation. Ratio was used to assess the fold changes in the abundance of the proteins identified in cold-stressed vs control plants and one sample t-test was used to identify significant (p < 0.05) differences in means between cold-stressed and control plants. Based on a threshold of >1.2-fold or < 0.83-fold change ratio of stress-induced wheat seedlings compared with that of the control, differentially expressed proteins were defined.  Bioinformatics  In this study, the identified proteins were annotated by searching against the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org). Then, these differentially expressed proteins were grouped on the basis of their biological functions from Gene Ontology (GO) terms (http://www.geneontology.org/) and they also mapped to the reference authoritative pathways in Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) to determine the active biological pathways. Additionally, protein-protein interaction networks were analyzed using the publicly available program STRING (http://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
By comparing the differentially accumulated proteins from the derivatives (UC 1110&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;PI 610750) in the F<sub>10</sub> recombinant inbred line population which differed in cold-tolerance, altogether 223 proteins with significantly altered abundance were identified. The comparison of 10 cold-sensitive descendant lines with 10 cold-tolerant descendant lines identified 140 proteins that showed decreased protein abundance, such as the components of the photosynthesis apparatus and cell-wall metabolism. The identified proteins were classified into the following main groups: protein metabolism, stress/defense, carbohydrate metabolism, lipid metabolism, sulfur metabolism, nitrogen metabolism, RNA metabolism, energy production, cell-wall metabolism, membrane and transportation, and signal transduction. Results of quantitative real-time PCR of 20 differentially accumulated proteins indicated that the transcriptional expression patterns of 10 genes were consistent with their protein expression models. Virus-induced gene silencing of Hsp90, BBI, and REP14 genes indicated that virus-silenced plants subjected to cold stress had more severe drooping and wilting, an increased rate of relative electrolyte leakage, and reduced relative water content compared to viral control plants. Furthermore, ultrastructural changes of virus-silenced plants were destroyed more severely than those of viral control plants. These results indicate that Hsp90, BBI, and REP14 potentially play vital roles in conferring cold tolerance in bread wheat.

### Keywords
Bread wheat, Itraq, Cold responsive proteins

### Affiliations
Agronomy College/National Key Laboratory of Wheat and Corn Crop/Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, Henan Agricultural University ,Zhengzhou China
 Henan Agricultural University

### Submitter
Ning Zhang 

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Chen
Agronomy College/National Key Laboratory of Wheat and Corn Crop/Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops, Henan Agricultural University ,Zhengzhou China


