### Accession
PXD041296

### Title
Functional viromic screens uncover regulatory RNA elements

### Description
The number of sequenced viral genomes has surged recently, presenting an opportunity to understand viral diversity and uncover unknown regulatory mechanisms. Here we conducted a screening of 30,367 viral segments from 143 species representing 96 genera and 37 families. Using a library of viral segments in 3′ UTR, we identified hundreds of elements impacting RNA abundance, translation, and nucleocytoplasmic distribution. To illustrate the power of this approach, we investigated K5, an element conserved in kobuviruses, and found its potent ability to enhance mRNA stability and translation in various contexts, including adeno-associated viral vectors and synthetic mRNAs. Moreover, we identified a previously uncharacterized protein, ZCCHC2, as a critical host factor for K5. ZCCHC2 recruits the terminal nucleotidyl transferase TENT4 to elongate poly(A) tails with mixed sequences, delaying deadenylation. This study provides a unique resource for virus and RNA research and highlights the potential of the virosphere for biological discoveries.


### Sample Protocol
RaPID (RNA-protein interaction detection) assay was performed with modifications (Ramanathan et al. 2018). In brief, BASU expressing stable HeLa cell line was generated using BASU RaPID plasmid (Addgene #107250). 1E7 cells were transfected with 40 μg RNA and incubated for 16 hours until biotin treatment. The labeled cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo, 89901) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Biotinylated proteins were pulled down from the soluble fraction using streptavidin beads. After a total of 5 denaturing washes and 6 non-denaturing washes, the samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA, and digested with trypsin. Remaining detergents were removed using HiPPR (Thermo, 88305) and cleaned up with ZipTip C18 resin (Millipore, ZTC18S960) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid (Thermo) coupled with a nanoAcquity system (Waters). The capillary analytical (75 μm i.d. × 100 cm) and trap (150 μm i.d. × 3 cm) columns were packed in-house with 3 μm Jupiter C18 particles (Phenomenex). The LC flow rate was 300 nl/min with the 60 min linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid (Merck)) to 35% solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Full MS scans (m/z 300–1,800) were acquired at 120k resolution (m/z 200). Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation occurred under 30% normalized collision energy (NCE) with 1.4 Th precursor isolation window. The MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 30k (maximum precursor ion injection time (ITmax): 54 ms, automatic gain control (AGC): Standard).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw data was analyzed using MSFragger (v3.7), IonQuant (v1.8.10), and Philosopher (v4.8.1) integrated into FragPipe (v18.0). For label-free protein identification and quantification, a built-in FragPipe workflow (LFQ-MBR) was used with the enzyme specified as trypsin. The target-decoy database (with contaminants) was generated by Fragpipe from the Swiss-Prot human database (Oct 2022). The combined_protein.tsv file was taken for further enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The number of sequenced viral genomes has surged recently, presenting an opportunity to understand viral diversity and uncover unknown regulatory mechanisms. Here, we conducted a screening of 30,367 viral segments from 143 species representing 96 genera and 37 families. Using a library of viral segments in 3' UTR, we identified hundreds of elements impacting RNA abundance, translation, and nucleocytoplasmic distribution. To illustrate the power of this approach, we investigated K5, an element conserved in kobuviruses, and found its potent ability to enhance mRNA stability and translation in various contexts, including adeno-associated viral vectors and synthetic mRNAs. Moreover, we identified a previously uncharacterized protein, ZCCHC2, as a critical host factor for K5. ZCCHC2 recruits the terminal nucleotidyl transferase TENT4 to elongate poly(A) tails with mixed sequences, delaying deadenylation. This study provides a unique resource for virus and RNA research and highlights the potential of the virosphere for biological discoveries.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Rapid

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea.

### Submitter
Jenny Seo

### Lab Head
Dr V. Narry Kim
School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science


