### Accession
PXD044860

### Title
cryo-EM study of human liver mitochondria lysate

### Description
This is the proteomic analysis data of Human liver mitochondria lysate subjected to cryo-EM study.

### Sample Protocol
Human liver mitochondria were lysed and fractionated by size exclusion chromatography. Three protein fractions were collected and subjected to protein digestion followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing all of the experimental peptide MS/MS spectra against the UniProt human proteome database using a database search engine, MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.1). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas variable modifications included oxidation of methionine to methionine sulfoxide and acetylation of N-terminal amino groups. For peptide/protein identification, strict trypsin specificity was applied, the minimum peptide length was set to 7, the maximum missed cleavage was set to 2, and the cutoff false discovery rate was set to 0.025.

### Publication Abstract
The application of integrated systems biology to the field of structural biology is a promising new direction, although it is still in the infant stages of development. Here we report the use of single particle cryo-EM to identify multiple proteins from three enriched heterogeneous fractions prepared from human liver mitochondrial lysate. We simultaneously identify and solve high-resolution structures of nine essential mitochondrial enzymes with key metabolic functions, including fatty acid catabolism, reactive oxidative species clearance, and amino acid metabolism. Our methodology also identified multiple distinct members of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase family. This work highlights the potential of cryo-EM to explore tissue proteomics at the atomic level.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Cryo-em, Human liver

### Affiliations
CWRU
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,cleveland,OH,USA

### Submitter
zhemin zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University,cleveland,OH,USA


