### Accession
PXD022630

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of ER Stress Response Reveals both Common and Specific Features in Two Contrasting Ecotypes of Arabidopsis

### Description
Accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) elicits a well conserved response called the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR), which triggers the up-regulation of downstream genes involved in protein folding, vesicle trafficking, and ER-Associated Degradation (ERAD). Although the dynamic transcriptomic responses and underlying major transcriptional regulators in ER stress response in plants have been well established, the proteome changes induced by ER stress have not been reported in plants. In the current study, we found that the Arabidopsis Ler ecotype is more sensitive to ER stress than the Col ecotype. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) isobaric labeling showed that totally 7439 and 7035 proteins were identified from Col and Ler seedlings, with 88 and 113 differentially regulated (FC>1.3 or <0.7, P<0.05) proteins by ER stress in Col and Ler, respectively. Among them, 40 proteins were commonly up-regulated in Col and Ler, of which 10 were not up-regulated in bzip28 bzip60 double mutant (Col background) plants. Of the 19 specifically up-regulated proteins in Col comparing to that in Ler, components in ERAD, N-glycosylation, vesicle trafficking and molecular chaperones were represented. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that genes encoding 7 out of 19 proteins were not up-regulated (FC>1.3 or <0.7, P<0.05) by ER stress in both ecotypes while genes encoding 12 out of 19 proteins were up-regulated by ER stress with no obvious differences in fold change between Col and Ler. Our results experimentally demonstrated the robust ER stress response at proteome level in plants and revealed differentially regulated proteins that may contribute to differed ER stress sensitivity between Col and Ler ecotypes in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type Arabidopsis thaliana lines of Col (Col-0) and Ler (Ler-0) were used in this study. bzip28 bzip60 double mutant DM) plants were obtained by crossing the T-DNA mutants bzip28 (SALK_132285) with bzip60 (SALK_050203), both of which were in the Col background. For proteomics analysis, 9-day-old seedlings grown on 1/2 MS plates were transferred to liquid MS medium plus 5 μg/ml TM for 12 hours, and whole seedlings were harvested for protein extraction. Three biological replicates for each plants were designed for proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database using Col or Ler sequences. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40. Differential expression proteins were obtained based on fold changes and P values as indicated in the text.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of unfolded and misfolded proteins in endoplasmic reticulum (ER) elicits a well-conserved response called the unfolded protein response (UPR), which triggers the upregulation of downstream genes involved in protein folding, vesicle trafficking, and ER-associated degradation (ERAD). Although dynamic transcriptomic responses and the underlying major transcriptional regulators in ER stress response in Arabidopsis have been well established, the proteome changes induced by ER stress have not been reported in Arabidopsis. In the current study, we found that the Arabidopsis Landsberg erecta (L<i>er</i>) ecotype was more sensitive to ER stress than the Columbia (Col) ecotype. Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) isobaric labeling showed that, in total, 7439 and 7035 proteins were identified from Col and L<i>er</i> seedlings, with 88 and 113 differentially regulated (FC &gt; 1.3 or &lt;0.7, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) proteins by ER stress in Col and L<i>er</i>, respectively. Among them, 40 proteins were commonly upregulated in Col and L<i>er</i>, among which 10 were not upregulated in <i>bzip28 bzip60</i> double mutant (Col background) plants. Of the 19 specifically upregulated proteins in Col, as compared with that in L<i>er</i>, components in ERAD, N-glycosylation, vesicle trafficking, and molecular chaperones were represented. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that transcripts of eight out of 19 proteins were not upregulated (FC &gt; 1.3 or &lt;0.7, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) by ER stress in Col ecotype, while transcripts of 11 out of 19 proteins were upregulated by ER stress in both ecotypes with no obvious differences in fold change between Col and L<i>er</i>. Our results experimentally demonstrated the robust ER stress response at the proteome level in plants and revealed differentially regulated proteins that may contribute to the differed ER stress sensitivity between Col and L<i>er</i> ecotypes in Arabidopsis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana; ecotype; er stress; proteomics; tmt; upr

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.
State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
YuShu LYU

### Lab Head
Dr JianXiang Liu
State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.


