### Accession
PXD004545

### Title
wdr13 knockout mice develops MD like phenotype on chronic stress

### Description
WDR13 expresses from the X chromosome and has a highly conserved coding sequence. There have been multiple associations of WDR13 with memory and psychiatric disorders. However, its detailed function in context of brain and behavior remains unknown.  We characterized the behavioral phenotype of male mice lacking the homologue of WDR13 gene (Wdr13-/0). Mice were evaluated for changes in anxiety, learning and memory, and chronic stress induced behavioral deficits. Taking cue from analysis of its expression in the brain, we chose hippocampus and pre-frontal cortex for molecular studies to delineate its function. In the absence of Wdr13, there was a significant upregulation of synaptic proteins, viz., SYN1, RAB3A, CAMK2A etc accompanied with better memory retention in mice. Interestingly, three weeks social isolation stress resulted in downregulation of aforementioned synaptic proteins, decreased exploration time in central area of Open field test, increased immobility in Forced swim test, and reduced dendritic arborations of hippocampal CA1 neurons- hallmarks of Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) in Wdr13-/0 mice. This phenotype could be rescued by short imipramine treatment. We hypothesise that one of the key factors behind the MDD like phenotype in these mice was upregulation of transcription factor GATA1. Parallel work from our lab has indicated WDR13 to interact with multiple nuclear receptors and acting majorly as a co-repressor. Absence of Wdr13 resulted in de-regulated expression of a number of genes including multiple synaptic genes leading to observed phenotypes. Summarily, our data provides functional evidence for the role of Wdr13 in memory retention and in withstanding chronic stress induced depression.

### Sample Protocol
:We pooled Prefrontal Cortex from three wild-type and three knockout (Wdr13-/0) mice of 2 months age and from three wild-type and three knockout mice which had undergone social isolation stress. Protein was extracted with 0.5% SDS and quantified using BCA protein extimation kit. We started with 200 ug of protein from all the groups as a starting amount and digested the sample using trypsin as described in iTRAQ 4-plex protocol. We split the samples based on the protein amount (80 ug) in each group and labeled with iTRAQ-8plex  (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) reagents as per manufacturers protocol. Peptides from wild type were labeled with 113 and 114 tags, peptides from knockout type were labeled with 115 and 116 tags, peptides from social isolated wild type group were labeled with 117 and 118 tags and social isolated knockout type were labeled with 119 and 121 tags. We carried out 8-plex labeling and desalting experiments as per manufacturer’s protocols. Strong Cation Exchange was carried out before de-salting to increase number of detections.  LC-MS/MS and data analysis: We have carried out experiments as described for iTRAQ 4-plex in the current study. Peptides had been separated using linear gradient from 5% to 98% of buffer B (95 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a column re-equilibration reaching 5 % of buffer B for few minutes. Gradient length was adjusted to 90 minutes. Data acquisition was done using Xcalibur 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).MS spectra, mass range, scan resolution for MS, MS/MS, Normalized collision energy (NCE), precursor ion selection, the dynamic exclusion parameters were kept same like as described in iTRAQ 4-plex experiments. The nano source spray was set at 2.2 KV and the capillary temperature at 250°C without sheath gas. Isolation width was adjusted. Data analysis for 8-plex experiments was done by using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) software. We acquired total 80900 MS/MS scans. We have set the same parameters, which were kept for iTRAQ 4-plex experiments. While performing analysis only 116 label was considered for Wdr13-/0 under non stress condition. ±1.2 fold was taken as significant change.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) software. We used NCBI database to search for peptides. The workflow was created which includes spectrum files, spectrum selector and Sequest. Search nodes were given as a searches including peptide validator for false discovery analysis and used a reporter ion quantifier for quantitation. We set the parameters includes Methylthio (C), iTRAQ label at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine were used as a fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine (M) and deamidation(N/Q) were used as variable modification. The data was searched using IPI Mouse protein database. The parent and fragment mass error tolerance were set as 20 ppm and 0.2 Da respectively. We acquired total 13059 MS/MS scans. We calculated false discovery rate (FDR) by enabling the peptide sequence analysis using decoy database and top ranked hit based on peptide score, XCorr for Sequest. We applied 1% FDR in our analysis and proteins with minimum 1 unique peptide were considered.

### Publication Abstract
We earlier reported that the male mice lacking the <i>Wdr13</i> gene (<i>Wdr13</i><sup>-/0</sup>) showed mild anxiety, better memory retention, and up-regulation of synaptic proteins in the hippocampus. With increasing evidences from parallel studies in our laboratory about the possible role of <i>Wdr13</i> in stress response, we investigated its role in brain. We observed that <i>Wdr13</i> transcript gets up-regulated in the hippocampus of the wild-type mice exposed to stress. To further dissect its function, we analyzed the behavioral and molecular phenotypes of <i>Wdr13</i><sup>-/0</sup> mice when subjected to mild chronic psychological stress, namely; mild (attenuated) social isolation. We employed iTRAQ based quantitative proteomics, real time PCR and western blotting to investigate molecular changes. Three weeks of social isolation predisposed <i>Wdr13</i><sup>-/0</sup> mice to anhedonia, heightened anxiety-measured by Open field test (OFT), increased behavior despair- measured by Forced swim test (FST) and reduced dendritic branching along with decreased spine density of hippocampal CA1 neurons as compared to wild-type counterparts. This depression-like-phenotype was however ameliorated when treated with anti-depressant imipramine. Molecular analysis revealed that out of 1002 quantified proteins [1% False discovery rate (FDR), at-least two unique peptides], strikingly, a significant proportion of synaptic proteins including, SYN1, CAMK2A, and RAB3A were down-regulated in the socially isolated <i>Wdr13</i><sup>-/0</sup> mice as compared to its wild-type counterparts. This was in contrast to the elevated levels of these proteins in non-stressed mutants as compared to the controls. We hypothesized that a de-regulated transcription factor upstream of the synaptic genes might be responsible for the observed phenotype. Indeed, in the socially isolated <i>Wdr13</i><sup>-/0</sup> mice, there was an up-regulation of GATA1 - a transcription factor that negatively regulates synaptic genes and has been associated with Major Depression (MD) in humans. The present study demonstrates significant genotype &#xd7; enviornment interaction for <i>Wdr13</i> gene as shown by the reversal in the expression levels of several synaptic proteins in the mutant vis-&#xe0;-vis wild-type mouse when exposed to social isolation stress.

### Keywords
Mice, Wdr13, Knockout

### Affiliations
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry

### Submitter
Shiladitya Mitra

### Lab Head
Dr Suman Thakur
Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India


