### Accession
PXD004071

### Title
Targeting tumor mitochondrial metabolism overcomes resistance to antiangiogenics

### Description
Epithelial malignancies are effectively treated by antiangiogenics; however, acquired resistance is a major problem in cancer therapeutics. Epithelial tumors commonly have mutations in the MAPK/Pi3K-AKT pathways, which leads to high-rate aerobic glycolysis. Here, we show how novel multikinase inhibitor antiangiogenics (TKIs) induce hypoxia correction in spontaneous breast and lung tumor models.  When this happens, the tumors down-regulate glycolysis and switch to long-term reliance on mitochondrial respiration. A transcriptomic, metabolomic and phosphoproteomic study revealed that this metabolic switch is mediated by down-regulation of HIF1α and AKT and up-regulation of AMPK, allowing uptake and degradation of fatty acids and ketone bodies. The switch renders mitochondrial respiration necessary for tumor survival. Agents like phenformin or ME344 induce synergistic tumor control when combined with TKIs, especially in a sequential schedule, leading to metabolic synthetic lethality. Our study uncovers new mechanistic insights in the process of tumor resistance to TKIs, and may have clinical applicability

### Sample Protocol
Pooled tumor samples were homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1% N-octyl glucoside, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Hepes (pH7.5), protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Halt EDTA-free; Thermo Scientific), and 0.1% Benzonase Nuclease (Novagen). Samples were extracted at room temperature in a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, France) sonicated for 20 min on ice and clarified by centrifugation at 16,100 × gat 4°C for 30 min. Protein concentration was estimated by a colorimetric assay (660 nm protein assay; Pierce) using BSA as reference.An 8-plex analysis was performed. The conditions were: T0, vehicle T1and Tend, B20-4.1.1 T1and Tend, nintedanib T1and Tend, and a control pooled lysate Protein samples were digested using the filter-aided sample preparation method (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, 220 µg of each sample dissolved in lysis buffer was reduced with 25 mM TCEP for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at 25°C in the dark. The excess of reduction and alkylation reagents were washed with 8 M urea in 50 mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8). The proteins were digested at 25°C overnight using endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) at a 1:40 enzyme-to-protein ratio. After Lys-C digestion, the volume was adjusted to 0.8 M urea with 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:100 (enzyme-toprotein ratio) and samples were subjected to a second digestion for 6 h at 37°C. Each tryptic digest was labeled with 2 U of one isobaric amine-reactive tag iTRAQ according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied  Biosystems,  Framingham,  MA,  USA).  After  completion  of  labeling,  samples  were  equally mixed,  evaporated  to  dryness  in  a  vacuum  centrifuge,  and  cleaned  of  the  excessive  reactives and  salts using  a  6-mL  OASIS  HLB  cartridge  (Waters,  Milford,  MA,  USA).  Eluted  peptides  were  dried  and reconstituted  in  125  µL  of  95%  acetonitrile  (ACN)  containing  0.1%  trifluoroacetic  acid  (TFA; hydrophilic interaction chromatography buffer A)

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed  using  the  Proteome  Discoverer  1.3.0.339  software  suite  (Thermo Scientific). The fragmentation spectra were searched against the Unitpro_Mouse database, comprising the canonical and manually reviewed isoform sequences (release 2012_09, 50,544 entries) using MASCOT (version 2.2) (Perkins et al., 1999)as the search engine. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively, and up to three tryptic missed cleavages were allowed. Lysine and peptide N-termini labeling with iTRAQ-8plex reagent as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered fixed modifications, whereas oxidation of methionine was chosen as a variable modification for database searching. Additionally, in the analysis of Fe(III)-IMAC–enriched samples, raw data was processed using MaxQuant with standard settings for iTRAQ 8-plex isobaric labeling including Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Phospho(STY) as variable modifications. Data was filtered to a protein and peptide FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Angiogenesis, Mitochondria, Inhibitors, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Institute (CNIO)
CNIO

### Submitter
Javier Munoz

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Angel Quintela
Spanish National Cancer Research Institute (CNIO)


