### Accession
PXD012747

### Title
Changes in protein arginine methylation by GSK3368712

### Description
Type I Protein Arginine Methyltransferases (PRMTs) catalyze asymmetric dimethylation of arginine residues on numerous proteins. Type I PRMTs and their substrates have been implicated in human cancers, suggesting that inhibiting Type I PRMT activity offers a tractable approach for therapeutic intervention. This dataset contains results from immunoproteomic studies enriching for monomethylated,  asymmetrically, and symmetrically dimethylated arginines in cancer cell lines treated with the Type I PRMT inhibitor, GSK3368712.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines were cultured with 0.1% DMSO, 2µM GSK3368712, 0.5µM GSK3203591, or a combination of GSK3368712 & GSK3203591 for 4 days. Cells were collected in freshly prepared lysis buffer (20mM HEPES, pH 8.0; 9.0M Urea; 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, activated; 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate; 1 mM ß-glycerol-phosphate) and flash frozen.  Proteomic analysis was carried out using the MethylScan method as previously described(Guo et al., 2014). Cellular extracts prepared in urea lysis buffer were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. 45mg total protein for each sample was desalted over SEP PAK C18 columns and split into 3-15mg aliquots for enrichment with the Mono-Methyl Arginine Motif Antibody (#12235), Asymmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Antibody (#13474), and Symmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Antibody (#13563).  Enriched peptides were purified over C18 STAGE tips, subjected to secondary digest with trypsin and re-purified over STAGE tip prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Two non-sequential replicates were run for each enrichment.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files from Xcalibur software were directly analyzed by GFY-Core (version 3.0) using the Sequest Search engine against the Human database from SwissProt (2015).

### Publication Abstract
Type I protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) catalyze asymmetric dimethylation of arginines on proteins. Type I PRMTs and their substrates have been implicated in human cancers, suggesting inhibition of type I PRMTs may offer a therapeutic approach for oncology. The current report describes GSK3368715 (EPZ019997), a potent, reversible type I PRMT inhibitor with anti-tumor effects in human cancer models. Inhibition of PRMT5, the predominant type II PRMT, produces synergistic cancer cell growth inhibition when combined with GSK3368715. Interestingly, deletion of the methylthioadenosine phosphorylase gene (MTAP) results in accumulation of the metabolite 2-methylthioadenosine, an endogenous inhibitor of PRMT5, and correlates with sensitivity to GSK3368715 in cell lines. These data provide rationale to explore MTAP status as a biomarker strategy for patient selection.

### Keywords
Human, Type i prmt, Lc-msms, Antibody, Methylscan, Arginine methyltransferases, Cancer cell lines, Immunoproteomic

### Affiliations
Cell Signaling Technology Inc.
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK)

### Submitter
Vicky Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Helai Mohammad
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK)


