### Accession
PXD027489

### Title
Coupled protein synthesis and ribosome-guided piRNA processing on mRNAs

### Description
PIWI-interacting small RNAs (piRNAs) protect the germline genome and are essential for fertility. Previously, we showed that ribosomes guide the biogenesis of piRNAs from long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) after translating the short open reading frames (ORFs) near their 5′ cap. It remained unclear, however, how ribosomes proceed downstream of ORFs and how piRNA precursors distinguish from other RNAs. It is thus important to test whether a short ORF length is required for substrate recognition for ribosome guided-piRNA biogenesis. Here, we characterized a poorly understood class of piRNAs that originate from the 3′ untranslated regions (3′UTRs) of protein coding genes in mice and chickens. We demonstrate that their precursors are full-length mRNAs and that post-termination 80S ribosomes guide piRNA production on 3′UTRs after translation of upstream long ORFs. Similar to non-sense mediated decay (NMD), piRNA biogenesis degrades mRNA right after pioneer rounds of translation and fine-tunes protein production from mRNAs. Interestingly, however, we found that NMD, along with other surveillance pathways for ribosome recycling are temporally sequestered during the pachytene stage to allow for robust piRNA production. Although 3′UTR piRNA precursor mRNAs code for distinct proteins in mice and chickens, they all harbor embedded transposable elements (TEs) and produce piRNAs that cleave TEs, suggesting that TE suppression, rather than the function of proteins, is the primary evolutionary force maintaining a subset of mRNAs as piRNA precursors. Altogether, we discover a function of the piRNA pathway in fine-tuning protein production and reveal a conserved, general piRNA biogenesis mechanism that recognizes translating RNAs regardless of their ORF length in amniotes.

### Sample Protocol
After testes lysis, protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Scientific).  Samples were then diluted to 1 mg/mL in 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium  bicarbonate (TEAB). 25 μ g of protein from each sample was reduced with dithiothreitol  to 2 mM, followed by incubation at 55°C for 60 minutes. Iodoacetamide was added to 10  mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes to alkylate the proteins.  Phosphoric acid was added to 1.2%, followed by six volumes of 90% methanol, 100 mM  TEAB. The resulting solution was added to S-Trap micros (Protifi) and centrifuged at  4,000 x g for 1 minute. The S-Traps containing trapped proteins were washed twice by  centrifuging through 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB. 1 ug of trypsin was brought up in  20 uL of 100 mM TEAB and added to the S-Trap, followed by an additional 20 μ L of  TEAB to ensure the sample did not dry out. The cap to the S-Trap was loosely screwed  on but not tightened to ensure the solution was not pushed out of the S-Trap during  digestion. Samples were placed in a humidity chamber at 37°C overnight. The next  morning, the S-Trap was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 minute to collect the digested  peptides. Sequential additions of 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA in 50%  acetonitrile were added to the S-trap, centrifuged, and pooled. Samples were frozen and 42     dried down in a Speed Vac (Labconco), then re-suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid  prior to analysis.  Peptides were loaded onto a 100 um x 30 cm C18 nano-column packed with 1.8 um  beads (Sepax), using an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher) connected to a Orbitrap  Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in  water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Ions were delivered to the  mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. Peptides were eluted  off the column using a multi-step gradient, which started at 3% B and held for 2 minutes,  quickly ramped to 10% B over 7 minutes, increased to 38% B over 152 minutes, then  ramped up to 90% B in 6 minutes and was held there for 4 minutes to wash the column  before returning to starting conditions in 2 minutes. The column was re-equilibrated for 7  minutes for a total run time of 180 minutes. The flow rate was 300 nL/minute. The  Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, performing a full scan followed by  as many MS2 scans as possible in 3 seconds. The full scan was done over a range of 375- 1400 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a  maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were  selected for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by collision-induced  dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 30 and an isolation width of 1.1 m/z. MS2  scans were collected in the ion trap with the scan rate set to rapid, a maximum injection  time of 35 ms, and an AGC setting of 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using SEQUEST within the Proteome Discoverer software  platform, version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher) employing the SwissProt mouse database, along  with a custom fasta database that included both test and control proteins. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with an MS1 mass tolerance of  10 ppm, and an MS2 mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was  selected as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable  modification. A percolator was used as the FDR calculator, filtering out peptides with a  q-value greater than 0.01. Label-free quantitation was performed using the Minora  Feature Detector node, with a minimum trace length of 5. The Precursor Ions Quantifer  node was then used to calculate protein abundance ratios, using only unique and razor  peptides. The summed abundance-based method was employed, which sums the peak  areas for all the peptides for a given protein to determine protein ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Testis, Mouse, Pirna, Protein synthesis, Lc-ms/ms, Mrna

### Affiliations
Center for RNA Biology: From Genome to Therapeutics Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics University of Rochester Medical Center Rochester, NY, 14642, USA
University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Shared Resource Laboratory

### Submitter
Kyle Swovick

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Zhiguo Li
Center for RNA Biology: From Genome to Therapeutics Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics University of Rochester Medical Center Rochester, NY, 14642, USA


