### Accession
PXD021959

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis to capture the role of heat-accumulated proteins in moss plant acquired thermotolerance

### Description
At dawn of a scorching summer day, land plants must anticipate upcoming extreme midday temperatures by timely establishing molecular defenses that can maintain heat-labile membranes and proteins in a functional state. A gradual morning pre-exposure to increasing sub-damaging temperatures induces the accumulation of heat-shock proteins (HSPs) that are central to the onset of plant acquired thermotolerance (AT). In an attempt to gain knowledge on the mechanisms of AT in the model land plant Physcomitrium patens, we used label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics to quantify the accumulated and depleted proteins before and following a mild heat-priming treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Extracts were mixed with 5x concentrated SDS-PAGE running buffer and denatured at 95C for 5 min. The protein concentration was measured by total lane densitometry after electrophoresis and Coomassie blue staining, by comparison with a quantified standard extract.  For analysis, 25 ug of each extract were then migrated on gel, stained with CBB and excised into 8 molecular weight fractions, approximately  covering the range 15-250 kDa (see gel images). In-gel proteolytic cleavage with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was performed as described (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Peptides from the digestion were dried by evaporation and redissolved in 0.05% TFA, 2% acetonitrile injection. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) interfaced via a nanospray EASY-Spray source to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano 3000 nanoHPLC system (Thermo Scientific Dionex). After loading onto a trapping microcolumn (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Thermo Scientific), peptides were separated on a reversed-phase Easy Spray C18 column (50 cm x 75µm ID, 2µm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) with a 45-76 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 120 min) at a flow of 250 nl/min. Full MS survey scans were performed at 60'000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 32.0.637 software, the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27%) and analyzed at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units. Selected m/z values were excluded for 80 s from further analysis. References Shevchenko, A., Tomas, H., Havlis, J., Olsen, J. V, and Mann, M. (2006). In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat. Protoc. 1(6): 2856–2860.

### Data Protocol
Data collected by the mass spectrometer were processed for protein identification and quantification using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30, using the Andromeda search engine set to search the UniProt database restricted to the Physcomitrium patens proteome (UniProt proteome ID: UP000006727, September 2016, 34837 sequences). Trypsin (cleavage after K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Other MaxQuant parameters were applied as per defaults and are described in the output. The match between runs function was activated. Decoy database matches and common contaminants were removed.   All subsequent data post-processing and statistical analyses were based on iBAQ and LFQ values and are describe din the manuscript were performed using custom Matlab scripts. iBAQ and LFQ data were used as the basis for quantification. Instead of only using raw iBAQ intensities, we took advantage of the additional normalization introduced by the LFQ method to re-calculate “normalized iBAQs” by dividing LFQ intensities by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides, as specified in the original iBAQ publication.  Since normalized iBAQs are proportional to protein molar quantities, protein mass fractions were obtained as where Ii is the normalized IBAQ intensity of protein i, Mi its molecular weight, and the index k runs over all identified proteins. Then, the corresponding micromolar quantities ci were derived using an estimated total intracellular protein concentration of CT = 162 mg/mL. Further statistical analysis are described in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
At dawn of a scorching summer day, land plants must anticipate upcoming extreme midday temperatures by timely establishing molecular defences that can keep heat-labile membranes and proteins functional. A gradual morning pre-exposure to increasing sub-damaging temperatures induces heat-shock proteins (HSPs) that are central to the onset of plant acquired thermotolerance (AT). To gain knowledge on the mechanisms of AT in the model land plant Physcomitrium patens, we used label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics to quantify the accumulated and depleted proteins before and following a mild heat-priming treatment. High protein crowding is thought to promote protein aggregation, whereas molecular chaperones prevent and actively revert aggregation. Yet, we found that heat priming (HP) did not accumulate HSP chaperones in chloroplasts, although protein crowding was six times higher than in the cytosol. In contrast, several HSP20s strongly accumulated in the cytosol, yet contributing merely 4% of the net mass increase of heat-accumulated proteins. This is in poor concordance with their presumed role at preventing the aggregation of heat-labile proteins. The data suggests that under mild HP unlikely to affect protein stability. Accumulating HSP20s leading to AT, regulate the activity of rare and specific signalling proteins, thereby preventing cell death under noxious heat stress.

### Keywords
Eat-shock proteins; physcomitrium patens; heat-priming; thermotolerance; heat-shock response; proteomics; rna-seq; hsp20s, Heat-shock proteins; molecular crowding.

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Plant Molecular Biology (DBMV) UNIL-Sorge, Biophore Building CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Goloubinoff
Department of Plant Molecular Biology (DBMV) UNIL-Sorge, Biophore Building CH-1015 Lausanne Switzerland


