### Accession
PXD021424

### Title
Differences in the self proteome of human feaces with different dietary protein.

### Description
19 men were split into two groups. 10 were provided with a diet of twice the recommended daily intake of protein and 9 were provided meals with the recommended dietary intake of protein. Faecal samples were collected after 10 weeks on the diet. This project looked at determining any qualitative differences present in the self-proteins from each group.

### Sample Protocol
The pellet and supernatant (see section 1.1.2) were combined 1:1. Methanol – chloroform was used to extract proteins and remove guanidine hydrochloride as described previously (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). The precipitated protein was resuspended in two extraction buffers – lysis buffer and urea-tris buffer. For the lysis buffer, the precipitate was resuspended in buffer containing (4% w/v sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, pH 8.0 using hydrochloric acid).  This homogenate was heated to 95 °C for 10 min, followed by homogenising in a ground glass tube for 1 min with an electric hand drill (Firebreak 50 Hz P/N 0-2809RPM). For the urea buffer, the precipitated peptides were resuspended in urea- tris buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaCl and 25 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane). The mixture was pipetted up and down and then vortexed at room temperature overnight. All extracts from both methods were then centrifuged at 14 100 x g for 10 min, followed by the collection of the clear supernatants. Methanol – chloroform extraction was done on urea- tris buffer extraction samples to remove urea and isolate the proteins

### Data Protocol
The MS data was exported to ProteinScape (Version 3.1.0 348; Bruker Daltonics). The file for both separation methods was combined into one for each sample. Protein searches were conducted using Mascot Server v 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, UK). Spectra were searched against the Swissprot Homo sapiens database. Semitrypsin was selected as the enzyme specificity allowing up to two missed cleavages. The MS error tolerance was set to 0.3 Da and the MS/MS error tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Peptide and protein Mascot threshold scores were set to 20 and 80, respectively. Instrument specificity was set to ESI-TRAP. The modifications included were carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed and oxidation (M), ammonia loss (N-term-C), sodium (DE) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications. Protein identifications required at least one unique peptide identification from the list of identified peptides for that protein.

### Publication Abstract
Faecal proteomics targeting biomarkers of immunity and inflammation have demonstrated clinical application for the identification of changes in gastrointestinal function. However, there are limited comprehensive analyses of the host faecal proteome and how it may be influenced by dietary factors. To examine this, the <i>Homo sapiens</i> post-diet proteome of older males was analysed at the completion of a 10-week dietary intervention, either meeting the minimum dietary protein recommendations (RDA; <i>n</i> = 9) or twice the recommended dietary allowance (2RDA, <i>n</i> = 10). The host faecal proteome differed markedly between individuals, with only a small subset of proteins present in &#x2265; 60% of subjects (14 and 44 proteins, RDA and 2RDA, respectively, with only 7 common to both groups). No differences were observed between the diet groups on the profiles of host faecal proteins. Faecal proteins were detected from a wide range of protein classes, with high inter-individual variation and absence of obvious impact in response to diets with markedly different protein intake. This suggests that well-matched whole food diets with two-fold variation in protein intake maintained for 10 weeks have minimal impact on human faecal host proteins.

### Keywords
Proteins, Protein diet, Feaces

### Affiliations
Proteins and Metabolites Team, AgResearch, Lincoln, Christchurch, New Zealand.
AgResearch

### Submitter
Jessica Gathercole

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Gathercole
Proteins and Metabolites Team, AgResearch, Lincoln, Christchurch, New Zealand.


