### Accession
PXD016678

### Title
Endothelial metabolic transcriptome plasticity in pathological angiogenesis

### Description
Endothelial cell (EC) metabolism is an emerging target for anti-angiogenic therapy in tumor and choroidal neovascularization (CNV), but little is known about individual EC metabolic transcriptomes. Here, by scRNA-sequencing 28,337 murine choroidal ECs (CECs) and sprouting CNV-ECs, we constructed a taxonomy to characterize their heterogeneity. Comparison with murine lung tumor ECs (TECs) revealed congruent marker gene expression by distinct EC phenotypes across tissues and diseases, suggesting similar angiogenic mechanisms. Trajectory inference of CNV-ECs revealed that differentiation of venous to angiogenic ECs was accompanied by metabolic transcriptome plasticity. EC phenotypes displayed metabolic transcriptome heterogeneity. Hypothesizing that conserved genes are more important, we used an integrated analysis, based on congruent transcriptome analysis, CEC-tailored genome scale metabolic modeling, and gene expression meta-analysis in multiple cross-species datasets, followed by functional validation, to identify the top-ranking metabolic targets SQLE and ALDH18A1, involved in EC proliferation and collagen production, respectively, as novel angiogenic targets.  The effect of SQLE and ALDH18A1 silencing in ECs was investigated by transcriptomics and proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Control, SQLE and ALDH18A1 silenced cells were collected and frozen as a dry pellet before extraction in 300 μl of a 50:30:20 (methanol: acetonitrile: 20 mM Tris, pH 9.3) extraction buffer. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at 15,000 rcf at 4°C and the supernatant was discarded. The resulting protein pellet was re-dissolved in 200 µl 8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 min at 55°C. Proteins were then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 min at RT in the dark. The samples were diluted by addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to reach a final urea concentration of 4 M; then, the proteins were digested with 1 μg endoLysC (Wako 1/100, w/w) for 4 hr at 37°C. Next, all samples were further diluted by addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and the proteins were digested with 1 μg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Next, peptides were purified on OMIX C18 tips (Agilent). The tips were first washed 3 times with 200 µl pre-wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ acetonitrile (ACN) (20:80, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated 5 times with 200 µl of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed 3 times with 200 µl of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 75 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). Peptides from each sample were re-dissolved in 20 μl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98 : 2, v/v)) of which 2 μg (quantified on the Lunatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs)) was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a home-made 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm trapping column (5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr Maisch) and the sample was loaded on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality mounted in the Ultimate 3000’s column oven at 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm inner diameter) (New Objective) was connected to the µPAC™ outlet union and a grounded connection was provided to this union.The peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1% to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2 : 8, v/v)) over 145 min , first at a flow rate of 750 nl/min, then at 300 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375 to 1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (fixed first mass, starting from 145 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyzer. The S-lens RF level was set at 50, and we excluded precursor ions with 1 or over 7 charge and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein level. The spectra were searched against the human proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of September 2017 containing 20,237 human protein entries, downloaded from www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as carboxy-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine–proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein amino-termini. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained for identification, while a minimum ratio count of two was required for quantification. Matching between runs was enabled, with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.  Further data analysis was performed in R after loading the proteinGroups results files from MaxQuant. Proteins with less than 20% valid values were removed, and missing values were imputed using minimum values. Differentially expressed proteins and their false discovery rate (FDR) corrected p values were identified by the Limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015), non-corrected p values are reported for targeted analysis of collagen modification enzymes.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial cell (EC) metabolism is an emerging target for anti-angiogenic therapy in tumor angiogenesis and choroidal neovascularization (CNV), but little is known about individual EC metabolic transcriptomes. By single-cell RNA sequencing 28,337 murine choroidal ECs (CECs) and sprouting CNV-ECs, we constructed a taxonomy to characterize their heterogeneity. Comparison with murine lung tumor ECs (TECs) revealed congruent marker gene expression by distinct EC phenotypes across tissues and diseases, suggesting similar angiogenic mechanisms. Trajectory inference predicted that differentiation of venous to angiogenic ECs was accompanied by metabolic transcriptome plasticity. ECs displayed metabolic transcriptome heterogeneity during cell-cycle progression and in quiescence. Hypothesizing that conserved genes are important, we used an integrated analysis, based on congruent transcriptome analysis, CEC-tailored genome-scale metabolic modeling, and gene expression meta-analysis in cross-species datasets, followed by in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo validation, to identify SQLE and ALDH18A1 as previously unknown metabolic angiogenic targets.

### Keywords
Endothelial cells; angiogenesis; choroidal neovascularization; tumor angiogenesis; scrna-seq; transcriptional regulation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Carmeliet
Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven 3000, Belgium


