### Accession
PXD023562

### Title
Broad Kinase Inhibition Mitigates Early Neuronal Dysfunction in Tauopathy

### Description
Tauopathies are a group of more than twenty known disorders that involve progressive neurodegeneration, cognitive decline, and pathological tau accumulation. Current therapeutic strategies provide only limited, late-stage symptomatic treatment. This is partly due to lack of understanding of the molecular mechanisms linking tau and cellular dysfunction, especially during the early stages of disease progression. In this study, we treated tau transgenic mice with a multi-target kinase inhibitor to identify novel targets that contribute to cognitive impairment and exhibit therapeutic potential. Drug treatment significantly ameliorated brain atrophy and neuronal function as determined by behavioral testing and a sensitive imaging technique called manganese-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MEMRI) with quantitative R1 mapping. Surprisingly, these benefits occurred despite unchanged hyperphosphorylated tau levels. To elucidate the mechanism behind these improved cognitive outcomes, we performed quantitative proteomics to determine the altered protein network during this early stage in tauopathy and compare this model with the human AD proteome. We identified a cluster of preserved pathways shared with human tauopathy with striking potential for broad multi-target kinase intervention. We further report high confidence

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were dissolved in protein buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS (w/v), 1% Triton-100 (w/v), 1 mM PMSF, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (v/v)). For each sample, a total of 50 μg of protein were reduced, alkylated, trypsin-digested, and labeled according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). For each mass-spectrometer batch, late-stage 8mo transgenic tissue were labeled with TMT tags 126 and 127N, non-transgenic mice treated with 414 were labeled with TMT tags 128C and 129N, non-transgenic mice treated with vehicle were labeled with TMT tags 128C and 129N, transgenic mice treated with 414 were labeled with 129C and 130N, transgenic mice treated with vehicle were labeled with 130C and 131N, and a mixed-sample internal batch was labeled with 131C. Labeled peptides were desalted with C18-solid phase extraction and dissolved in strong cation exchange (SCX) solvent A (25% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, pH 2.8). The peptides were fractionated using an Agilent HPLC 1260 with a polysulfoethyl A column (2.1 × 100 mm, 5 µm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 0–20% solvent B (25% (v/v) acetonitrile and 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 6.8) over 50 min followed by ramping up to 100% solvent B in 5 min. The absorbance at 280 nm was monitored and a total of 19 fractions were collected. The fractions were lyophilized, desalted, and resuspended in LC solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 97% water (v/v), 3% acetonitrile (v/v)). A hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap (Q Exactive) MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used with high energy collision dissociation (HCD) in each MS and MS/MS cycle. The MS system was interfaced with an automated Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each sample fraction was loaded onto an Acclaim Pepmap 100 pre-column (20 mm × 75 μm; 3 μm-C18) and separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm; 2 μm-C18) at a flow rate at 350 nl/min during a linear gradient from solvent A (0.1% formic acid (v/v)) to 30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (v/v) and 99.9% acetonitrile (v/v)) for 95 min, to 98% solvent B for 15 min, and hold 98% solvent B for additional 30 min. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 400–2000 range with resolution 70,000 at 200 m/z. The top ten most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 3 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell normalized collision energy of 28%, (the isolation window was 2 m/z). The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 ms, respectively and the ion target values were set to 3e6 and 1e6, respectively. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra where searched using a uniprot mouse database downloaded on December 4, 2019 with 63369 (including the human TAU 301L sequence) using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher). Search parameters included fully tryptic enzymatic cleavage, 20 ppm precursor tolerance, 0.05 dalton fragment ion tolerance, static TMT modification on lysine and n-terminal (+229.163 Da), static cysteine carbamindomethy (+57.021 Da)and dynamic modification of methionine (+15.995 Da).  Search results were filtered with Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases
1Department of Neuroscience & Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Jose F. Abisambra
1Department of Neuroscience & Center for Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA


