### Accession
PXD033987

### Title
An integrated multi-omic network analysis identifies seizure-associated dysregulated pathways in the GAERS model of absence epilepsy

### Description
Absence epilepsy syndromes are part of the genetic generalized epilepsies, the pathogenesis of which remains poorly understood, although a polygenic architecture is presumed. Current focus on single molecule or gene identification to elucidate epileptogenic drivers is unable to fully cap-ture the complex dysfunctional interactions occurring at a genetic/proteomic/metabolomic level. Here, we employ a multi-omic, network-based approach to characterize the molecular signature associated with absence epilepsy-like phenotype seen in a well validated rat model of genetic generalized epilepsy with absence seizures. Electroencephalographic and behavioral data was collected from Genetic Absence Epilepsy Rats from Strasbourg (GAERS, n=6) and non-epileptic controls (NEC, n=6), followed by proteomic and metabolomic profiling of the cortical and tha-lamic tissue of rats from both groups.  The general framework of weighted correlation network analysis was used to identify groups of highly correlated proteins and metabolites, which were then functionally annotated through joint pathway enrichment analysis. In both brain regions a large protein-metabolite module was found to be highly associated with the GAERS strain, ab-sence seizures and associated anxiety and depressive-like phenotype. Quantitative pathway analysis indicated enrichment in oxidative pathways and a downregulation of the lysine degra-dation pathway in both brain regions. GSTM1 and ALDH2 were identified as central regulatory hubs of the seizure-associated module in the somatosensory cortex and thalamus, respectively. These enzymes are involved in lysine degradation and play important roles in maintaining oxi-dative balance. We conclude that the dysregulated pathways identified in the seizure-associated module may be involved in the aetiology and maintenance of absence seizure activity. This dysregulated activity could potentially be modulated by targeting one or both central regulatory hubs.

### Sample Protocol
30mg of tissue from each region was processed. Powdered samples were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris (pH8.1, 95°C, 10 min) and sonicated. Lysate was cleared by centrif-ugation (16,000 g, 10 min) and protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo). Equal amount of protein was denatured and alkylated using Tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine-hydrochloride and 2-Chloroacetamide (final concentra-tion of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively), and incubated (95°C, 5 min). Proteins were precipitated using chloroform/methanol followed by sequencing grade trypsin digestion (37°C, overnight, enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100). Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (concentration of 1%). Peptides were cleaned with BondElut Omix Tips (Ag-ilent) and concentrated in a vacuum concentrator prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired DIA data were evaluated in Spectronaut 13 Laika (Biognosys) using in-house spectral library derived from the same brain samples. Multi-dimensional scaling was undertaken to identify outliers. Differential expression analysis was conducted using R Studio (version 1.2.5033) and R’s (version 3.6.3) limma package on log-transformed in-tensity values

### Publication Abstract
Absence epilepsy syndromes are part of the genetic generalized epilepsies, the pathogenesis of which remains poorly understood, although a polygenic architecture is presumed. Current focus on single molecule or gene identification to elucidate epileptogenic drivers is unable to fully capture the complex dysfunctional interactions occurring at a genetic/proteomic/metabolomic level. Here, we employ a multi-omic, network-based approach to characterize the molecular signature associated with absence epilepsy-like phenotype seen in a well validated rat model of genetic generalized epilepsy with absence seizures. Electroencephalographic and behavioral data was collected from Genetic Absence Epilepsy Rats from Strasbourg (GAERS, <i>n</i> = 6) and non-epileptic controls (NEC, <i>n</i> = 6), followed by proteomic and metabolomic profiling of the cortical and thalamic tissue of rats from both groups. The general framework of weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) was used to identify groups of highly correlated proteins and metabolites, which were then functionally annotated through joint pathway enrichment analysis. In both brain regions a large protein-metabolite module was found to be highly associated with the GAERS strain, absence seizures and associated anxiety and depressive-like phenotype. Quantitative pathway analysis indicated enrichment in oxidative pathways and a downregulation of the lysine degradation pathway in both brain regions. GSTM1 and ALDH2 were identified as central regulatory hubs of the seizure-associated module in the somatosensory cortex and thalamus, respectively. These enzymes are involved in lysine degradation and play important roles in maintaining oxidative balance. We conclude that the dysregulated pathways identified in the seizure-associated module may be involved in the aetiology and maintenance of absence seizure activity. This dysregulated activity could potentially be modulated by targeting one or both central regulatory hubs.

### Keywords
An integrated multi-omic network analysis identifies sei-zure-associated dysregulated pathways in the gaers model of absence epilepsy

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine (The Royal Melbourne Hospital), The University of Melbourne, 3000, Victoria, Australia. Department of Neuroscience, Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, 3004, Victoria, Australia.
Monash University

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Pablo Casillas-Espinosa
Department of Medicine (The Royal Melbourne Hospital), The University of Melbourne, 3000, Victoria, Australia. Department of Neuroscience, Central Clinical School, Monash University, Melbourne, 3004, Victoria, Australia.


