### Accession
PXD024041

### Title
Poplar acetylome profiling reveals lysine acetylation dynamics in seasonal dormancy release.

### Description
Bud dormancy in perennials in boreal and temperate ecosystems is crucial for survival in harsh winter. Dormancy is released by prolonged exposure to low temperatures and is followed by reactive growth in the spring. Lysine acetylation (Kac) is one of the major post-translational modifications (PTMs) involved in plant response to environment signals. However, little information is available on the effects of Kac modification on bud dormancy release. Here, we report the dynamics of lysine acetylome in hybrid poplar (Populus tremula x alba) dormant buds. A total number of 7,594 acetyl sites from 3,281 acetyl proteins were identified, representing the largest to date dataset of lysine acetylome in plants. Of them, 229 proteins were differentially acetylated during bud dormancy release and were involved mainly in the primary metabolism. Site-directed mutagenesis enzymatic assays showed that acetylation strongly modified the activities of two key enzymes of primary metabolism, pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). We thus propose that Kac of enzymes could be an important strategy for reconfiguration of metabolic processes during bud dormancy release. In all, our results reveal the importance of Kac in bud dormancy release and give a new perspective to understand the molecular mechanisms of tree’s seasonal growth.

### Sample Protocol
Six-year-old hybrid poplar (P. tremula x alba, clone 717-1B4) trees grown in the field of Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China, were chosen for sample collection. Top vegetative buds from current‐year shoots were sampled once a month from December to March, more specifically: in December, January, February, and Mar respectively. Twenty apical buds from the same tree were pooled together with one replicate and three individual trees were sampled as biological replicates respectively. The samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Bud samples (0.3g Fw for each replicate; Fw, Fruit weight) were ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to centrifuge tubes with 2 ml lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail [Merck, Darmstadt, Germany]). The extracts were sonicated three times on ice-cold lysis buffer using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (SCIENTZ, Ningbo, China). Soluble proteins were isolated by centrifugation (20,000 g, 4 °C, 10 min) and final precipitation with by adding cold 20% 100% trichloroacetic acid (TCA, the final concentration of TCA is 20%) at -20 °C for 2 h. After 10-min centrifugation (12,000 g, 4 °C), the protein precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times and re-dissolved in 8 M urea. The protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Cat#P0010, Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). Prior to digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM tetraethylammonium borohydride (TEAB) to reach a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, the protein was sequentially digested with two gradient trypsin (Cat#V5111, Promega, Madison, USA) concentrations: first, with trypsin overnight (12h, 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio), and then, the next day for 4 h (1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio). Affinity enrichment  To enrich acetylated peptides, the 2 mg digested peptides were incubated with 20 μl anti-acetyl-lysine beads (50% slurry; the concentration of IgG on the beads is 16 mg/ml; Cat#PTM-104, PTM Bio, Hangzhou, China) in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. After four-fold washing with NETN buffer and two-fold with distilled water, the beads were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and finally vacuum-dried. For liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, the acetylated peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS The acetylated peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient comprised of an increase from 6% to 22% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 44 min, from 22% to 35% in 10 min, and reaching up to 80% in 13 min, followed be holding at 80% for the last 2 min; all operations were performed at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an nanoElute UPLC system (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany). Then, the peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) MS/MS. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.6 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed using a TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro instrument was operated in a parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states from 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 24 sec. Database searches The protein and acetylation sites identification and quantification were performed through The raw MS/MS data were searching using MaxQuant search engine (v1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Populus. Trichocarpa protein database (version 3.0, https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) and concatenated with reverse decoy database to remove the effects of protein contamination. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acid residues. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 40 ppm (Meier et al., 2018), and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.04 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification, and acetylation modification on pro N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and acetylation on Lys and acetylation on the N-terminal protein were defined as variable modifications. False discovery rate (The FDR) threshold for protein, peptide and modified site were specified at 0.01. was adjusted to < 1%. The acetylation site localization probability was set to > 0.75, and the peptide score was set to > 40.

### Publication Abstract
For perennials in boreal and temperate ecosystems, bud dormancy is crucial for survival in harsh winter. Dormancy is released by prolonged exposure to low temperatures and is followed by reactive growth in the spring. Lysine acetylation (Kac) is one of the major post-translational modifications (PTMs) that are involved in plant response to environmental signals. However, little information is available on the effects of Kac modification on bud dormancy release. Here, we report the dynamics of lysine acetylome in hybrid poplar (Populus tremula&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;Populus alba) dormant buds. A total of 7,594 acetyl-sites from 3,281 acetyl-proteins were identified, representing a large dataset of lysine acetylome in plants. Of them, 229 proteins were differentially acetylated during bud dormancy release and were mainly involved in the primary metabolic pathways. Site-directed mutagenesis enzymatic assays showed that Kac strongly modified the activities of two key enzymes of primary metabolism, pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). We thus propose that Kac of enzymes could be an important strategy for reconfiguration of metabolic processes during bud dormancy release. In all, our results reveal the importance of Kac in bud dormancy release and provide a new perspective to understand the molecular mechanisms of seasonal growth of trees.

### Keywords
Perennial; poplar; dormancy release; lysine acetylome

### Affiliations
HuaZhong Agricultural University
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Liao xiaoli

### Lab Head
Dr Jihua Ding
HuaZhong Agricultural University


