### Accession
PXD023389

### Title
GCN5 associated complex in human malaria Plasmodium falciparum

### Description
The histone acetyltransferase (HAT) GCN5-associated SAGA complex is evolutionarily conserved from yeast to human and functions as a general transcription co-activator in global gene regulation. To study GCN5 associated complex in human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum, PfGCN5 was tagged with PTP tag for a tandem affinity purification (TAP). We performed the TAP procedure using nuclear extracts from synchronized trophozoites of the PfGCN5::PTP parasite, which was followed by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for accurate protein identification. The MS data were subjected to Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT) using a threshold of probability above 94% and false discovery rate (FDR) below 1% (Teo et al., 2014). Nine proteins were identified as core components of PfGCN5 complex including a plant apetela2 (AP2)-domain transcription factor (PF3D7_0802100), three hypothetical proteins with unknown function (PF3D7_1019700, PF3D7_1364400 and PF3D7_1402800) and two PHD domain containing proteins (PF3D7_1008100 and PF3D7_1433400, named as PfPHD1 and PfPHD2). Among them, only PfGCN5 and PfADA2 are known as the components of SAGA complex, indicating PfGCN5 complex is highly divergent from SAGA complex. To confirm the subunits identified by TAP, PfPHD1 and PF3D7_1019700 were tagged with C-myc and GFP tag, respectively. Immuno-precipitations (IPs) from parasites with PfPHD1-myc and PF3D7_1019700-GFP were conducted with myc- or GFP-trap beads followed by LC-MS/MS. Indeed, the core complex were identified by these reciprocal pulldowns. To study the function of PfGCN5 complex, Bromodomain (BrD) in PfGCN5 and PHD in PfPHD1 at the C-termini of PfGCN5 and PfPHD1 were deleted and meanwhile tag the C-termini of these truncated proteins with a GFP tag for sorting parasites with truncated PfGCN5 or PfPHD1. The parasite lines with these deletions grew significantly slower with substantial defect in merozoite invasion. IPs by GFP-trap beads from these parasites were performed to reveal the integrity of PfGCN5 complex after domain deletion. IPs with the PfGCN5-∆BrD::GFP parasites confidently purified the nine core subunits of the PfGCN5 complex, suggesting the deletion of the BrD from PfGCN5 did not affect the integrity of the complex, whereas only four major components of the PfGCN5 complex (PfGCN5, PfADA2, PfPHD1, and PF3D7_1402800) were detected from the PfPHD1-∆PHD::GFP parasites. Collectively, the PfGCN5 complex represents a novel HAT complex with a unique subunit composition including the AP2 transcription factor, which signifies a new paradigm for targeting the co-activator complex to regulate general and parasite-specific cellular processes in this low-branching parasitic protist.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie-stained for visualization. The gel section was minced and de-stained before being reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), and finally digested with Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were extracted using 50/50 acetonitrile (ACN)/H2O/0.1% formic acid and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Labconco). Peptides were resuspended in 98%H2O/2%ACN/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Experiments were performed in triplicate. Next, peptides are separated using a 50cm C18 reversed-phase HPLC column (Thermo) on an Ultimate3000 UHPLC (Thermo) with a 120 minute gradient (2-32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition in which the top 10 most abundant ions are selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files are processed in MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) and searched against the current Uniprot P. falciparum 3D7 protein sequence database. Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin; Database: Uniprot P. falciparum + Swissprot Human (forward and reverse appended with common contaminants); Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (NQ); Mass values: Monoisotopic; Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da; Max Missed Cleavages: 2; Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a nonredundant list per sample. Data were filtered 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Gcn5, Malaria

### Affiliations
Internal Medicine Morsani College of Medicine University of South Florida
University of Sourth Florida

### Submitter
JUN MIAO

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Miao
Internal Medicine Morsani College of Medicine University of South Florida


