### Accession
PXD005972

### Title
Angiogenic and Immunologic Proteins Identified by Deep Proteomic Profiling of Human Choroidal and Retinal Vascular Endothelial Cells

### Description
PURPOSE Diseases that involve choroidal or retinal endothelial vascular cells are leading causes of vision loss: age-related macular degeneration, retinal ischemic vasculopathies and non-infectious posterior uveitis. Proteins differentially expressed by these endothelial cell populations are potential drug targets. We used deep proteomics to define the molecular phenotype of human choroidal and retinal endothelial cells at the protein level.  METHODS Choroidal and retinal endothelial cells were separately isolated from 5 human eye pairs by selection on CD31. Total protein was extracted and digested, and peptide fractions were analysed by reverse-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Peptide sequences were assigned to fragment ion spectra and proteins were inferred using public protein databases. Protein abundance was determined by spectral counting. Protein expression in choroidal versus retinal endothelial cells was compared using edgeR package in R, and annotation enrichment analysis was performed.  RESULTS Human choroidal or retinal endothelial cells expressed 5042 non-redundant proteins. Setting the false discovery rate at 5%, 498 proteins (14.4%) of 3454 quantifiable proteins with minimum mean spectral counts of 2.5 were differentially expressed between cell populations. Choroidal and retinal endothelial cells were enriched in angiogenic proteins, and retinal endothelial cells were also enriched in immunologic proteins.   CONCLUSIONS This work demonstrates the protein heterogeneity of human choroidal and retinal vascular endothelial cells and provides multiple candidates for further study as novel treatments or drug targets for posterior eye diseases.

### Sample Protocol
OCULAR TISSUE The human ocular tissue that was used in the reported work was purchased from Lions VisionGift (Portland, OR) as paired posterior globes.   ISOLATION OF HUMAN RETINAL AND CHOROIDAL ENDOTHELIAL CELLS Donor summary: 39-year-old female; 46-year-old male; 48-year-old male; 18-year-old female and 36-year-old male. Time to cell isolation time varied from 11 to 22.5 hours. The retina and choroid were dissected from both posterior globes, and separately digested with 0.3 mg/ml Dispase (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 0.25-1 mg/ml type II collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich). After 7 to 10 days of culture in MCDB-131 medium (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and endothelial growth factors (EGM-2 SingleQuots supplement, omitting FBS, hydrocortisone and gentamicin; Lonza-Clonetics) at 37 C, endothelial cells are purified using magnetic Dynabeads (ThermoFisher Scientific) coated with mouse anti-human CD31 antibody (BD Pharmingen), and grown in modified MCDB-131 medium with 10% FBS. Subculturing of retinal endothelial cells was performed with 0.05% trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific). The cell isolates were used at passage 2 or 3.   PREPARATION OF PROTEIN SAMPLES Cells were grown to confluence in modified MCDB-131 medium with 10% FBS in separate 10 cm dishes (two dishes per endothelial cell population). The medium was replaced with fresh MCDB-131 medium supplemented with 5% FBS and endothelial growth factors, and the cells were cultured for a further 4 hours. The dishes were washed four times with phosphate buffered saline (ThermoFisher Scientific) at room temperature (RT) to remove serum proteins and snap frozen at -80 C.  On thawing, 500 ul of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to the first of each set of two dishes. Adherent endothelial cells were dislodged using a disposable plastic cell scraper; the cell suspension was transferred to the second of each set of two dishes; and the process was repeated. Cells were transferred to a single centrifuge tube, and an additional 500 ul of ammonium bicarbonate buffer was used to collect any remaining cells. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, subsequently suspended in 200 ul of 8 M deionized urea containing 1 M Tris (pH 8.5) and 8 mM calcium chloride, and finally sonicated using a Model 60 Sonic Dismembrator  (ThermoFisher Scientific) at setting 2, using 3 treatments of 15 seconds each, with an intervening 30 seconds of cooling on ice. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific).   1 mg (approximately 125 ul) of each sample were combined with 12.5 ul of 2 M methylamine, and reduced with 12.5 ul of 0.9 M dithiothreitol and incubated at 50 C for 15 min. Samples were alkylated with 25 ul of 1 M iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark at RT for 15 min, followed by addition of a second 12.5 ul of 0.9 M dithiothreitol to scavage iodoacetamide. 272 ul of water was added, followed by 40 ul of 1 ug/ul Trypsin Gold (Promega Corporation) dissolved in 1 mM HCl. Following an overnight digestion at 37 C, formic acid was added to a final concentration of 5%, and the peptides solid phase extracted using Sep-Pak Light cartridges (Millipore).  2-D LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPHY AND TANDEM MASS SPECTROMETRY Protein digests were injected onto a 100 × 2.1 mm polysulfoethyl A cation exchange column (The Nest Group) at a flow rate of 200 ul/min. Mobile phase A contained 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 3.0) and 25% acetonitrile, and mobile phase B was the same plus 350 mM potassium chloride. Following 5 min of loading and washing in mobile phase A, peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 0-50 % B over 45 min, followed by a linear gradient of 50-100 % B over 20 min. One-minute fractions were collected, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and re-dissolved by shaking in 100 ul of 5% formic acid. Fractions at the beginning or end of the salt gradient were combined. 10 ul of each fraction were analyzed by LC/MS on an Agilent 1100 series capillary LC system and an LTQ linear ion trap (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a standard electrospray source fitted with a 34 gauge metal needle (Cat. No. 97144-20040). Samples were applied at 20 ul/min to a micro C18 trap cartridge (Optimize Technologies), and subsequently switched onto a 0.5 X 250 mm Zorbax SB-C18 column (Agilent Technologies) using a mobile phase A containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was 7-35 % acetonitrile over 90 min at 10 ul/min flow rate. Data dependent acquisition used dynamic exclusion to obtain MS/MS spectra of the three most abundant parent ions. Parameters were: repeat count of 1; exclusion duration of 30 sec; list size of 50; exclusion mass window was low of 1.0 Da and high of 4.0 Da. There was no averaging of microscans, a maximum inject time of 200 millisec, and automatic gain control targets of 30000 in MS mode and 10000 in MSn mode.

### Data Protocol
PEPTIDE IDENTIFICATION Thermo RAW files were converted to readable text files using Proteowizard (release 3.0.9490), and all compressed text files with a minimum ion count of 15 and a minimum absolute intensity of 100 were converted to MS/MS-format files with Python scripts. For fragment ions with a mass-to-charge ratio greater than parent ion value, intensity fraction was used to distinguish peptides with 1+ charge. Duplicate 2+ and 3+ charges were created for peptides with higher charge.   Data were processed using the Proteomic Analysis Workbench (PAW) pipeline (http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12177-009-9042-6), with steps that included control of peptide-sequencing errors, inference of protein identities from observed peptides, and quantitative estimates of protein abundance. Two protein databases were accessed from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) in January 2016: (1) Swiss-Prot, providing reviewed canonical human protein sequences (20,146 sequences); and (2) human reference proteome, UP000005640, including isoforms and non-reviewed sequences (91,738 sequences). A total of 179 common contaminants and “decoy” sequences were added to permit protein false discovery rate (FDR) to be estimated and controlled. Databases were searched using Comet (version 2016.01 rev. 2). Parameters included: mass parent ion tolerance of 2.5 Da and monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance of 1.0005 Da; tryptic enzyme specificity; static modifications of +57 Da on Cys residues; variable modifications of +16 Da on Met residues with a maximum of two modifications; and scoring with y- and b-ions. Comet search scores were transformed to discriminant scores using functions modeled on PeptideProphet. Target and decoy discriminant scores were displayed as histograms and overlaid, to set thresholds for peptide-to-mass spectra matching and control the PSM FDR. Peptides were separated into subclasses based on charge and modification (i.e. unmodified or containing oxidized methionine), and 1% FDR thresholds were set independently in each subclass.   PROTEIN INFERENCE Protein inference used basic parsimony logic: identical peptide sets were taken to represent one protein; and proteins inferred from subsets of peptide sets were excluded. Inference was experiment-wide, with the additional requirement of at least two distinct peptides per protein. A final stage of processing was implemented to control the relatively high rate of peptide-to-mass spectra mismatches that may occur in a large proteomic dataset: proteins with nearly identical peptide sets were grouped together, and proteins inferred from peptide sets that were nearly subsets were grouped with the superset protein. For protein families generated by these groupings, spectral count fractions were assigned to peptides based on the spectral counts attributed to each protein. Fractional peptide spectral counts provided more accurate protein spectral counts, referred to below as “corrected spectral counts”.  Protein FDR was estimated using the target/decoy method. Protein inference was performed for peptides matched to decoy proteins exactly as for peptides matched to target proteins, and total number of those peptides was used to calculate the protein FDR. Although the protein FDR was less than 1% in each sample, the experiment-wide error rate exceeded 7%. An experiment-wide protein ranking value was computed as the sum of all discriminant function scores for all peptide-to-spectral matches matched to each protein. Target and decoy proteins were ranked from highest to lowest scores, and target and decoy scores were used to compute protein q-scores. Final protein identifications were reported at protein FDR of 1%.  DIFFERENTIAL EXPRESSION Analysis of differential protein expression between human retinal and choroidal endothelial cell isolates was based on quantitative estimates made using the Swiss-Prot protein database, due to the minimal peptide redundancy of that database. Corrected spectral counts for each sample were normalized to mean grand total corrected spectral counts across the 10 samples; normalization factors to equalize the total amount of protein per sample ranged from 0.8 to 1.2. Proteins with mean spectral counts below 2.5 were excluded. Analysis of differential protein expression was performed using R and the edgeR Bioconductor package (release 3.3). The built-in trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) normalization method was applied, and a paired study design was specified and processed using the global linear modeling edgeR extensions, following example 4.1 in the edgeR User’s Guide (revised 30 June 2016).   UniProt has richly annotated flat format text files available for human Swiss-Prot entries, and selected annotations (protein and gene names, GO terms, keywords, and Reactome pathways) were added to the protein results files to facilitate biological interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tandem mass spectrometry, Cell culture, Linear ion trap, Spectral counting, Proteomics, Protein expression, Choroid, Retina, Mudpit, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Eye & Vison Health, Flinders University School of Medicine Flinders Medical Center Flinders University Australia
Flinders University

### Submitter
Justine Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Justine R. Smith
Eye & Vison Health, Flinders University School of Medicine Flinders Medical Center Flinders University Australia


