### Accession
PXD021217

### Title
Site-specific ubiquitination of the E3 ligase HOIP regulates apoptosis and immune signaling

### Description
HOIP, the catalytic component of the Linear Ubiquitin chain Assembly Complex (LUBAC), is a critical regulator of inflammation. However, how HOIP itself is regulated to control inflammatory responses is unclear. Here, we discover that site-specific ubiquitination of K784 within HOIP promotes Tumour Necrosis Factor (TNF)-induced inflammatory signalling. A HOIP K784R mutant is catalytically active but shows reduced induction of an NF-B reporter relative to wild type HOIP. HOIP K784 is evolutionarily conserved, equivalent to HOIP K778 in mice. We generated HoipK778R/K778R knockin mice, which show no overt developmental phenotypes; however, in response to TNF, HoipK778R/K778R mouse embryonic fibroblasts display suppressed NF-B activation and increased apoptotic markers. On the other hand, HOIP K778R enhances the TNF-induced formation of TNFR complex II, and an interaction between TNFR complex II and LUBAC. Loss of the LUBAC component SHARPIN leads to embryonic lethality in HoipK778R/K778R mice, which is rescued by knockout of TNFR1. We propose that site-specific ubiquitination of HOIP regulates a LUBAC-dependent switch between survival and apoptosis in TNF-signalling.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC-MS Analysis pcDNA3-Myc-human HOIP and pRK5-Myc-human OTULIN (WT or C129A) were ectopically expressed in HEK293T cells. A GST-Linear TUBE pulldown was performed as previously described (Asaoka et al., 2016). Briefly, cells were lysed in mammalian lysis buffer on ice and cleared by centrifugation. A GST-Linear TUBE immobilized on glutathione Sepharose 4B beads was incubated with supernatants for 12 hours at 4°C. Pulldown samples were washed five times in lysis buffer, and heated at 96°C for 5 minutes in 2X SDS sample buffer. These samples which contained HOIP were separated using SDS-PAGE using 4-15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX gels (Bio-Rad; #4561083). Gels were silver stained according to Blum’s protocol (Helmut et al., 1987). Gel fragments containing the HOIP band and above were extracted from the gel. Following this, the gel bands were reduced, alkylated and digested with Trypsin. The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Amsterdam, Netherlands, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1 and a binary 1h gradient, respectively 105 min. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35%B over the next 60 min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for 5 min and decreases in 5min back to the gradient 98%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C. The Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan (m/z range 380-1650, nominal resolution of 70,000, target value 3E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired using normalized collision energy of 27%, isolation width of 2.0 m/z, resolution of 17.500 and the target value was set to 1E5. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (exclude charge state 1) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 10 s. Additionally, the intensity threshold was calculated to be 4.0E4. The peptide match feature and the exclude isotopes feature were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing protocol for analyzed peptides For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v1.4.14.7870 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). The RAW-files were searched against the Swissprot sequence database, using the taxonomy human (20,171 sequences; 11,317,551 residues). The following search parameters were used: Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine and ubiquitination on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.03 Da. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Peptide areas have been quantified using in-house-developed tool apQuant (Doblmann J. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2018 Oct 23).

### Publication Abstract
HOIP, the catalytic component of the linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC), is a critical regulator of inflammation. However, how HOIP itself is regulated to control inflammatory responses is unclear. Here, we discover that site-specific ubiquitination of K784 within human HOIP promotes tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced inflammatory signaling. A HOIP K784R mutant is catalytically active but shows reduced induction of an NF-&#x3ba;B reporter relative to wild-type HOIP. HOIP K784 is evolutionarily conserved, equivalent to HOIP K778 in mice. We generated Hoip<sup>K778R/K778R</sup> knock-in mice, which show no overt developmental phenotypes; however, in response to TNF, Hoip<sup>K778R/K778R</sup> mouse embryonic fibroblasts display mildly suppressed NF-&#x3ba;B activation and increased apoptotic markers. On the other hand, HOIP K778R enhances the TNF-induced formation of TNFR complex II and an interaction between TNFR complex II and LUBAC. Loss of the LUBAC component SHARPIN leads to embryonic lethality in Hoip<sup>K778R/K778R</sup> mice, which is rescued by knockout of TNFR1. We propose that site-specific ubiquitination of HOIP regulates a LUBAC-dependent switch between survival and apoptosis in TNF signaling.

### Keywords
Site-specific ubiquitination of the e3 ligase hoip regulates apoptosis and immune signaling

### Affiliations
Professor, Division of Inflammation and Proteostasis, Medical Institute of Bioregulation (MIB), Kyushu University   Address: 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan Office phone: +81-(0)92-642-4769 Website: https://ikedalab.bioreg.kyushu-u.ac.jp/ Twitter:@IkedaResearch
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Fumiyo Ikeda
Professor, Division of Inflammation and Proteostasis, Medical Institute of Bioregulation (MIB), Kyushu University   Address: 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan Office phone: +81-(0)92-642-4769 Website: https://ikedalab.bioreg.kyushu-u.ac.jp/ Twitter:@IkedaResearch


