### Accession
PXD004424

### Title
Proteomic and bioinformatic characterization of extracellular vesicles released from human primary macrophages upon influenza A infection

### Description
We have previously shown that IAV infection of human monocyte-derived macrophages causes major alterations to subcellular protein trafficking inside the cell and triggers robust protein secretion (Lietzén et al, 2011). Here, we have used high-throughput proteomics to identify proteins secreted in extracellular vesicles (EVs) during influenza A virus infection of human macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary macrophages were infected with influenza A virus (H3N2/Udorn strain, HA 256) for 9 hrs or left untreated. We analyzed two independent biological replicates with cells from three individual donors each. EVs were isolated from equal supernatant volumes (40-60 mL of medium per condition) by ultracentrifugation, then washed in PBS, and pelleted again. The washed EV pellet was solubilized in Laemmli sample buffer, and the proteins were identified using GeLC-MS/MS. The proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, silver stained and the gel lanes were cut into 5-6 pieces. The proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiotreitol for 30 min in 56 °C, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark, and in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight in 37 °C. The peptides were eluted twice with 0.1 % TFA/50 % ACN, dried and solubilized in 40 μL 0.1 % TFA for mass spectrometry analysis. Each peptide mixture was analyzed by automated nanoflow capillary LC–MS/MS using an EASY nanoLC 1000 (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). As a trap column the Acclaim Pepmap 100 (75 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 3µm, 100Å (Proxeon part #164705)) was used. Reverse-phase separation of peptides was carried out using a 75 μm × 15 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phases were 5 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (A) and 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (B). Peptides were eluted from the column with a linear gradient of 5–35 % solvent B in 90 minutes. Fractions with very high peptide concentration were repeated with a 3h gradient.  Data dependent acquisition was performed in positive ion mode. MS spectra were acquired from m/z 400 to m/z 1800 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 with a target value of 1,000,000 and maximum injection time of 80 ms. The 10 most abundant precursor ions of which charge states were 2+ or higher were selected for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with an isolation window of 2 and normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with a target value of 50,000, maximum injection time of 100 ms, without a lowest fixed mass defined. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS spectra were searched with the Mascot database search engine (version 2.4.0) through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) against the SwissProt database (SwissProt 2015_11, 549,832 sequences, 196,078,138 residues). The data was processed separately for the two biological replicates.  The search criteria specified trypsin as the digestion enzyme, fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q). Precursor masses were defined to be between 350 and 5000 kDa, precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance 20 mmu. Maximum missed cleavage sites were set to 2, and Preferred taxonomy to “human”. The maximum p-value for identification confidence was 0.05.  The false discovery rate (FDR) was determined with a decoy database, Target FDR (Strict):  0.01, Target FDR (Relaxed):  0.05, based on q-values.

### Publication Abstract
Influenza A viruses (IAVs) are aggressive pathogens that cause acute respiratory diseases and annual epidemics in humans. Host defense against IAV infection is initiated by macrophages, which are the principal effector cells of the innate immune system. We have previously shown that IAV infection of human macrophages is associated with robust secretion of proteins via conventional and unconventional protein release pathways. Here we have characterized unconventional, extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated protein secretion in human macrophages during IAV infection using proteomics, bioinformatics, and functional studies. We demonstrate that at 9 h postinfection a robust EV-mediated protein secretion takes place. We identified 2359 human proteins from EVs of IAV-infected macrophages compared with 1448 proteins identified from EVs of control cells. Bioinformatic analysis shows that many proteins involved in translation, like components of spliceosome machinery and the ribosome, are secreted in EVs in response to IAV infection. Our data also shows that EVs derived from IAV-infected macrophages contain fatty acid-binding proteins, antiviral cytokines, copper metabolism Murr-1 domain proteins, and autophagy-related proteins. In addition, our data suggest that secretory autophagy plays a role in activating EV-mediated protein secretion during IAV infection.

### Keywords
Human primary macrophages, Lc-msms, Influenza a, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Sognsvannsveien 20, Rikshospitalet, 0372 Oslo, Norway Formerly Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Anneli Nyman
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Sognsvannsveien 20, Rikshospitalet, 0372 Oslo, Norway Formerly Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Finland


