### Accession
PXD018993

### Title
Comprehensive protein profiling of tomato phloem exudates during drought stress and recovery

### Description
Phloem is the primary conduit through which photosynthates, hormones, and other biologically important molecules are distributed from aerial plant organs downward and throughout the plant. Increasing evidence suggests that phloem contents are diverse and play a critical role in biotic and abiotic stress adaptation. Drought causes the greatest decreases in agricultural crop productivity among all biotic and abiotic stresses, and the link between water deficiency and phloem protein contents is relatively unexplored. Here we employed the EDTA-facilitated phloem exudate collection method from Solanum lycopersicum leaves during a period of drought stress and recovery. Our analysis resulted in the confident identification and quantification of 2,558 proteins. Comparing our data with previous findings confirms that our exudate collection strategy enriched for known phloem proteins. Independent of drought, enrichment analysis of the total phloem exudate protein profiles from all samples suggest that the exchange of proteins into the phloem is more complex than previously thought, including additional protein chaperone systems, branched-chain amino acid synthesis proteins, trehalose metabolism, and RNA silencing proteins. During the experiment we observed 169 proteins whose abundance changed significantly within the phloem sap, the majority of which were impacted specifically in response to drought. Among these were proteins involved in lipid metabolism, chaperone-mediated protein folding, carboxylic acid metabolism, abscisic acid signaling, cytokinin biosynthesis, and amino acid metabolism are significantly upregulated during drought. Conversely, proteins involved in lipid signaling, sphingolipid metabolism, cell wall organization, carbohydrate metabolism, and a mitogen-activated protein kinase are downregulated in response to drought. Many of these observations are consistent with previous literature findings at the whole plant level but have not been localized to the vasculature in tomato, suggesting phloem plays a critical role in adaptation to drought stress in tomato  .

### Sample Protocol
Protein Sample Preparation  Frozen phloem exudate was cryogenically lyophilized and resuspended in 8 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubation at 37°C for 1 hour with shaking at 800 rpm. Alkylation was achieved by the addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM with shaking at room temperature. Prior to digestion, each sample was diluted 8-fold with 1.14 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM NH4CO3, bringing the final CaCl2 concentration to 1 mM. Protein was then quantified via Pierce BCA (Thermo Scientific, Cat# 23225). Trypsin was added to each sample at a 1:50 w:w trypsin to protein ratio followed by incubation at 37°C for 3 hours with shaking at 800 rpm. Each sample was then cleaned with C-18 solid-phase extraction columns (Phenomenex, Cat#8B-S001-DAK), and the resulting peptides were quantified by BCA.  LC-MS/MS  5 ul of 0.1 ug/ul peptides were injected into Waters nanoAcquity liquid chromatography system and separated using a reverse-phase C-18 column (in-house prepared 70-cm x 70 um i.d., 3 um Jupiter C-18) in-line with a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) at 300 nL/minute. Separation occurred over 100 minutes using a linear gradient of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) to 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). Eluent entered the mass spectrometer via electrospray ionization in positive mode.   The raw data files (see below for access) contain the specific operational parameters.

### Data Protocol
For all samples, a peptide search was performed via MaxQuant (V1.6.5.0)19 Andromeda20 using a comprehensive FASTA generated from the Uniprot21 database entries for Solanum lycopersicum. Maxquant search parameters included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation, as well as fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation (max of 5 modifications per peptide) using the re-quantify function. Global parameters also included a ‘match between run’ window of 1.4 minutes, a 1% protein false discovery rate, and protein abundance estimation via iBAQ. The resulting combined protein groups file was then imported into Perseus22, where contaminants were removed from the dataset. To add confidence to our protein identifications, the dataset was further reduced by filtering for proteins that were identified using ≥2 unique peptides. Furthermore, only proteins that were detected in all three biological replicates of at least 1 treatment group (e.g. all replicates from drought T1 or watered T1, etc.) were considered for subsequent analyses. The resulting 2,558 proteins were then log2 transformed, followed by missing value imputation from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.822. Normalization was achieved by a median subtraction for each sample (Figure 2). An ANOVA was performed with a permutation-based FDR of 10% using 250 randomizations. For hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA) and heatmap generation, proteins with an adjusted ANOVA p-value threshold <0.01 were Z-score transformed (z = χ-μ/σ)22 and imported into Multiple Experiment Viewer MeV (v4.9.0).  The HCA was performed using average linkage and Euclidean distance23. Cluster number was determined using MeV Figure of Merit function24. An additional post-hoc t-test with permutation-based 5% FDR correction was performed using drought T1 versus watered T1 samples, and drought T2 versus watered T2 samples. When used, gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed using Panther25 (v.15.0, Annotation version 15.0, Released 14-Feb-2020) GO-Slim biological process terms. Panther settings for enrichment analysis of the entire phloem protein profile (S2), as well as individual clusters (S3-S7) consisted of a Fisher test type and a Bonferroni multiple test correction using the entire tomato genome as a background. Results of Panther enrichment tests can be replicated using column A of each supplemental table.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is the leading cause of agricultural yield loss among all abiotic stresses, and the link between water deficit and phloem protein contents is relatively unexplored. Here we collected phloem exudates from <i>Solanum lycopersicum</i> leaves during periods of drought stress and recovery. Our analysis identified 2558 proteins, the most abundant of which were previously localized to the phloem. Independent of drought, enrichment analysis of the total phloem exudate protein profiles from all samples suggests that the protein content of phloem sap is complex, and includes proteins that function in chaperone systems, branched-chain amino acid synthesis, trehalose metabolism, and RNA silencing. We observed 169 proteins whose abundance changed significantly within the phloem sap, either during drought or recovery. Proteins that became significantly more abundant during drought include members of lipid metabolism, chaperone-mediated protein folding, carboxylic acid metabolism, abscisic acid signaling, cytokinin biosynthesis, and amino acid metabolism. Conversely, proteins involved in lipid signaling, sphingolipid metabolism, cell wall organization, carbohydrate metabolism, and a mitogen-activated protein kinase are decreased during drought. Our experiment has achieved an in-depth profiling of phloem sap protein contents during drought stress and recovery that supports previous findings and provides new evidence that multiple biological processes are involved in drought adaptation.

### Keywords
Phloem exudate, Exudate, Phloem, Abiotic stress, Tomato, Drought

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Labs
Postdoctoral researcher

### Submitter
Aaron Ogden

### Lab Head
Dr Josh Adkins
Pacific Northwest National Labs


