### Accession
PXD019724

### Title
Expanding the cross-link coverage of a dihydrazide-based carboxyl-group specific chemical cross-linking strategy - Dataset 1: Model proteins

### Description
The conditions for chemical protein-protein cross-linking using the reagents pimelic dihydrazide (PDH) and 4-(4,6-Dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium (DMTMM) chloride were optimized using a set of five model proteins and two large complexes, the 20S proteasome and the 70S ribosome. This dataset contains data from the model proteins only.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed with different reagent concentrations and relative ratios (for details, see the accompanying publication). Cross-linked proteins were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, and the digests were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system after fractionation by size exclusion chromatography. Duplicate injections for each SEC fraction were performed for precursors with a charge state of 3 and above. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of the target proteins and shuffled decoy sequences. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The false discovery rate was set to 5% at the level of non-redundant cross-link peptide pairs using xProphet. Results are provided in 16 separate tables corresponding to the 16 different experimental conditions tested. Each table contains data for two replicates and for PDH and DMTMM identifications, respectively (4 tabs per table).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; pdh; dmtmm; model proteins; method optimization

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


