### Accession
PXD014789

### Title
Compare total proteomics profile of PaCa-2 cells using 1D and 2D IDA LC and SWATH analysis

### Description
Progesterone Receptor Membrane Component 1 (PGRMC1) is expressed in many cancer cells, where it is associated with detrimental patient outcomes. Multiple different functions and cellular locations have been attributed to PGRMC1 in a variety of contexts, however the mechanisms underlying PGRMC1 biology remain obscure. The protein contains several phosphorylated residues including tyrosines which were acquired early in animal evolution and could be involved with animal cell differentiation mechanisms. Here we demonstrate that mutagenic manipulation of PGRMC1phosphorylation status in MIA PaCa-2 (MP) pancreatic cells exerts broad pleiotropic effects, influencing cell plasticity and tumorigenicity, as assayed by cell biological and proteomics measurements. Relative to MP cells over-expressing hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged wild-type PGRMC1- HA (WT), cells expressing a PGRMC1-HA-S57A/S181A double mutant (DM) exhibited reduced levels of proteins involved in energy metabolism and mitochondrial function. This was associated with Rho-kinase inhibitor (ROCKI)-sensitive changes including altered cell shape, motility, increased PI3K/Akt and JNK activity, and fragmented mitochondrial morphology. An S57A/Y180F/S181A triple mutant (TM) reduced PI3K/Akt and JNK activation, indicating involvement of Y180. Both TM cells and Y180F single mutant cells exhibited attenuated mouse xenograft tumor growth. Tyrosine 180 phosphorylation status of PGRMC1 exerts dramatic influence over cancer cell biology.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction 100 µL of buffer (1% NaDOC, 50 mM TEAB) was added to each sample pellet and heated at 99 °C for five minutes. Once they were cooled < 40 C, 1 µL of benzonase was added to degrade DNA and left for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged and supernatant transferred. The protein concentration was then determined by Direct Detect.  100 µg of each sample was taken for digestion. Samples were diluted with 50 mM TEAB to a final volume of 100 µL. The samples were then reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM IAA) and then digested with 4 µg trypsin (1:25) for 16 hours at 37 °C.  The digested sample was acidified and centrifuged to remove the sodium deoxycholate. The supernatant was dried and resuspended in 100 µL of loading buffer (2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid).  1D-IDA 0.5 µL each of the sample was taken (total 3 µL, 3 µg) to dilute with 7 µL of loading buffer and subjected to 1D IDA nanoLC MS/MS analysis.  2D-IDA A pool was prepared from 33.3 µL of each sample (~ 200 µg, ~ 200 µL) to perform High pH reverse phase fractionation on a HPLC column. A total of 10 fractions were pooled from collected fractions (21 – 80 minutes), dried and resuspended in 11 µL of loading buffer. 10 µL of each fraction was transferred to vials for 2D IDA analysis.  SWATH: 3 µL of each sample was taken to dilute with 7 µL of loading buffer and transferred to HPLC vials for SWATH analysis. Each sample was injected once.

### Data Protocol
IDA acquisition The LC-MS/MS data of the IDA runs were searched using ProteinPilot (v5.0) (AB Sciex) in thorough mode. The database used for the search is SwissProt (SwissProt_2016_02.fasta) with taxonomy: Human. This database contains 20,198 proteins. The search results (.group files) are converted into individual library (.txt files) using PeakView (v2.1).  SWATH quantitation A merged library was constructed by merging all of the libraries from IDAs.  SWATH data were extracted using PeakView (v2.1) with the following parameters: Top 6 most intense fragments of each peptide were extracted from the SWATH data sets (75 ppm mass tolerance, 10 min retention time window). Shared and modified peptides were excluded. After data processing, peptides (max 100 peptides per protein) with confidence > 99% and FDR < 1% (based on chromatographic feature after fragment extraction) were used for quantitation.  The extracted SWATH protein peak areas were analysed by APAF in-house program. The protein peaks were normalised to the total peak area for each run and subjected to T-Test to compare relative protein peak area between the sample group. Protein T-Test with P-value smaller than 0.05 and fold change larger than 1.5 were highlighted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Swath, Cancer

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW, 2650,Australia
Australian Proteome Analysis Facility

### Submitter
Dana Pascovici

### Lab Head
Dr Michael A. Cahill
School of Biomedical Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, NSW, 2650,Australia


