### Accession
PXD046440

### Title
Global organelle profiling reveals subcellular localization and remodeling at proteome scale

### Description
Defining the subcellular distribution of all human proteins and its remodeling across cellular states remains a central goal in cell biology. Here, we present a high-resolution strategy to map subcellular organization using organelle immuno-capture coupled to mass spectrometry. We apply this proteomics workflow to a cell-wide collection of membranous and membrane-less compartments. A graph-based representation of our data reveals the subcellular localization of over 7,600 proteins, defines spatial protein networks, and uncovers interconnections between cellular compartments. We demonstrate that our approach can be deployed to comprehensively profile proteome remodeling during cellular perturbation. By characterizing the cellular landscape following hCoV-OC43 viral infection, we discover that many proteins are regulated by changes in their spatial distribution rather than by changes in their total abundance. Our results establish that proteome-wide analysis of subcellular remodeling provides essential insights for the elucidation of cellular responses. Our dataset can be explored at organelles.czbiohub.org.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells endogenously labelled with CRISPR (unifected and infected with OC43), native immunoprecipitation on tagged proteins for organelle and subcellular structure enrichment. Bottom-up proteomics by on bead tryptic digestion. Additionally, a centrifugation fraction of the cell line was performed to achieve a nuclear enriched pellet, organelle enriched pellet and cytosolic enriched supernatant (N/O/C). Standard bottom-up proteomics was performed along with a triple peptide fractionation at the desalting step to increase proteomic depth. Peptides were analyzed by reverse phase chromatography LC-MS on an EasyNano1200 coupled with a Thermo Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Raw data searched against both a human and OC43 uniprot database using Maxquant software v2.2.0.0 with default settings applied. Match between runs (MBR) and the maxLFQ algorithm (minimum ratio count = 1) were activated. Separate parameter groups were applied to the IP-MS and NOC sample sets to ensure no MBR and maxLFQ crossover.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Infection, Ip-ms, Oc43

### Affiliations
CZ Biohub
Group Leader, Quantitative Cell Science, Chan Zuckerberg Biohub San Francisco, Ca, USA

### Submitter
Frank McCarthy

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Leonetti
Group Leader, Quantitative Cell Science, Chan Zuckerberg Biohub San Francisco, Ca, USA


