### Accession
PXD008319

### Title
ALKBH7, a mitochondrial member of AlkB family, binds histones in vitro, part 2

### Description
Human genome encodes 9 AlkB family members, one of which is ALKBH7. In this study, we found recombinant ALKBH7 could bind bulk histones in GST pull-down and attenuate the signal of H4K20me2 in demethylation assays. With mass spectrometry, we also identified several potential ALKBH7-interacting proteins, such as NDUFS2, MRPS7 etc.; and found the expression of NDUFA4 and COX6C was down-regulated upon knockdown of ALKBH7. With these results, we can obtain a novel sight into the function of this protein.

### Sample Protocol
The four type of cell lines (including the transient ALKBH7 overexpressed HEK293T cells, stable ALKBH7 knockdown HeLa cells and their corresponding control cells) were separately harvested and treated with fresh lysis buffer (8 M urea in PBS, pH 8-8.5;1 mM PMSF; 1 Mm protease inhibitor cocktail). they were then reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 25 mM iodoacetamide in darkness at room for 0.5 h. Trypsin and Lys-C were then added at a 25:1(w/w) at 37 °C for 16 h according to the instructions. Digested peptides were acidified with 1% formic acid and desalted with a reverse-phase column (Oasis HLB, Waters, MC). The extracts were dried with a vacuum concentrator and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer for following TMT labeling. TMT isobaric label reagents (0.8 mg TMT dissolved in 40 μl 99.9% acetonitrile) were separately used to label two technical sets of the aforementioned four type of cell lines according to the manufacturer’s instructions as following: TMT-126 for shALKBH7 Hela control cell lines, TMT-127 for shALKBH7 Hela cell lines, TMT-128 for ALKBH7OE HEK293T control cell lines, TMT-129 for ALKBH7OE HEK293T cell lines. All the labeled peptides were then separately mixed, desalted, dried and dissolved in 100 μl 0.1% formic acid for subsequent high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
the Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) was also used to analysis TMT-based MS/MS raw data against the human reviewed Swiss-Prot FASTA database (Uniport, released on 20150702). The search criteria set as follows: A maximum number of two missed trypsin/Lys-C cleavages were allowed. Precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in an Orbitrap mass analyzer and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu for all MS/MS spectra acquired. Carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT-6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) were set as fixed modifications, and oxidation (methionine, M) was specified as the variable modification. The FDR of peptide and protein identification were both set to 0.01 (1%).Relative protein quantification was based on the intensities of six reporter ion per peptide. Quantification was carried out only for proteins with two or more unique peptides matched. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of all peptide hits belonging to a protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alkbh7;mitochondrion;histone

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; No. 5 Dongdansantiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; No. 5 Dongdansantiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100005, China.


