### Accession
PXD024836

### Title
Improving sperm cryopreservation with type III antifreeze proteins: effect on proteomic profiles of Cynomolgus macaque sperm

### Description
Antifreeze protein III (AFP III) has been used in the cryopreservation of germ cells in several kinds of animals, but it is not yet known what the specific cryoprotective mechanism of AFP III is, except for reducing the formation of ice crystals during cryopreservation. In order to study the cryoprotective mechanism of AFP III on sperm cryopreservation, the proteomic profile of Cynomolgus macaques sperm were identified after cryopreservation. Compared to fresh sperm, 141 and 32 proteins were differentially identified in Cynomolgus macaques sperm cryopreserved without and with 0.1µg/ml AFP III, respectively. These proteins were mainly involved in mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), glutathione (GSH) synthesis and cell apoptosis. According to the differential proteins, we supposed that AFP Ⅲ mainly reduce sperm lipid, protein and DNA damage, as well as the release of cytochrome c, and thereby reduce sperm apoptosis by modulating the production of ROS in mitochondria. The molecular mechanism that how AFP III acts with sperm proteins and protects cell from cryoinjuries needs further study.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics procedures were performed by PTM Biolabs Inc. (Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China). Briefly, samples from each of the three experimental groups were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor in a lysis buffer. The samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 4% to 6% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 2 min, 6% to 24% over 68 min, 24% to 32% in 14 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by processing the MS/MS data using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Identified and differentially-expressed proteins were screened by DESeq with P<0.05 and P-adjusted<0.1. Through the comparison of the two experimental groups, we obtained three sets of differential protein spectra, including Cryo /Fresh, AFP/Fresh, and AFP/ Cryo. Bioinformatics analysis and statistical analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was performed according to the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, identified protein IDs were converted to UniProt ID and then mapped to GO IDs with protein ID. When some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan software would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on the protein sequence alignment method. Then differential proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) connects known information on molecular interaction networks, such as pathways and complexes (the “Pathway” database), information about genes and proteins generated by genome projects (including the gene database) and information about biochemical compounds and reactions (including compound and reaction databases). KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathway for differential proteins. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Sperm motility, acrosome integrity, and mitochondrial membrane potential were analyzed using ANOVA and the Fisher least-significance difference test (SPSS 16, SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Data are presented as means ± standard deviation. The p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Antifreeze protein III (AFP III) is used for the cryopreservation of germ cells in various animal species. However, the exact mechanism of its cryoprotection is largely unknown at the molecular level. In this study, we investigated the motility, acrosomal integrity, and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), as well as proteomic change, of cynomolgus macaque sperm after cryopreservation. Sperm motility, acrosomal integrity, and MMP were lower after cryopreservation (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001), but significant differences in sperm motility and MMP were observed between the AFP-treated sperm sample (Cryo+AFP) and the non-treated sample (Cryo-AFP) (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01). A total of 141 and 32 differentially expressed proteins were, respectively, identified in cynomolgus macaque sperm cryopreserved without and with 0.1 &#x3bc;g/ml AFP III compared with fresh sperm. These proteins were mainly involved in the mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), glutathione (GSH) synthesis, and cell apoptosis. The addition of AFP III in the sperm freezing medium resulted in significant stabilization of cellular molecular functions and/or biological processes in sperm, as illustrated by the extent of proteomic changes after freezing and thawing. According to the proteomic change of differentially expressed proteins, we hypothesized a novel molecular mechanism for cryoprotection that AFP III may reduce the release of cytochrome c and thereby reduce sperm apoptosis by modulating the production of ROS in mitochondria. The molecular mechanism that AFP III acts with sperm proteins for cellular protection against cryoinjuries needs further study.

### Keywords
Cynomolgus macaques; sperm; cryopreservation; antifreeze protein iii; proteomic profile

### Affiliations
Institute of Biothermal Science and Technology, School of Medical Instruments and Food Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology

### Submitter
Bingbing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Bingbing Chen
Institute of Biothermal Science and Technology, School of Medical Instruments and Food Engineering, University of Shanghai for Science and Technology


