### Accession
PXD029684

### Title
Copy number variation in tRNA isodecoders impairs mammalian development and balanced translation

### Description
The number of tRNA isodecoder genes has increased dramatically in mammals, but the specific molecular and physiological reasons for this expansion remain elusive. To address this fundamental question we used CRISPR editing to knockout the seven-membered phenylalanine tRNA gene family in mice, both individually and combinatorially. Using ATAC-seq, RNA-seq and proteomics we observed distinct molecular consequences of individual tRNA deletions. We show that tRNA-Phe-1-1 is required for neuronal function and its loss is partially compensated by increased expression of other tRNAs but results in mistranslation. In contrast, the other tRNA-Phe isodecoders compensate for the loss of each of the remaining six tRNA-Phe genes. In the tRNA-Phe gene family, the expression of at least four tRNA-Phe isodecoders is required for embryonic development and survival. The loss of tRNA-Phe-1-1 and any other three tRNA-Phe genes causes embryonic lethality indicating that tRNA-Phe-1-1 is most important for development and survival. Our results reveal that the multi-copy configuration of tRNA isodecoder genes is required to buffer translation and viability in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue homogenates were lysed in 10% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 200 µg of protein was dissolved in 50 µl cell lysis buffer (0.13 M Tris HCl, 6 M guanidinium chloride, 0.1 M 2-chloroacetamide, 2mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and digested using the S-trap mini columns as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubation at 70˚C for 60 min. Proteins were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were acidified with 2.5 µl of 12% phosphoric acid and diluted with 150 µl of binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM final Tris). Samples were added to the S-Trap Mini Spin columns (Protifi) by centrifugation at 4,000 g for 30 s then subsequently washed three times by successively loading 150 µl of binding buffer and centrifuging at 4,000 g for 30 s. Digestion was achieved by adding 1 µg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and 125 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight at 37˚C. Peptides were eluted by successively adding 80 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate , 80 µl of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and 80 µl of 50% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid with a 30 s centrifugation step at  4,000 g between the addition of each elution buffer. The eluants were pooled, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 µl of buffer A (5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). Samples were analysed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC and an Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected on a reverse-phase PepMap 100 C18 trap column (5 µm, 100 Å, 150 µm i.d. x 5 mm) at a flowrate of 10 µl/minute. After 2.7 minutes, the trap column was switched in-line with a Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 resolving column (1.7 µm, 130 Å, 300 µm i.d. x 100 mm) and the peptides were eluted at a flowrate of 0.9 µl/min buffer A (5 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid) as the mobile phases. The gradient consisted of: 5-24% B for 0 to 22 min, 24-40% B from 22 to 35 min, 40%-95% B from 35-39 min, followed by a wash, a return of 8 % buffer B and equilibration prior to the next injection. The mass spectra were obtained in DIA mode with an MS1 resolution of 60,000, automatic gain control target at 200 %, maximum injection time at 40 ms and scan range from 350-1200 m/z. DIA spectra were recorded at resolution 15,000 and an automatic gain control target of 800 %. The 70 isolation windows were 10 m/z each from mass 399.9319-1101.2502.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Spectronaut version 14 (14.10.201222.47784) using direct DIA analysis and default settings (Bruderer et al., 2015). Briefly, spectra were searched against the Mus musculus proteome database from UniProt (Protoeme ID UP000000589, downloaded 14/04/2020) with carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable with 1% false discovery rate cut-offs at the peptide spectral match, peptide and protein group levels. Quantitation was performed at the MS2 level with Q-value data filtering and cross run normalization with Q-complete row selection. GO term analysis was performed using annotations sourced from the Mus musculus GO annotation file from the Gene Ontology Consortium (generated 25/02/2021).  A secondary analysis was performed in Spectronaut version 15 (15.0.210615.50606) to search for substituted peptides. In this analysis, a database was constructed to search for specific amino acid substitution events. Settings were identical to the previous run other than the introduction of the more stringent data filters in Spectronaut 15, such as the precursor posterior error probability cut-off filter, left at default settings. Peptide identifications and abundances were exported for further processing in Python 3.8. Briefly, substituted peptides were identified by screening all identified peptides against an in silico digest of the original UniProt mouse protein FASTA file using Protein Digestion Simulator (https://omics.pnl.gov/software/protein-digestion-simulator). Peptide intensities of the substituted and non-substituted peptides were added across all modifications of a single peptide (carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation and N-acetylation) and intensities were averaged across biological replicates and the means compared using the Student’s t test. Substitution candidates were screened to remove peptides with identical masses (phenylalanine to oxidised methionine or phenylalanine to valine plus three oxidised methionine residues).

### Publication Abstract
The number of tRNA isodecoders has increased dramatically in mammals, but the specific molecular and physiological reasons for this expansion remain elusive. To address this fundamental question we used CRISPR editing to knockout the seven-membered phenylalanine tRNA gene family in mice, both individually and combinatorially. Using ATAC-Seq, RNA-seq, ribo-profiling and proteomics we observed distinct molecular consequences of single tRNA deletions. We show that tRNA-Phe-1-1 is required for neuronal function and its loss is partially compensated by increased expression of other tRNAs but results in mistranslation. In contrast, the other tRNA-Phe isodecoder genes buffer the loss of each of the remaining six tRNA-Phe genes. In the tRNA-Phe gene family, the expression of at least six tRNA-Phe alleles is required for embryonic viability and tRNA-Phe-1-1 is most important for development and survival. Our results reveal that the multi-copy configuration of tRNA genes is required to buffer translation and viability in mammals.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Liver

### Affiliations
Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Timothy McCubbin

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Filipovska
Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia


