### Accession
PXD039993

### Title
Charge site manipulation to enhance top-down fragmentation efficiency

### Description
In recent years, top-down mass spectrometry has become a widely used approach to study proteoforms; however, improving sequence coverage remains an important goal. Here, two different proteins, α-synuclein and bovine carbonic anhydrase, were subjected to top-down collision-induced dissociation (CID) after electrospray ionisation. Two high-boiling solvents, DMSO and propylene carbonate, were added to the protein solution in low concentration (2%) and the effects on the top-down fragmentation patterns of the proteins were systematically investigated. Each sample was measured in triplicate, which revealed highly reproducible differences in the top-down CID fragmentation patterns in the presence of a solution additive, even if the same precursor charge state was isolated in the quadrupole of the instrument. Further investigation supports the solution condition-dependent selective formation of different protonation site isomers as the underlying cause of these differences. Higher sequence coverage was often observed in the presence of additives, and the benefits of this approach became even more evident when datasets from different solution conditions were combined, as increases up to 35% in cleavage coverage were obtained. Overall, this approach therefore represents a promising opportunity to increase top-down fragmentation efficiency.

### Sample Protocol
Human α-synuclein (αSN) and bovine carbonic anhydrase 2 (CA) were used for the experiments. A 5 µM solution of αSN was prepared in 20 mM ammonium acetate (AmAc) in water. A 10 µM solution of CA was prepared in 30:70 water:methanol (MeOH) and 1% formic acid (FA). The respective additives, propylene carbonate and DMSO, were added to the protein solution in a concentration of 2% (v/v). These solutions were prepared independently three times for each condition so that triplicate measurements could be performed.  All protein solutions were sprayed via direct infusion with a nanoESI setup and in-house pulled glass needles coupled to a Waters Synapt XS ion mobility – mass spectrometer. The needles were pulled with a Sutter P97 needle puller. For all samples a capillary voltage of 0.8 – 1.5 kV was used. For αSN the sampling cone was set to 10 V, and for CA to 100 V. Source offset values were set to 1 V for all samples. The other settings were kept at their default values.Top-down CID was carried out in the Trap cell. Precursor charge states were selected in the quadrupole and CA32+ was fragmented with 25 V, αSN10+ with 45 V, and αSN14+ with 20 V of collision energy. All experiments were performed in triplicate, and all spectra were acquired for 10 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Fragment ion analysis was done using MASHNative with eTHRASH deconvolution. Fragments were automatically assigned with a filter of <10 ppm mass error and were additionally validated manually. Intensities were extracted from MASH and normalised to the TIC to ensure comparability between different samples. Only fragments which were consistently detected in all three replicates were considered for further evaluation. To look at specific cleavage positions, the average intensities of all fragment types which resulted from a bond cleavage at this specific residue position were summed up.

### Publication Abstract
In recent years, top-down mass spectrometry has become a widely used approach to study proteoforms; however, improving sequence coverage remains an important goal. Here, two different proteins, &#x3b1;-synuclein and bovine carbonic anhydrase, were subjected to top-down collision-induced dissociation (CID) after electrospray ionisation. Two high-boiling solvents, DMSO and propylene carbonate, were added to the protein solution in low concentration (2%) and the effects on the top-down fragmentation patterns of the proteins were systematically investigated. Each sample was measured in triplicate, which revealed highly reproducible differences in the top-down CID fragmentation patterns in the presence of a solution additive, even if the same precursor charge state was isolated in the quadrupole of the instrument. Further investigation supports the solution condition-dependent selective formation of different protonation site isomers as the underlying cause of these differences. Higher sequence coverage was often observed in the presence of additives, and the benefits of this approach became even more evident when datasets from different solution conditions were combined, as increases up to 35% in cleavage coverage were obtained. Overall, this approach therefore represents a promising opportunity to increase top-down fragmentation efficiency.

### Keywords
Charge site manipulation, Top-down, Protomers, Protein

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Technical University of Darmstadt, 64287 Darmstadt

### Submitter
Tanja Habeck

### Lab Head
Dr Frederik Lermyte
Department of Chemistry, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Technical University of Darmstadt, 64287 Darmstadt


