### Accession
PXD011214

### Title
Urinary glycopeptide analysis for the investigation of novel biomarkers

### Description
The aim of this study was to investigate the presence of intact O- and N-glycopeptides in profiles of normal human urine analyzed by capillary electrophoresis coupled to mass spectrometry (CE-MS).CE and liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (CE- and LC-MS/MS) were both  used to identify glycopeptide sequences. Furthermore, we estimated the abundance levels of these glycopeptides in urine from five different cancer types i.e. bladder cancer (BCa), prostate cancer (PCa), pancreatic cancer, cholangiocarcinoma (CC) and renal cell carcinoma (RCC).

### Sample Protocol
Samples for the CE were ionized using a modified Proxeon nano spray source fitted with a non-grounded Agilent ESI sprayer operating in positive ion mode. Ionization voltage was 3.4 kV and the capillary temperature was 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in MS/MS mode scanning from 350 to 1500 amu. The threshold was set to 5000 counts to trigger sequencing. The top five multiply charged ions were selected from each scan for MS/MS analysis using HCD at 40% collision energy. The resolution of ions in MS1 was 60.000 and 7.500 for MS2. Samples for LC were separated on a nano-flow system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex, Camberly, UK). The eluant was ionized using a Proxeon nano spray ESI source operating in a positive ion mode and MS/MS an Orbitrap Velos FTMS (Thermo Finnigan, Bremen, Germany). Ionization voltage was 2.6 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by MS was further processed in Byonic software. Data were searched against the entire human proteome (FASTA file, 20,303 reviewed entries in UniProtKB, released January 2018) and against the mammalian common O-glycome database (6 most common O-glycans-default database in Byonic) and against the common N-glycome database (309 common mammalian N-glycans–default database in Byonic). The following parameters were used for the search: the maximum threshold for MS/MS peptides was set to 500 counts, and a mass tolerance up to 10 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.05 for the fragment ions was allowed. Oxidation of methionine and proline as variable modification was selected and O- linked glycan residues like Hex, HexNAc, NeuAc and N-linked glycan residues Hex, HexNAc, HexNAcHex, HexNAcHexFuc, HexNAcHexFucNeuAc, HexNAcHexNeuGc, HexNAcHexNeuAc, HexNAcHexFucNeuAc were used as variable modifications. The mass range for the search was set between 350 Da and 2000 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Posttranslational modifications, Protein biomarkers, Glycosylation, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH
Clinical Proteomics, Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH

### Submitter
Martin Pejchinovski

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pejchinovski
Clinical Proteomics, Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH


