### Accession
PXD006690

### Title
A Map of Human Mitochondrial Protein Interactions Linked to Neurodegeneration Reveals New Molecular Determinants in Redox Homeostasis and NF-κB Signaling

### Description
Mitochondrial protein (MP) dysfunction has been linked to neurodegenerative disorders (NDs), however, the discovery of molecular mechanisms underlying NDs has been impeded by the limited characterization of interactions governing MP function. Here, using 109 affinity-purified mitochondrial fractions isolated from 13 epitope-tagged human ND-linked MPs in HEK293 cells coupled with mass spectrometry (MS), we report a high-confidence MP network involving 1,964 interactions among 772 proteins (>90% previously unreported). Nearly half of these interactions were confirmed in differentiated neuronal cells by primary antibody immunoprecipitation and MS, with many linked to NDs and autism. We show that the SOD1-PRDX5 interaction, critical for mitochondrial redox homeostasis, can be perturbed by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked variants, and establish a new functional role for ND-linked factors coupled with IκBε in NF-kB activation. Our results identify new mechanisms for MPs with direct consequences for human disease, and expands the interaction landscape of human mitochondria

### Sample Protocol
The fresh (or frozen) mitochondrial cell pellets isolated from the cross-linked HEK293 cells expressing VA-tagged MPs were resuspended with buffer containing 30 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% digitonin, and supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Cell lysates were incubated in this buffer on ice for 30 min, then centrifuged at 23,000 xg for 20 min at 4 °C. The harvested supernatant was incubated with 100 μL of anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma) at 4 °C for 4 h with gentle rotation. Supernatant with beads was transferred to Bio-spin disposable chromatography columns and washed four times with 1 mL ice-cold buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 7.6) and 150 mM NaCl) with 10 min wait in between washes. In the case of Strep-Tactin-FLAG purifications, 100 µL TEV buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.9), 125 mM NaCl, and 0.1% digitonin), 5 µL TEV protease (2 mg/mL), and 2 µL 3×FLAG peptide (5 mg/mL) were added to the FLAG-immunoprecipitates and rotated overnight at 4 °C. The following day, 20 µL Strep-Tactin-Sepharose bead (IBA) slurry was washed three times with 1 mL TEV buffer and added to the TEV eluents. The mixture was incubated for 4 h at 4 °C. The column was washed 4 times with TEV buffer (with 10 min wait in between), followed by elution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and/or 2 mM D-biotin (Sigma). The eluted samples were dried using a Savant Speedvac prior to processing in mass spectrometry (MS) The Speedvac dried samples were diluted with 50 μL digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 and 1 mM CaCl2) and incubated with 0.9 μL of 2 mM TCEP-HCl (Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) at room temperature for 45 min to reduce protein disulfide bonds. To this mixture, 1 μL of 10 mM iodoacetamide alkylating agent was added and incubated in the dark for 40 min, prior to digesting the mixture with trypsin gold (Promega). The trypsinized samples were incubated overnight at room temperature by mixing gently using a rocking shaker. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 μL of acetic acid. The digested samples were processed using the following steps: first, a zip tip was equilibrated by aspirating 10 μL of wetting solution (70% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and dispensing to waste three times, then washed with 100% HPLC grade H2O in 0.1% formic acid by aspirating and dispensing 10 times, and finally washed three times with wetting solution and dispensed. After washing, 10 μL of digested sample was aspirated and dispensed twice and then air-dried and resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on an EASY- nano high-performance liquid chromatography 1000 (Proxeon), where samples are injected onto a nano C18 column (10 cm x 75 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å) employing a water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient for 100 min at a flow rate of 0.30 μl/min. Peptides were separated using 1% acetonitrile and increased gradually to 3% acetonitrile in the first 2 min and then a linear gradient from 3 to 24 % of acetonitrile for 74 min, followed by a gradient from 24 to 100 % acetonitrile for 14 min and a 10 min wash with 100 % acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using positive electrospray ionization at an ion source temperature of 250 °C and an ionspray voltage of 2.1 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap at mass resolution of 60,000 (m/z 400). The automatic gain control settings were 1e6 for full FTMS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap when ion intensity reached >1,500 counts. The 15 most intense ions were isolated for ion trap CID with charge states ≥2 and sequentially isolated for fragmentation using the normalized collision energy set at 35%, activation Q at 0.250 and an activation time of 10 ms. Ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
RAW files from affinity purification or IP combined with MS experiments were converted into mzXML files and high-confidence matches among the resulting MS/MS spectra were mapped against a reference human protein sequences using the SEQUEST database search engine. Matches were evaluated by the STATQUEST probability algorithm (Babu et al., 2012).

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial protein (MP) dysfunction has been linked to neurodegenerative disorders (NDs); however, the discovery of the molecular mechanisms underlying NDs has been impeded by the limited characterization of interactions governing MP function. Here, using mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis of 210 affinity-purified mitochondrial (mt) fractions isolated from 27 epitope-tagged human ND-linked MPs in HEK293 cells, we report a high-confidence MP network including 1,964 interactions among 772&#xa0;proteins (&gt;90% previously unreported). Nearly three-fourths of these interactions were confirmed in mouse brain and multiple human differentiated neuronal cell lines by primary antibody immunoprecipitation and MS, with many linked to NDs and autism. We show that the SOD1-PRDX5 interaction, critical for mt redox homeostasis, can be perturbed by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked SOD1 allelic variants and establish a functional role for ND-linked factors coupled with I&#x3ba;B&#x25b; in NF-&#x3ba;B activation. Our results identify mechanisms for ND-linked MPs and expand the human mt interaction landscape.

### Keywords
Autism, Mitochondria, Parkinson's disease, Nf-kb signaling, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics, Mitochondrial proteins, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Research and Innovation Centre, University of Regina, SK S4S OA2, Canada
University of Toronto;
University of Regina

### Submitter
Sadhna Phanse

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Mohan Babu
Research and Innovation Centre, University of Regina, SK S4S OA2, Canada


