### Accession
PXD036228

### Title
Immunomodulatory effect of extracellular vesicles derived from Entamoeba histolytica trophozoites

### Description
We have isolated and characterized the extracellular vesicles released by Entamoeba histolytica, when alone or in coculture with human neutrophils, and determined their effect on human neutrophil NETs and ROS production.

### Sample Protocol
EVs from Entameoba histolytica trophozoites, human neutrophils and trophozoite:neutrophil cocultures, equivalent to 100 µg of protein each, were run on polyacrylamide gels. The bands were cut under sterile conditions and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Gel pieces were washed and digested. The resulting peptides were extracted using solutions of acetonitrile with formic acid. Dried peptides were dissolved in trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using 2-core MCX stage tips. The stage tips were activated with ACN. Samples were dissolved in water containing ACN and formic acid. Two µL were injected onto a pulled tip nano-LC column with 75 µm inner diameter packed to 25 cm with 3 µm, 120 Å, C18AQ particles (Dr. Maisch). The peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient from 3 – 28% ACN, followed by a 7 min ramp to 85% ACN and a 3 min hold at 85% ACN. The column was connected in line with an Orbitrap Lumos via a nanoelectrospray source operating at 2.2 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent top speed mode with a cycle time of 2.5s. Dynamic exclusion was applied for 15 s. HCD fragmentation was used followed by MS2 scans in the ion trap with 35 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was searched using SequestHT in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific) simultaneously against (Uniprot, containing 8171 entries, retrieved 26/8/2021), human (Uniprot, containing 20443 reviewed entries, retrieved 13/9/2019), and a list of common laboratory contaminant proteins (Thermo scientific, 298 entries, 2015). Enzyme specificity for trypsin was set to semi-tryptic with up to 2 missed cleavages. Precursor and product ion mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss, and methionine loss plus acetylation were set as variable modifications. The output was filtered using the Percolator algorithm with strict FDR set to 0.01. Label-free quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer with normalization set to total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Parasites release extracellular vesicles (EVs) which, in some cases, modulate the host's immune response contributing to the establishment of the infection. In this work we have isolated and characterized the EVs released by trophozoites of the human protozoan parasite <i>Entamoeba histolytica</i>, the causal agent of amoebiasis, when alone or in coculture with human neutrophils, and determined their effect on neutrophil NETs and ROS production. Nanoparticle tracking analysis showed that amoebic EVs are variable in size, ranging from less than 50 nm to nearly 600 nm in diameter (average of 167 nm), whereas neutrophil EVs are more uniform in size, with an average of 136 nm. In cocultures amoeba:neutrophil (1:100) most EVs are 98 nm in size, which is the typical size of exosomes. EVs from amoebae and neutrophils showed almost equal levels of ROS, which were considerably increased in EVs from cocultures. Uptake of amoebic EVs by neutrophils was demonstrated by fluorescence and resulted in a significant reduction in the oxidative burst and NET release triggered by PMA, ionophore A23187, or the amoebae itself used as stimuli. Interestingly, uptake of EVs from cocultures did not affect ROS production, but instead caused a greater delay in the onset of NETs release and in their quantity. A comparative proteomic analysis between the EVs of amoebae and neutrophils separately vs the cocultures showed a similar distribution of protein categories in the GO analysis, but differences in the expression and abundance of proteins such as the N-acetyl-D-galactosamine (GalNAc) inhibitable surface lectin and calreticulin in amoeba EVs, and various antimicrobial molecules in neutrophil EVs, such as lactoferrin and myeloperoxidase. These results highlight the importance of EVs in the immunomodulatory effects exerted by amoeba on human neutrophils.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Entamoeba histolytica, Neutrophil, Immunomodulatory

### Affiliations
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México

### Submitter
Cesar Diaz

### Lab Head
Dr Julio Cesar Carrero
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México


