### Accession
PXD038383

### Title
Spin column-based prefractionation alternatives for Streamlined Tandem Mass Tag (SL-TMT) sample processing

### Description
Fractionation is essential to achieving deep proteome coverage for sample multiplexing experiments where currently up to 18 samples can be analyzed concurrently. However, prefractionation (i.e., upstream of LC-MS/MS analysis) with a liquid chromatography system constrains sample processing as only a single sample can be fractionated at once. Here, we highlight the use of spin column-based methods which permit multiple multiplexed samples to be prefractionated simultaneously. These methods require only a centrifuge and eliminate the need for a dedicated liquid chromatograph. We investigate prefractionation with strong anion exchange (SAX) and high-pH reversed phase (HPRP) spin columns, as well as a combination of both, as methods of prefractionation. In two separate experiments, we acquired deep proteome coverage (>8,000 quantified proteins), while starting with only 25 µg of protein per channel. Our datasets showcase the proteome alterations in two human cell lines resulting from treatment with inhibitors acting on the ubiquitin-proteasome system. We recommend this spin column-based prefractionation strategy for high-throughput screening applications or whenever a liquid chromatograph is not readily available.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion. Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented at 18,000 x g for 5 min. Protein concentrations were determined from the supernatant using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 15 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the free cysteines were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature (in the dark), later quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol for 15 min at room temperature (also in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed on 100 μg of protein prior to protease digestion. Samples which were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5, were digested for 14 hr at room temperature with LysC (100:1 protein-to-protease ratio). Trypsin was added also at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the samples were then incubated at 37 °C for 6 hr. Tandem mass tag labeling. We labeled sufficient peptide for two TMTpro experiments. Specifically, 120 µg of TMTpro reagent (in 10 μL of acetonitrile) was added to 50 µg of peptide along with 15 μL of acetonitrile for a final acetonitrile concentration of ~30% (v/v). After incubating for 1 hr at room temperature, we quenched the reaction with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%. The TMTpro-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples. The pooled sample was desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters).  For the two experiments described below, we divided the eluate in half and each was vacuum centrifuged to dryness. These samples were divided such that all TMT experiments had the equivalent of 25 µg of peptide per channel.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the Human UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2022) which was concatenated with all protein sequences of that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.03 Da product ion tolerance in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as variable. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described previously 20 and then assembled further to a protein-level FDR of 1% across the entire dataset 22. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all PSMs, also as described previously 23. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and normalized such that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.

### Publication Abstract
Fractionation is essential to achieving deep proteome coverage for sample multiplexing experiments where currently up to 18 samples can be analyzed concurrently. However, peptide fractionation (i.e., upstream of LC-MS/MS analysis) with a liquid chromatography system constrains sample processing as only a single sample can be fractionated at once. Here, we highlight the use of spin column-based methods which permit multiple multiplexed samples to be fractionated simultaneously. These methods require only a centrifuge and eliminate the need for a dedicated liquid chromatography system. We investigate peptide fractionation with strong anion exchange (SAX) and high-pH reversed phase (HPRP) spin columns, as well as a combination of both. In two separate experiments, we acquired deep proteome coverage (&gt;8000 quantified proteins), while starting with &lt;25&#xa0;&#x3bc;g of protein per channel. Our datasets showcase the proteome alterations in two human cell lines resulting from treatment with inhibitors acting on the ubiquitin-proteasome system. We recommend this spin column-based peptide fractionation strategy for high-throughput screening applications or whenever a liquid chromatograph is not readily available. SIGNIFICANCE: Fractionation is a means to achieve deep proteome coverage for global proteomics analysis. Typical liquid chromatography systems may be a prohibitive expense for many laboratories. Here, we investigate prefractionation with strong anion exchange (SAX) and high-pH reversed phase (HPRP) spin columns, as well as a combination of both, as peptide fractionation methods. These spin columns have advantages over liquid chromatography systems, which include relative affordability, higher throughput capability, no carry over, and fewer potential instrument-related malfunctions. In two separate experiments, we acquired deep proteome coverage (&gt;8000 quantified proteins), thereby showing the utility of each or a combination of both spin columns for global proteome analysis.

### Keywords
Hprp, Sax, Faims, Isobaric tagging, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA


