### Accession
PXD017868

### Title
Systematic discovery of Short Linear Motifs decodes calcineurin phosphatase signaling

### Description
Short linear motifs (SLiMs) form dynamic protein-protein interactions essential for signaling; however, sequence degeneracy and low binding affinities make them difficult to identify. In this study, we employed multiple, unbiased systematic approaches for SLiM discovery to elucidate the regulatory network of calcineurin (CN), the Ca2+-regulated phosphatase that recognizes LxVP and PxIxIT motifs. In vitro proteome-wide detection of CN-binding peptides, in situ SLiM-dependent proximity labeling, as well as in silico modeling of motif determinants uncovered unanticipated CN interactors, including centrosomal and nuclear pore complex (NPC) proteins – structures where Ca2+ signaling is largely uncharacterized. Here, we show that CN binds to and dephosphorylates NPC proteins (nucleoporins) in vitro and promotes the accumulation of a nuclear transport reporter in HeLa cells. Furthermore, IP/MS analyses on HeLa cells treated with DMSO or the CN inhibitor, Cyclosporin A (CsA), reveal multiple CN-dependent phosphosites on key transport nucleoporins in vivo. Together, these data suggest that CN positively regulates nuclear transport by dephosphorylating key transport nucleoporins. In summary, the CN network assembled here provides a resource to investigate Ca2+ and CN signaling and the demonstrated synergy between experimental and computational methods establishes a blueprint for examining SLiM-based networks.

### Sample Protocol
Cell treatment and collection. For each biological replicate (total of 3), ~3.6 x 107 HeLa cells were treated with 2 μM Cyclosporin A (CsA; Sigma-Aldrich) or an equivalent volume of DMSO (vehicle control) for 1 hour. After drug treatment, cells were collected on ice with scraping, rinsed in ice-cold PBS, and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Cell lysis and Immunoprecipitation. Cell pellets were lysed in RIPA-2 buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, and 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0) supplemented with a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (HaltTM, ThermoFisher) and subjected to fine needle aspiration with a sterile 27.5 gauge needle. Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation (13,000 RPM for 20 minutes) and subjected to BCA analysis to measure protein concentration. For each sample, 4 mg of clarified lysate was incubated with antibody-coated protein G beads (3 mg protein G DynabeadsTM [ThermoFisher] + 24 μg mAb414 antibody [BioLegend]) in IP buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40) supplemented with a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. IP reactions were carried out for 3 hours at 4०C with end-over-end rotation, followed by 3 x 1 mL rinses with supplemented IP buffer. Bound proteins were eluted from the beads by boiling in 2X sample buffer (4X LDS stock; Invitrogen) and separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen).   Peptide generation and analysis For each lane, an ~1.5 cm area between the 50 kDa IgG band and loading well was excised and cut into 2 segments for in-gel Tryptic digestion. Peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Easy LC1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system connected to a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using analytical column ES803A (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nl/min and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) over 100 minutes and from 28 to 44 % solvent B over 20 minutes, followed by short wash at 90 % solvent B. Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1,600 and top 15 most intense multiply charged precursors were selection for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry peak lists were extracted using an in-house script PAVA. Protein Identification and post-translational modification search were done using Protein Prospector (version 5.20.0) (Chalkley et al., 2008, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M800021-MCP200) against the random concatenated SwissProt database Homo Sapiens (total 20203 entries). A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 20 ppm were allowed. Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a fixed modification. Variable modifications include protein N-terminal acetylation, peptide N-terminal Gln conversion to pyroglutamate, and Met oxidation. Subsequent searches were performed to find those peptides modified by phosphorylation. The search parameters were as above, but this time allowing for phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr. Assignments of all modified peptides were checked manually and selected spectra are illustrated in supplemental figure online.   Phosphorylation was quantified by using Skyline. Briefly, non-modified and modified peptide MS1 spectra were extracted by Skyline using centroid data with 5 ppm allowance. The peaks were manually curated based on  retention time and total area of extracted ions (M, M+1, M+2) of respective peptides were exported to excel file. The calculation was similar as described in Ni et al (Ni et al., 2008, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.113.112342).  A value termed the phospho-ratio was defined as a relative level of phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptide containing the site. The final ratio is calculated by dividing Phos-Ratio from CsA treated sampled to the one from DMSO control. If CsA has no effect, we would expect to see a final ratio of 1.   In some cases, because the phosphorylation may affect the tryptic cleavage of the peptides, the corresponding non-phosphorylated peptides were not detected. Then the normalization was done by using the total peptide intensities from that protein calculated by Maxquant (version 1.6.2.6). Briefly, settings were default settings. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications and Carbamidomethylcysteine as fixed modification. Maximum number of modifications per peptide was five. Trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages was set as digest. Peptides were searched against the the same database as mentioned as above plus a list of likely contaminants containing Trypsin, human Keratin and against the contaminants list of MaxQuant. Minimum allowed peptide length was seven. FTMS and TOF MS/MS tolerance were 20 ppm and 40 ppm, respectively, and the peptide FDR and protein FDR were 0.01. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification. LFQ minimum ratio count was set to one and fast LFQ was active with a minimum and average number of neighbors of three and six, respectively. Match between runs and second peptides were checked.

### Publication Abstract
Short linear motifs (SLiMs) drive dynamic protein-protein interactions essential for signaling, but sequence degeneracy and low binding affinities make them difficult to identify. We harnessed unbiased systematic approaches for SLiM discovery to elucidate the regulatory network of calcineurin (CN)/PP2B, the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-activated phosphatase that recognizes LxVP and PxIxIT motifs. In&#xa0;vitro proteome-wide detection of CN-binding peptides, in&#xa0;vivo SLiM-dependent proximity labeling, and in silico modeling of motif determinants uncovered unanticipated CN interactors, including NOTCH1, which we establish as a CN substrate. Unexpectedly, CN shows SLiM-dependent proximity to centrosomal and nuclear pore complex (NPC) proteins-structures where Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling is largely uncharacterized. CN dephosphorylates human and yeast NPC proteins and promotes accumulation of a nuclear transport reporter, suggesting conserved NPC regulation by CN. The CN network assembled here provides a resource to investigate Ca<sup>2+</sup> and CN signaling and demonstrates synergy between experimental and computational methods, establishing a blueprint for examining SLiM-based networks.

### Keywords
Signaling, Intrinsically disordered proteins (idps), Calcium, Short linear motifs (slims), Nuclear pore complex (npc), Phosphatase

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility at Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr shouling xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility at Stanford


