### Accession
PXD016356

### Title
MuSC proteomic changes during aging

### Description
The proteoomic changes of skeletal muscle stem cells was analyzed during aging.

### Sample Protocol
MuSCs were directly FAC sorted into 2x lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES pH8, 20 mM dithiotreitol, 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate. For lysis the samples were sonicated 10x 1 min using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) on high intensity at 20 °C, boiled for 10 min at 95 °C using a block heater (SBH130D/3, Stuart) and sonicated again 10x 1 min as before. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol (6908.3, Roth) for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (I1149, Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently proteins were precipitated with acetone to remove solvents. The precipitated protein pellets were resuspended in 30 μl digestion buffer by sonication for 3x 1 min using a Bioruptor Plus. LysC  was added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with shaking at 650 rpm . Samples were then diluted 1:1 with water and trypsin added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ration. The samples were digested for 16 h at 37 °C with at 650 rpm shaking (650 rpm). The digested samples were acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and then desalted. MuSC samples were reconstituted in 8.5 μl reconstitution buffer, 0.5 μl of the HRM kit was added in a dilution recommended by the manufacturer and 8 μl were injected. For spectral library generation, approx. 1μg of reconstituted peptides was analyzed using Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5μm, 180μm x 20mm, 186006527, Waters) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, 186007484, Waters). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A. Peptides were eluted via a non-linear gradient from 0 % to 40 % solution B in 120min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (FS360-20-10-D-20, New Objective). Total runtime was 145min, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The RF lens was set to 30%. For spectral library generation, individual MuSC samples were measured in DDA mode. The conditions for DDA data acquisition were as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000. The filling time was set at maximum of 50ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30 %) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the Orbitrap (resolution 15,000, fixed first mass 120 m/z), with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed but with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors meeting the criteria were found. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 105 ions or after filling time of 22 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 15 seconds and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. For data acquisition and processing Tune version 2.1 was employed. For the DIA data acquisition, 1 μg of reconstituted peptides were loaded and the same gradient conditions were applied to the LC as for the DDA. The MS conditions were varied as follows: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20ms with limitation of 5 x 105 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range with a cycle time of 3 seconds. HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM over the mass range 200-2000 m/z after accumulation of 2 x 105 ions or after filling time of 70 ms (whichever occurred first). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur v4.0, Tune v2.1 and Spectronaut v10.0 (Thermo Fisher) were used with the default settings.

### Data Protocol
Both types of data (DIA and DDA) were included in the library generation (DpD). The data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database (Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01, 16,747 entries) using the Pulsar search engine (Biognosys AG) inside Spectronaut 10.  For each sample group,at least 3 independent biological replicates were analyzed. Data were processed using Spectronaut 10 (Biognosys AG)(Bruderer et al., 2017). Precursor matching, protein inference and quantification were performed in Spectronaut using default settings except that median intensities were used instead of Top3 to calculate protein quantities. Peptide and protein level FDR for DIA data were controlled to 1% (Rosenberger et al., 2017). Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level using the unpaired data strategy, followed by multiple testing correction.(Storey, 2002).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Muscle stem cell, Aging, Satellite cell, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging - FLI
Leibniz Institute on Aging

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - FLI


