### Accession
PXD016670

### Title
The Whi2p-Psr1p/Psr2p complex regulates interference competition and expansion of cells with competitive advantage in multicellular yeast colonies - Proteomics of P1, P1-whi2 and P1-psr1psr2 colonies.

### Description
The associated files are mass spec raw data from Orbitrap Fusion.  Proteins originated from colonies of Saccharomyces cerevisiae P1, P1-whi2 and P1-psr1psr2 strains.

### Sample Protocol
Biomass of S. cerevisiae P1, P1-whi2 and P1-psr1psr2 colonies grown 4 days on GMA (1% yeast extract, 3% glycerol, 1% ethanol, 2% agar, and 10 mM CaCl2) was harvested. The cells were disrupted 5 min at 95°C in 150 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 10mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM chloroacetamide ‎ buffer using glass beads. Protein aliquots (30 g; determined by bicinchoninic acid assay, Sigma) were solubilized using sodium deoxycholate (1% (w/v) final conc.), digested sequentially with trypsin and extracted with ethyl acetate. Peptide (2 g) from each sample was separated on a 50-cm C18 column using a 2 h elution gradient and analyzed in DDA mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Three biological replicates were run for each strain and condition.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were processed in MaxQuant (v. 1.6.10.43). Searches were performed against the latest version of S. cerevisiae Uniprot database and common contaminant database

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Charles University
Faculty of ScienceCharles University, BIOCEVVestecCzech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Zdena Palkova
Faculty of ScienceCharles University, BIOCEVVestecCzech Republic


