### Accession
PXD010883

### Title
Proteomic characteristics of vessels in patients with chronic kidney disease

### Description
In this study, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (ITRAQ) and Q Exactive mass spectrometer were used for non-targeted proteomic profiling of forearm arteries and veins in patients with chronic kidney disease stage 5 (with or without diabetes mellitus, obtained from arteriovenous fistula surgery) and healthy controls (obtained from patients with forearm trauma). Protein identifications were acquired against the Uniport Human database. As a result, 497609 spectra were obtained and 3244 proteins were identified with 96525 matched peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Diabetic radial arteries, diabetic cephalic veins, non-diabetic radial arteries, non-diabetic cephalic veins, veins of healthy control and internal standard were labelled with Tag-113, -114, -115, -116, -117 and -118 respectively. Every three samples were mixed (CKD group 1-3, 4-6, 7-9 and Control group 1-3, 4-6, 7-9) and homogenized (24×2, 6.0M/S, 60s, twice) with ceramic bead in SDT lysis buffer (4% w/v SDS, 100mM Tris‐HCl, 1mM DTT, pH7.6). The homogenate was sonicated on ice (80W, 10s running/15s pause, 10 circulations) and then incubated in boiling water for 15 min. The crude extract was then centrifuged at 14,000g at 25℃ for 40 min. The supernatant was filtered by 0.22um filter membrane and the protein concentration was then determined with the BCA protein assay. iTRAQ-labeled peptides were mixed in three groups and fractioned by Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography (AKTA Purifier 100 system, GE Healthcare). The chromatographic column (Polysulfoethyl 4.6×100 mm column, 5 μm, 200Å, PolyLC Inc, Maryland, U.S.A.) was equilibrated by SCX Buffer A (10mM KH2PO4 pH 3.0, 25% ACN). The dry peptide was resolved with 2mL SCX Buffer A and loaded onto the column. The peptide was eluted at 1mL/min using SCX Buffer B (10mM KH2PO4 pH 3.0, 500mM KCl, 25% CAN). The liquid phase gradient of SCX Buffer B was: 0%-8% for 22 min; 8%-52% for 25 min; 52%-100% for 3 min; 100% for 8 min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every minute (30 fractions collected in all) and finally combined into 10 pools. Each pool was freeze-dried and desalted on C18 Cartridges [Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma]. Each fraction was centrifugated in vacuum and resolved in 40μl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. All samples were stored at - 80°C until LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS were performed on Easy nLC chromatographic system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic column was equilibrated by 95% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid). 10μl of each fraction was injected for LC-MS/MS. 5μg of peptides was loaded to column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18) using automatic-sampler and separated by phase column (Thermo scientific EASY column, 10cm, ID75μ m, 3μm, C18-A2) with a liner gradient (0min – 110min 0%-55%; 110min – 115min 55%-100%; 115min – 120min 100%) of Buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 84% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 2 hours. Mass spectrometer (MS) was then performed by Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) over 120 min. Precursor ions were scanned by full scan MS (Resolution: 70,000 at 200 m/z; Range: 300-1800 m/z; Automatic Gain Control target: 3e6; Maximum IT: 10ms; Number of scan ranges: 1; Dynamic exclusion: 40.0s). Every 10 fractions were collected after each full scan MS by tandem mass spectrometry [Activation Type: higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD); Resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z; Isolation window: 2 m/z; Microscans: 1; Maximum IT: 60ms; Normalized Collision Energy: 30eV, Underfill: 0.1%].

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and uploaded to Mascot 2.2(Matrix Science). Protein identifications were acquired against the Uniport Human database (156,053 sequences, downloaded on November 4, 2016). The selected differently expressed proteins were defined as: fold change >1.2 and P-value (t test) <0.05. Sequences of the selected proteins were performed with gene ontology (GO) analysis. Briefly, NCBI BLAST+ (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) was applied to find a corresponding match between sequences and SwissProt database. The top 10 blast sequences with an E-value <=1e-3 were loaded into Blast2GO (Version 2.7.0) for mapping and annotation within database (go_201504.obo). The proteins were also annotated when the conserved motif of protein was matched against European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) database using InterProScan.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Vessels, Proteomics, Chronic kidney disease, Itraq

### Affiliations
Shanghai tenth people's hospital of Tongji university, school of medicine
Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China

### Submitter
Chunyu Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Chunyu Zhou
Department of Nephrology and Rheumatology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China


