### Accession
PXD019279

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of the Substantia Nigra to Identify Determinants of Lewy Body Pathology and Dopaminergic Neuronal Loss

### Description
Proteinaceous aggregates containing alpha-synuclein protein called Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra is a hallmark of Parkinson's disease. The molecular mechanisms of Lewy body formation and associated neuronal loss remain largely unknown. To gain insights on proteins and pathways associated with Lewy body pathology, we performed quantitative profiling of the proteome. We analyzed substantia nigra tissue from 51 subjects arranged into three groups: cases with Lewy body pathology, Lewy body-negative controls with matching neuronal loss and controls with no neuronal loss. Using label-free LC-MS/MS approach we quantified the 2,963 most abundant proteins. Statistical testing for differential protein abundance, followed by pathway enrichment and Bayesian learning of the causal network structure were performed to identify likely drivers of Lewy body formation and dopaminergic neuronal loss. The identified pathways include (1) Arp2/3 complex-mediated actin nucleation; (2) synaptic function; (3) poly(A) RNA binding; (4) basement membrane and endothelium; and (5) hydrogen peroxide metabolic process. According to the data, the endothelial/basement membrane pathway is tightly connected with both pathologies and likely to be one of the drivers of the neuronal loss. The poly(A) RNA-binding proteins, including the ones relevant to other neurodegenerative disorders (e.g. TDP-43 and FUS) have strong inverse correlation with Lewy bodies and may reflect alternative mechanism of nigral neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
The extraction and digestion of the proteins was performed using a conventional protocol based on denaturation of protein in 8 M urea followed by digestion with trypsin [23]. Briefly, approximately 8 mg (5 - 10 mg range) of human SN tissue punch biopsy was resuspended in 100 uL of denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT, and 1 mM EDTA) and homogenized with a motorized pestle. The amount of protein material according to the coomassie assay was 463 ug on average (133 - 762 ug range). Aliquots with equal amounts of 133 ug protein material were supplemented with denaturation buffer to obtain equal volume of 100 uL. Further steps, up to solid phase extraction, were performed in 96 well plate format using Epmotion 5075 TMX (Eppendorf) liquid handling robot. The samples were incubated for 30 min at 37 째C with gentle shaking (600 rpm) to allow for protein denaturation and reduction. Cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 10 uL of iodoacetamide 400 mM stock solution to 36 mM concentration and incubating for 1 h at 37 째C, with shaking, in the dark. Prior to the next step, the samples were stored at -80 째C overnight. After thawing the samples were diluted by adding 690 uL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 at pH 7.8 and supplemented with 8 uL of CaCl2 100 mM stock solution.  Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Cat No V5111) was added in a 1:50 ratio (w/w trypsin/protein) after pre-activation and incubated for 6 h at 37 째C with shaking. The sample digests were purified with solid phase extraction using C18 columns (Discovery DSC-18, SUPELCO, 52601-U) followed by drying down to ~50 uL in SpeedVac (ThermoFisher). The average recovered peptide amount according to the BCA assay was 73 ug (41 - 91 ug range). Aliquots of the tryptic peptides were diluted down to 0.2 ug/ul prior to the LC-MS/MS analysis. The 7 ug aliquots were analyzed using LC-MS/MS platform.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant settings are in mqpar.xml. Details of downstream processing can be found at https://github.com/vladpetyuk/LewyBodies.SN.Proteomics.BottomUp.Pub

### Publication Abstract
Proteinaceous aggregates containing &#x3b1;-synuclein protein called Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra is a hallmark of Parkinson's disease. The molecular mechanisms of Lewy body formation and associated neuronal loss remain largely unknown. To gain insights into proteins and pathways associated with Lewy body pathology, we performed quantitative profiling of the proteome. We analyzed substantia nigra tissue from 51 subjects arranged into three groups: cases with Lewy body pathology, Lewy body-negative controls with matching neuronal loss, and controls with no neuronal loss. Using a label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach, we characterized the proteome both in terms of protein abundances and peptide modifications. Statistical testing for differential abundance of the most abundant 2963 proteins, followed by pathway enrichment and Bayesian learning of the causal network structure, was performed to identify likely drivers of Lewy body formation and dopaminergic neuronal loss. The identified pathways include (1) Arp2/3 complex-mediated actin nucleation; (2) synaptic function; (3) poly(A) RNA binding; (4) basement membrane and endothelium; and (5) hydrogen peroxide metabolic process. According to the data, the endothelial/basement membrane pathway is tightly connected with both pathologies and likely to be one of the drivers of neuronal loss. The poly(A) RNA-binding proteins, including the ones relevant to other neurodegenerative disorders (e.g., TDP-43 and FUS), have a strong inverse correlation with Lewy bodies and may reflect an alternative mechanism of nigral neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Brain, Substantia nigra, Lc-ms/ms, Lewy bodies

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Vladislav A Petyuk
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


