### Accession
PXD027757

### Title
Mitochondrial interactome quantitation reveals structural changes in metabolic machinery in failing murine heart

### Description
Advancements of cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) for structural analysis of proteins bridges the gap between purified systems and native tissue environments. Here, we utilize isobaric quantitative protein interaction reporter technology (iqPIR) to further extend XL-MS to the first system-wide comparative study of mitochondrial proteins from healthy and diseased murine hearts.  The failing heart interactome includes 544 statistically significant cross-linked peptide pairs altered in disease condition. Structural insight into ketone oxidation metabolons, OXPHOS machinery, and nucleotide transporter hybrid-conformations, support mitochondrial remodeling in failing heart while bringing forth new hypotheses for pathological mechanisms. Application of quantitative cross-linking technology in live tissue provides molecular-level insight to complex biological systems difficult to model in cell culture, thus providing a valuable resource for study of human diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation. The chest cavity was opened, and the heart was rapidly excised and placed into ice-cold, mitochondria isolation medium (MIM: 70mM sucrose, 220mM mannitol, 5mM MOPS, 1.6mM carnitine hydrochloride, 1mM EDTA, 0.025% fatty acid-free BSA, pH 7.4 with 5M KOH) to flesh out blood. The aorta and atria were removed. The myocardium was weighed (heart weight). The heart was transferred to a pre-chilled 60mm dry petri dish and maintained on ice. Heart tissue was finely minced with a razor blade to a homogenous tissue size distribution of approximately 1mm2 cubes. Heart tissue was centrifuged at 1500 x g for 5 min at 4C, and MIM was replaced with cross-linking buffer (170 mM Na2HPO4, pH 8).The cross-linker, normalized to heart weight, was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. The samples were mixed for 30 min at room temperature on a Thermomixer at 800 rpm. The tissue was centrifuged at 1500 x g for 5 min at 4C and the supernatant was removed.  Cross-linked heart tissue was washed in fresh MIM and centrifuged at 1500 x g for 5 min at 4C. Subsequent steps are the same as regular mitochondrial isolation protocol below. However, resulting fractions and supernatants were collected after each step.  Frozen fractions were transferred to a stainless steel cryogrinding jar cooled to -196C with liquid nitrogen in 0.1M NH4HCO3. The samples were cryoground for five 3 min cycles at 30 Hz using a Retch MM 400 mixer mill. Between cycles, the cryogrinder was cooled with liquid nitrogen between cycles. The resulting frozen powder was transferred to a falcon tube where 8M urea (in 0.1M Tris, pH 8.0) was added. Samples were sonicated using a GE-130 ultasonic processor, followed by reduction of cysteine residues by incubation with 5mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, Fisher Scientific) for 30 min followed by alkylation with 45 min incubation with 10mM iodoacetamide (Fisher Scientific). Urea concentration was reduced to less than 1M by diluting the samples by a factor of 10 with fresh 0.1M Tris Buffer (pH 8.0). The protein concentration was measured using the Pierce Coomassie protein assay (Thermo Scientific).  Extracted protein were digested with trypsin (200:1 in weight ratio) overnight at 37oC and then quenched with acidification of digest to pH ~3 by adding TFA.  The digest was then desalted using Sep-Pak cartridges and fractionated on SCX using a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min and 97.5-min gradient with an increasing percentage of SCX solvent B (solvent A: 7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.6, 30% (vol/vol) acetonitrile and solvent B: 7 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.6, 350 mM KCl, 30% (vol/vol) acetonitrile).  The SCX fractions were adjusted to pH 8.0 and then subjected to biotin capture by adding monomeric avidin UltraLink resin (Thermo Scientific) to each pooled fraction.  After 3 times of washing the avidin beads with 0.1 M NH4HCO3, pH 8.0, the crosslinked peptides were eluted with 70% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 1% (vol/vol) formic acid (FA) and then dried in a speed vacuum.  The dried samples were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and ready for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Cross-linked peptide samples were analyzed in technical duplicate by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using an Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).   Each analysis used a 3 μL injection of sample onto a 3 cm x 100 μm inner diameter fused silica trap column packed with a stationary phase consisting of 5 μm Reprosil C8 particles with 120 Å pores (Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a flow rate of 2 μL/ min of mobile phase consisting of solvent A (H2O containing 0.1% formic acid) for 10 minutes.  Peptides were then fractionat-ed over a 60 cm x 75 μm inner diameter fused silica analytical column packed with 5 μm Reprosil C8 particles with 120 Å pores by applying a linear gradient from 95% solvent A, 5% solvent B (acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) to 60% solvent A, 40% solvent B over either 120 or 240 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  Eluting peptide ions were ionized by electrospray ionization by applying a positive 2.2 kV potential to a laser pulled spray tip at the end of the analytical column.  The mass spectrometer was operated using a top five data dependent acquisition method with a resolving power setting of 70,000 for MS1 and MS2 scans.  Additional settings include an AGC target value of 1e6 with a maximum ion time of 100 ms for the MS1 scans and an AGC value of 5e4 with a maximum ion time of 300 ms for the MS2 scans.  Charge state exclusion parameters were set to only allow ions with charge states from 4+ to 7+ to be selected for MS2.  Ions selected for MS2 were isolated with a 3 m/z window and fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy setting of 30.  Ions for which MS2 was performed were then dynamically excluded from further selection for MS2 for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS results were analyzed for identification and quantitation of iqPIR crosslinked peptide pairs as previously described8. Briefly, LC-MS/MS data raw files were converted to .mzXML format using the ReADW tool in the Trans Proteomic Pipeline software suite9. Mango10 was used to search for PIR mass relationships and Comet11 was used to search the mzXML files against the mouse Mitocarta 2 database12 consisted of both forward and reverse protein sequences (2,084 total sequences).  The resulting pepXML files were then analyzed with XLinkProphet13. For dead-end peptides, PeptideProphet14 was applied to filter Comet search results at < 1% FDR.  All cross-links passing the threshold were used for quantitation. Light (SH) and heavy (RH) isotope peptide precursors and their fragment peaks containing the stump group were deconvoluted and their peak intensities were extracted to calculate Log2 ratios.  The final ratio for each crosslinked peptide pair is the normalized mean value from all contributing ion ratios to the same cross-link from different charge states, different scans, and separate replicate runs with outliers removed, where normalization is achieved by subtracting from each cross-link Log2 ratio the median value of all cross-link Log2 ratios.   Finally, the cross-link Log2 ratio p-value reflecting its likelihood of being 0 is calculated based on a statistical t-test using the Log2 ratio mean value, standard deviation, and number of contributing quantified ions.  Protein quantitation was estimated by combining together normalized Log2 ratios of all intra-protein cross-links and dead-end peptides corresponding to the protein.  The mean Log2 ratio of all contributing ratios (cross-link and dead-end) was used after excluding outliers, with the added requirement of 3 or more contributing ratios and a maximum 95% confidence of 0.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative cross-linking; heart failure; cardiac hypertrophy; mitochondria; protein interactions; interactome; mass spectrometry; systems structural biologyquantitative cross-linking; heart failure; cardiac hypertrophy; mitochondria; protein interactions; interactome; mass spectrometry; systems structural biology

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Xiaoting Tang

### Lab Head
Dr James Edward Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington


