### Accession
PXD016421

### Title
Integrated proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis reveal novel targets and suggest rationale for ibrutinib efficacy in UM-CLL

### Description
n order to decipher the underlying mechanisms we aimed to analyze and compare the global phosphoproteome of UM-CLL and M-CLL cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0,5% DOC, 0,1% SDS; pH 8, supplemented cOmplete Mini protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (both Sigma Aldrich). DNA and RNA were degraded using Benzonase (Sigma Aldrich; 35 unites per 100 µg of protein, 37°C for 30 minutes). Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA assay kit (Thermo Scientific). Cys residues were reduced by addition of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubation at 56°C for 30 minutes, followed by alkylation using 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 25 min in the dark.  Per sample, 150 µg of protein were digested using a modified filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol, where samples were loaded thrice with loading and wash buffer I (50 mM TEAB, pH 8), followed by 2x wash buffer II (20% ACN), before washing with digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB, 0.1 M urea (freshly prepared), 1 mM CaCl2, pH 8). Samples were digested with Sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega) in an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:20 (w:w) at 37°C overnight. After elution of generated peptides with 1x 50 mM TEAB and 1x H2O, samples were acidified to 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 30 µL 50 mM TEAB. Digests were controlled using a monolithic HPLC setup, as previously described.

### Data Protocol
QEplus and QE-HF. Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Mascot, Percolator, phosphoRS.

### Publication Abstract
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors are highly active drugs for the treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). To understand the response to BTK inhibitors on a molecular level, we performed (phospho)proteomic analyses under ibrutinib treatment. We identified 3466 proteins and 9184 phosphopeptides (representing 2854 proteins) in CLL cells exhibiting a physiological ratio of phosphorylated serines (pS), threonines (pT), and tyrosines (pY) (pS:pT:pY). Expression of 83 proteins differed between unmutated immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable region (IGHV) CLL (UM-CLL) and mutated IGHV CLL (M-CLL). Strikingly, UM-CLL cells showed higher basal phosphorylation levels than M-CLL samples. Effects of ibrutinib on protein phosphorylation levels were stronger in UM-CLL, especially on phosphorylated tyrosines. The differentially regulated phosphopeptides and proteins clustered in pathways regulating cell migration, motility, cytoskeleton composition, and survival. One protein, myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate (MARCKS), showed striking differences in expression and phosphorylation level in UM-CLL vs M-CLL. MARCKS sequesters phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate, thereby affecting central signaling pathways and clustering of the B-cell receptor (BCR). Genetically induced loss of MARCKS significantly increased AKT signaling and migratory capacity. CD40L stimulation increased expression of MARCKS. BCR stimulation induced phosphorylation of MARCKS, which was reduced by BTK inhibitors. In line with our in&#xa0;vitro findings, low MARCKS expression is associated with significantly higher treatment-induced leukocytosis and more pronounced decrease of nodal disease in patients with CLL treated with acalabrutinib.

### Keywords
Cll, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre

### Submitter
René Zahedi

### Lab Head
Dr Rene Zahedi
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.


