### Accession
PXD003656

### Title
Mouse retinal tissue study in VEGF-induced hyperpermeability.

### Description
The goal of the project is to identify novel therapeutic targets for retinal vascular hyperpermeability. Three condition (Control, VEGF, and Anti-VEGF) sample of mouse retinal tissues were extensively characterized by global proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
Analytical Sample Protocol - Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Fractionation: mid-pH RPLC with non-contiguous pooling, Fractions: 24 (global proteome, Proteolysis: Trypsin, Starting amount: 800 g, Labeling: 4-plex iTRAQ, Protocol – Column length: 100 cm, Column inner diameter: 75 m, Particle size: 3 m;  Gradient length: 180 min, Injected: 10 g per fraction (global proteome), Mass Spectrometry Protocol – Dissociation: HCD, Instrument: Thermo Q Exactive, MS1 resolution: 70000, MS2 resolution: 17500, Precursors: Top 10

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using PE-MMR to assign accurate precursor mass to tandem MS data. The resultant MS/MS spectra were searched against SWISS-Prot-mouse-reference database (released September, 2013; 24,544 entries) and 179 common contaminants in the target-decoy setting using MS-GF+ (v9387) search engine under the following condition: Semi tryptic, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ labeling of lysine and peptide n-termini as static modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Retinal vascular hyperpermeability causes macular edema, leading to visual deterioration in retinal diseases such as diabetic retinopathy and retinal vascular occlusion. Dysregulation of junction integrity between endothelial cells by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was shown to cause retinal vascular hyperpermeability. Accordingly, anti-VEGF agents have been used to treat retinal vascular hyperpermeability. However, they can confer potential toxicity through their deleterious effects on maintenance and survival of neuronal and endothelial cells in the retina. Thus, it is important to identify novel therapeutic targets for retinal vascular hyperpermeability other than VEGF. Here, we prepared murine retinas showing VEGF-induced vascular leakage from superficial retinal vascular plexus and prevention of VEGF-induced leakage by anti-VEGF antibody treatment. We then performed comprehensive proteome profiling of these samples and identified retinal proteins for which abundances were differentially expressed by VEGF, but such alterations were inhibited by anti-VEGF antibody. Functional enrichment and network analyses of these proteins revealed the &#x3b2;2 integrin pathway, which can prevent dysregulation of junction integrity between endothelial cells through cytoskeletal rearrangement, as a potential therapeutic target for retinal vascular hyperpermeability. Finally, we experimentally demonstrated that inhibition of the &#x3b2;2 integrin pathway salvaged VEGF-induced retinal vascular hyperpermeability, supporting its validity as an alternative therapeutic target to anti-VEGF agents.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Retinal vascular hyperpermeability, Mouse retinal tissue

### Affiliations
Korea University
Department of Chemistry, Korea University

### Submitter
Dong-Gi Mun

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Won Lee
Department of Chemistry, Korea University


