### Accession
PXD034784

### Title
iTRAQ based proteomic analysis to reveal the mechanism of tigecycline resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii

### Description
The antibiotic resistance of A. baumannii has been increasing in recent years. There are still many questions unclear concerning the mechanism of tigecycline resistance in A. baumannii. iTRAQ based proteomic analysis were used to reveal the mechanism of tigecycline resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were collected and put into liquid nitrogen and grinded fully. The sample powders were suspended by phenol extraction solution and sonicated on ice for protein extraction, an equal volume of phenol-Tris-HCl saturated solution were added and mixed up for 30 min at 4°C, then the supernatant were collected by centrifugation at 4°C, 7100×g for 10 min. 5 times the volume of pre-cooled 0.1 mol/L ammonium acetate-methanol solution were added and precipitated overnight at -20°C. The precipitates were centrifuged and collected and then 5 times the volume of pre-cooled methanol was added to wash the precipitate. The steps were repeated twice with acetone instead of methanol to fully remove methanol. Finally, the precipitates were collected by centrifugation at 4°C, 12000×g for 10min and dried at room temperature. Then the precipitates were dissolved in lysis solution at room temperature for 3 h and the concentration was determined by BCA method. For proteomics analysis,100 μg of protein was taken from each sample. DTT with a final concentration of 5 mmol/L was added and incubated at 55°C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide was added to with a final concentration to 10 mmol/L and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Then 6 times the volume of acetone was added to the above solution, stay at -20°C overnight, and then the precipitate was collected by centrifugation. The precipitate was reconstituted with 100 μL TEAB (200 mmol/L) and digested with trypsin Trypsin-TPCK at 37°C overnight. The digested samples were lyophilized and reconstituted with 30 μL 100 mM TEAB, 200 μL iTRAQ regent were added and reacted at room temperature for 2 h, then 200 μL deionized H2O were added to terminate the reaction. The dried peptides were reconstituted and loaded onto a C18 column and subjected to reverse gradient separation under alkaline conditions using conventional high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Agilent 1100 HPLC). For the samples of 8~60 min, collect the eluent into the centrifuge tube every minute, freeze dry, and save for mass spectrometry. The sample is loaded into the precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 100umx2cm (RP-C18, Thermo Fisher) at the flow rate of 300 nL/min, and then separated by the separation column acclaim pepmap RSLC, 75umx15cm (RP-C18\, Thermo Fisher). The quality resolution of the primary MS is set to 60000, the automatic gain control value is set to 3e6, and the maximum injection time is 50 ms; The MS scanning is set as the full scanning charge mass ratio m/z range of 350-1500, and MS/MS scanning is performed for 20 of the highest peaks; The resolution of MS/MS is set to 15000, the automatic gain control is set to 2e5, and the maximum ion injection time is 40 ms; The dynamic exclusion time is set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed by Proteome Discover2.4 (Thermofisher Company) software. The credible proteins were screened according to the criteria of score sequence HT>0 and unique peptide≥1, and the blank value was removed. Fold change is used to evaluate the expression level change of a protein between different samples, and the P value calculated by t-test is used to show the significance of the difference. Difference screening conditions: foldchange≥2 or foldchange≤1/2 and P<0.05. For the obtained differential proteins, NCBI and Uniprot databases were used for GO enrichment analysis (statistically significant differences in GO terms were defined by P<0.05), and the information of individual proteins was retrieved by Pubmed.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanism of tigecycline resistance in <i>A. baumannii</i> remains largely unclear. In this study, we selected a tigecycline-resistant and a tigecycline-susceptible strain from a tigecycline-susceptible and a resistant strain, respectively. Proteomic and genomic analyses were performed to elucidate the variations associated with tigecycline resistance. Our study showed proteins associated with efflux pump, biofilm formation, iron acquisition, stress response, and metabolic ability are upregulated in tigecycline resistant strains, and efflux pump should be the key mechanism for tigecycline resistance. By genomic analysis, we found several changes in the genome that can explain the increased level of efflux pump, including the loss of the global negative regulator <i>hns</i> in the plasmid and the disruption of the <i>hns</i> gene and <i>acrR</i> gene on the chromosome by the insertion of IS5. Collectively, we not only revealed the phenomenon that the efflux pump is mainly responsible for tigecycline resistance, but also highlighted the mechanism at the genomic level, which will help in understanding the resistance mechanism in detail and provide clues for the treatment of clinical multiple drug-resistant <i>A. baumannii</i>.

### Keywords
Tigecycline resistance, Acinetobacter baumannii, Itraq

### Affiliations
Peking University Health Science Center
Peking university health science center

### Submitter
Qinghua Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Qinghua Zou
Peking University Health Science Center


