### Accession
PXD031617

### Title
Histone H4K20 Trimethylation is Decreased in Murine Models of Heart Disease

### Description
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the developed world, and its comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, and heart failure are accompanied by major transcriptomic changes in the heart. During cardiac dysfunction, which leads to heart failure, there are global epigenetic alterations to chromatin that occur concomitantly with morphological changes in the heart in response to acute and chronic stress. These epigenetic alterations include the reversible methylation of lysine residues on histone proteins. Lysine methylation on histone H3K4 and H3K9 were among the first methylated lysine residues identified and have been linked to gene activation and silencing, respectively. However, much less is known regarding other methylated histone residues, including histone H4K20. Trimethylation of histone H4K20 has been shown to repressive gene expression, however this mark has never been examined in the heart. Here we utilized immunoblotting and mass spectrometry to quantify histone H4K20 trimethylation in three models of cardiac dysfunction. Our results show that lysine methylation at this site is regulated in a biphasic manner leading to increased H420 trimethylation during acute hypertrophic stress and decreased H4K20 trimethylation during sustained ischemic injury and cardiac dysfunction. In addition, we examined publicly available datasets to analyze enzymes that regulate H4K20 methylation and identified one demethylase (KDM7C) and two methyltransferases (KMT5A and SMYD5) which were all upregulated in heart failure patients. This is the first study to examine histone H4K20 trimethylation in the heart and to determine how this post-translational modification is differentially regulated in multiple models of cardiac disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed using a standard FASP protocol that we have previously published. Samples were diluted with Urea buffer, reduced, and alkylated, then proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C, and acidified to using 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were analyzed with an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with an Easy nLC-1000 UPLC and outfitted with a ESI Source Solutions pulled tip column type 2 (15 cm x 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore diameter, ESI Source Solutions). Spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with dynamic exclusion enabled and fragmented using Collision Induced dissociation. The top twenty MS1 peaks were analyzed at a resolution of 30,000. Samples were run in duplicate to generate technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.7.0 against the UniprotKB mouse protein database. Search engine parameters for MaxQuant were as follows: trypsin digestion, two missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da.  Match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.3 minutes, match ion mobility window of 0.05 and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. The false discovery rate (FDR) was 1%. For relative quantification, peptide abundance (measured as intensity values for area under the curve) was used to calculate the abundance or total histone H4 (7 mapped peptides) and Gapdh (15 mapped peptides). Normalized log2 intensities of peptides were used in statistical comparisons of groups: Student’s two sample t-test was used for comparisons between the two sample groups and statistical analyses were performed in Perseus 1.6.5.0.

### Publication Abstract
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the developed world, and its comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, and heart failure are accompanied by major transcriptomic changes in the heart. During cardiac dysfunction, which leads to heart failure, there are global epigenetic alterations to chromatin that occur concomitantly with morphological changes in the heart in response to acute and chronic stress. These epigenetic alterations include the reversible methylation of lysine residues on histone proteins. Lysine methylations on histones H3K4 and H3K9 were among the first methylated lysine residues identified and have been linked to gene activation and silencing, respectively. However, much less is known regarding other methylated histone residues, including histone H4K20. Trimethylation of histone H4K20 has been shown to repress gene expression; however, this modification has never been examined in the heart. Here, we utilized immunoblotting and mass spectrometry to quantify histone H4K20 trimethylation in three models of cardiac dysfunction. Our results show that lysine methylation at this site is differentially regulated in the cardiomyocyte, leading to increased H4K20 trimethylation during acute hypertrophic stress in cell models and decreased H4K20 trimethylation during sustained ischemic injury and cardiac dysfunction in animal models. In addition, we examined publicly available data sets to analyze enzymes that regulate H4K20 methylation and identified two demethylases (KDM7B and KDM7C) and two methyltransferases (KMT5A and SMYD5) that were all differentially expressed in heart failure patients. This is the first study to examine histone H4K20 trimethylation in the heart and to determine how this post-translational modification is differentially regulated in multiple models of cardiac disease.

### Keywords
Lysate, Mouse, Sham, Lvad, Wt, Po

### Affiliations
University of Utah
Principal Investigator

### Submitter
Ryan Bia

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Franklin
Principal Investigator


