### Accession
PXD014185

### Title
Pull-down of Exo1-TAP from yeast meiotic cells and analysis of phosphorylated residues

### Description
Exo1 tagged with the TAP sequence was pulled down from synchronous ndt80∆ meiotic cells after induction of the CDC5 kinase at t = 8 h 15 in meiosis (1 h 15 after CDC5 induction), in order to identify its phosphorylated residues

### Sample Protocol
2.1010 cells of VBD2070 strain were harvested after 8 h 15 min in sporulation medium and processed for TAP pull-down in the presence of 125 U/mL benzonase. 1500 μL of PanMouse IgG magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) were washed 1:1 with lysis buffer, preincubated in 100 μg/ml BSA in lysis buffer for 2 h at 4°C and then washed twice with 1:1 lysis buffer. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 8000 g for 10 min at 4°C and incubated overnight at 4°C with washed PanMouse IgG magnetic beads. The magnetic beads were washed four times with 8 mL of wash buffer (20 mM HEPES/KOH pH7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5% Triton X-100; 5% Glycerol; 1 mM MgCl2; 2 mM EDTA; 1 mM PMSF; 1X Complete Mini EDTA-Free (Roche)). Beads were then resuspended in 40 μl of Laemmli buffer and boiled for 10 min at 75°C. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with colloidal blue, and the band predicted to contain Exo1-TAP was excised and processed. Excised gel slice was washed and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking of the gel pieces with 100% acetonitrile, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin/LysC (0.1µg) overnight in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 30°C. Peptide are then extracted using 60/35/5 MeCN/H2O/HCOOH, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in loading buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O + 0.05% TFA) prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. The extracted peptides were chromatographically separated using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (75-μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A’, separated and MS data acquired using Xcalibur software. Peptides separation was performed over a linear gradient of 91 min from 2% to 30% buffer B (75-μm inner diameter × 50 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and the top20 intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap for futher fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation and a dynamic exclusion on 20 s.

### Data Protocol
For identification the data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot S. cerevisiae database using Sequest with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2) and SwissProt fasta database containing S. cerevisiae sequences using MascotTM (version 2.5.1). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines, oxidation and loss (N-ter) of methionines, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine and acetylation of amino termini were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after Lys or Arg except before Pro, and 2 missed trypsin cleavage site were allowed. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al., 2007) v3.6. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) calculation was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study (Percolator or QVALITY algorithm). We validated phosphorylated peptides by combining the phosphoRS informations and by manually inspecting the peak assignment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mutlgamma, Recombination, Meiosis, Crossover

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


