### Accession
PXD015960

### Title
Proteome profile of peripheral myelin in healthy mice and in a neuropathy model

### Description
Using the sciatic nerve as a model, we biochemically purified peripheral nervous system (PNS) myelin and systematically assessed its proteome by dedicated, partly ion mobility-enhanced data-independent acquisition (DIA) workflows with alternating low and elevated energy (MSE) modes. Specifically, we used MSE for correct quantification of highest-abundance proteins, UDMSE for deep quantitative proteome coverage, and dynamic range enhancement (DRE)-UDMSE for comparative analysis, the latter mode providing a good compromise between dynamic range, identification rate and instrument run time for routine differential myelin proteome profiling. We found that integration of the proteome data with the total nerve transcriptome is suited to determine comprehensive molecular profiles in healthy nerves and in myelin-related disorders. This work provides the most comprehensive proteome resource thus far to approach development, function and pathology of peripheral myelin, and a straightforward, accurate and sensitive workflow to address myelin diversity in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of peripheral nervous system (PNS) myelin from pools of sciatic nerves by discontinuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation. Solubilization of myelin proteins in ASB-14 detergent and automated in-solution protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. 1D LC separation of peptides using a Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system. Mass spectrometric analysis performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA) on a Waters Synapt G2-S quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer equipped with ion mobility option.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with Waters ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS). Retention time alignment, exact mass and retention time (EMRT) and ion mobility clustering, data normalization, isoform/homology filtering and calculation of absolute in-sample amounts for each detected protein according to the TOP3 quantification approach with ISOQuant. Statistical analysis and visualization of data with an RStudio pipeline employing the Bioconductor packages "limma" and "q-value".

### Publication Abstract
Proteome and transcriptome analyses aim at comprehending the molecular profiles of the brain, its cell-types and subcellular compartments including myelin. Despite the relevance of the peripheral nervous system for normal sensory and motor capabilities, analogous approaches to peripheral nerves and peripheral myelin have fallen behind evolving technical standards. Here we assess the peripheral myelin proteome by gel-free, label-free mass-spectrometry for deep quantitative coverage. Integration with RNA-Sequencing-based developmental mRNA-abundance profiles and neuropathy disease genes illustrates the utility of this resource. Notably, the periaxin-deficient mouse model of the neuropathy Charcot-Marie-Tooth 4F displays a highly pathological myelin proteome profile, exemplified by the discovery of reduced levels of the monocarboxylate transporter MCT1/SLC16A1 as a novel facet of the neuropathology. This work provides the most comprehensive proteome resource thus far to approach development, function and pathology of peripheral myelin, and a straightforward, accurate and sensitive workflow to address myelin diversity in health and disease.

### Keywords
Dynamic range enhancement, Mouse, Peripheral nervous system (pns), Demyelination, Transcriptome, Myelin proteome, Axon degeneration, Charcot-marie-tooth disease, Neuropathy, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen
PD Dr. Olaf Jahn Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323 E-mail: jahn@em.mpg.de URL: www.em.mpg.de/proteomics

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Olaf Jahn
PD Dr. Olaf Jahn Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323 E-mail: jahn@em.mpg.de URL: www.em.mpg.de/proteomics


