### Accession
PXD000154

### Title
Comprehensive Absolute Quantification of the Cytosolic Proteome of Bacillus subtilis by Data Independent, Parallel Fragmentation in Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS)

### Description
Absolute protein quantification for cytosolic proteins of B. subtilis growing on a carbon source (condition S) or on an amino acid source (condition CH). Data for 3 biological replicates and 3 technical replicates each for each condition are provided. For data processing and protein identification, raw data were imported into ProteinLynx Global Server 2.4(PLGS, Waters) and processed via Apex3D algorithm with following parameters:chromatographic peak width:automatic, MS ToF resolution: automatic, lock mass for charge 2:785.8426Da/e, lock mass window: 0.25Da, low energy threshold: 250cts, elevated energy threshold: 30cts, retention time window: automatic, intensity threshold of precursor/fragment ion cluster:1000cts. Database search was carried out by the ion accounting algorithm against randomized _B. subtilis_ 168 database with added common laboratory contaminants and yeast ADH1 sequence (8,438 entries) using following parameters: peptide tolerance:automatic, protein tolerance: automatic, min fragment ions matches per peptide: 1, min fragment ions matches per protein: 5, min peptide matches per protein: 2, primary digest reagent: trypsin, missed cleavages: 2, variable modifications: carbamidomethylation C (+57.0215), deamidation N, Q (+0.9840),oxidation M (+15.9949), pyrrolidonecarboxylacid N-TERM (-27.9949), false discovery rate (FDR): 5%, calibration protein: yeast ADH1. With PLGS absolute protein quantification is based on comparison of the summed signal intensities of the three most intense peptides of a protein to these of ADH1 (Hi3 approach).

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In the growing field of systems biology, the knowledge of protein concentrations is highly required to truly understand metabolic and adaptational networks within the cells. Therefore we established a workflow relying on long chromatographic separation and mass spectrometric analysis by data independent, parallel fragmentation of all precursor ions at the same time (LC/MS(E)). By prevention of discrimination of co-eluting low and high abundant peptides a high average sequence coverage of 40% could be achieved, resulting in identification of almost half of the predicted cytosolic proteome of the Gram-positive model organism Bacillus subtilis (&gt;1,050 proteins). Absolute quantification was achieved by correlation of average MS signal intensities of the three most intense peptides of a protein to the signal intensity of a spiked standard protein digest. Comparative analysis with heavily labeled peptides (AQUA approach) showed the use of only one standard digest is sufficient for global quantification. The quantification results covered almost four orders of magnitude, ranging roughly from 10 to 150,000 copies per cell. To prove this method for its biological relevance selected physiological aspects of B. subtilis cells grown under conditions requiring either amino acid synthesis or alternatively amino acid degradation were analyzed. This allowed both in particular the validation of the adjustment of protein levels by known regulatory events and in general a perspective of new insights into bacterial physiology. Within new findings the analysis of "protein costs" of cellular processes is extremely important. Such a comprehensive and detailed characterization of cellular protein concentrations based on data independent, parallel fragmentation in liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS(E)) data has been performed for the first time and should pave the way for future comprehensive quantitative characterization of microorganisms as physiological entities.

### Keywords
B. subtilis, Absolute protein quantification, Synapt (waters), Dia, Mse

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head


