### Accession
PXD031940

### Title
The social and structural architecture of the yeast protein interactome

### Description
Nearly all cellular functions are mediated by protein-protein interactions and mapping the interactome provides fundamental insights into the regulation and structure of biological systems. In principle, affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (APMS) is an ideal and scalable tool, however, it has been difficult to identify low copy number complexes, membrane complexes and those disturbed by protein-tagging. As a result, our current knowledge of the interactome is far from complete, and assessing the reliability of reported interactions is challenging. Here we develop a sensitive, high-throughput, and highly reproducible AP-MS technology combined with a quantitative two-dimensional analysis strategy for comprehensive interactome mapping of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We reduced required cell culture volumes thousand-fold and employed 96-well formats throughout, allowing replicate analysis of the endogenous green fluorescent protein (GFP) tagged library covering the entire expressed yeast proteome. The 4159 pull-downs generated a highly structured network of 3,909 proteins connected by 29,710 interactions. Compared to previous large-scale studies, we double the number of proteins (nodes in the network) and triple the number of reliable interactions (edges), including very low abundant epigenetic complexes, organellar membrane complexes and non-taggable complexes interfered by abundance correlation. This nearly saturated interactome reveals that the vast majority of yeast proteins are highly connected, with an average of 15 interactors, the majority of them unreported so far. Similar to social networks between humans, the average shortest distance is 4.2 interactions. A web portal (www.yeastinteractome.org) enables exploration of our dataset by the network and biological communities and variations of our AP-MS technology can be employed in any organism or dynamic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell growth: S. cerevisiae GFP-tagged library were grown in YPD media using 96-deep-well plates. Cell lysis: Cell lysis was performed within the 96-deep-well plates at 4°C via bead-beating. Interactor enrichment: Anti-GFP nanobody coated 96-well microtiter plates optimized for this protocol allowing efficient and high reproducible “in-well" digestion, and mass spectrometry compatibility were used. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry: Protein-enriched GFP-Trap plates were brought to room temperature and 50 µL of digestion mix 1 (4.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, 3 mM dithiothreitol, 2 ng/µL LysC) were added per well. Plates were incubated at 30 °C and 1000 rpm on a small stroke (3 mm) shaker. After 3 h, 100 µL of digestion mix 2 (10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, 7.5 mM chloroacetamide, 2 ng/µL LysC) were added and microtiter plates and lids were sealed with parafilm®. The plates were incubated overnight at 30 °C/800 rpm. The reaction was stopped and the sample was acidified with 15 µL of 10% TFA per well. Plates with peptides were stored at -80 °C till sample loading on EvoTips (Evosep, Odense, Denmark). Mass spectrometry: Mass spectrometric analysis was performed in a data-dependent (dda) PASEF mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing. MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0), which extracts features from four-dimensional isotope patterns and associated MS/MS spectra, on a computing cluster (SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 15 SP2). To allow processing in an acceptable time frame, RAW files were handled in 5 parallel batches of approximately 1700 files each containing plates equally distributed across the measurement period. Files were searched against the S. cerevisiae Uniprot databases (UP000002311_559292; canonical and isoform, reviewed-sp and unreviewed-tr from 02/2020). For high significance identification the false-discovery rates were reduced and controlled at 0.1% both on peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein levels. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, while limiting the maximum peptide mass to 4,800 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to LysC cleaving C-terminal to lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The parameter “type” was set to “TIMS-DDA” with “TIMS half width” at 4. The instrument was set to “Bruker TIMS” and main search peptide tolerance reduced to 8 ppm, the max. charge set to 5 and min. peak length to 3. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs (4D-MBR) using a narrow elution match time window of 12 s and a reduced ion mobility window of 0.01 1/K0. Protein quantification was performed by label-free quantification using a minimum ratio count of 2. The 24-fraction library was added as an additional parameter group with the same group-specific settings, but LFQ disabled and “separate LFQ in parameter groups” under global parameters enabled. The writing of additional tables was disabled for performance reasons. 

### Publication Abstract
Cellular functions are mediated by protein-protein interactions, and mapping the interactome provides fundamental insights into biological systems. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry is an ideal tool for such mapping, but it has been difficult to identify low copy number complexes, membrane complexes and complexes that are disrupted by protein tagging. As a result, our current knowledge of the interactome is far from complete, and assessing the reliability of reported interactions is challenging. Here we develop a sensitive high-throughput method using highly reproducible affinity enrichment coupled to mass spectrometry combined with a quantitative two-dimensional analysis strategy to comprehensively map the interactome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Thousand-fold reduced volumes in 96-well format enabled replicate analysis of the endogenous GFP-tagged library covering the entire expressed yeast proteome<sup>1</sup>. The 4,159 pull-downs generated a highly structured network of 3,927 proteins connected by 31,004 interactions, doubling the number of proteins and tripling the number of reliable interactions compared with existing interactome maps<sup>2</sup>. This includes very-low-abundance epigenetic complexes, organellar membrane complexes and non-taggable complexes inferred by abundance correlation. This nearly saturated interactome reveals that the vast majority of yeast proteins are highly connected, with an average of 16 interactors. Similar to social networks between humans, the average shortest distance between proteins is 4.2 interactions. AlphaFold-Multimer provided novel insights into the functional roles of previously uncharacterized proteins in complexes. Our web portal ( www.yeast-interactome.org ) enables extensive exploration of the interactome dataset.

### Keywords
Pull-downs, Ap-ms, Timstof pro, Interactome, Pasef, Quantitative interactomics, Ae-ms, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany


