### Accession
PXD006837

### Title
Eml1-associated proteins in mouse neural progenitors

### Description
Echinoderm microtubule (MT)-associated protein-like 1 (Eml1) is mutated in the HeCo mouse, which exhibits subcortical band heterotopia (SBH), a developmental malformation of the cerebral cortex. EML1 mutations are also found in human patients affected by severe ribbon-like heterotopia, associated with epilepsy and intellectual disability (1). Neural progenitors in the ventricular zone (VZ) of the developing cerebral cortex undergo precisely regulated divisions, and mitotic perturbations contribute to pathological mechanisms (2). Eml1 is expressed in the mouse VZ and ectopic progenitors are present in the mutant developing cortex, when Eml1 is absent, at early stages of development (1). Thus, Eml1 is likely to play a role in neural progenitors during cortical development. We performed cell and molecular biology assays aiming to elucidate the function of Eml1 in neural progenitors, and explored the VZ of the HeCo mutant in order to find morphological perturbations that might explain the initiation of SBH formation (3). As part of this study, we searched for Eml1 molecular partners by pull-downs from mouse cortical extracts at embryonic day E13.5 and mass spectrometry (MS) analyses in order to identify the molecular pathways in which the protein is involved (3). Eml1 is formed by an N-terminal region that contains a dimerization domain and a C-terminal region that forms a ‘tandem atypical propeller in EMLs’ (TAPE) domain. The isolated N-terminal domain strongly binds MTs, while the C-terminal domain preferentially binds tubulin, and its beta-propeller structure is thought also to mediate the interaction with other molecules (4,5). We focused for this study on the N-terminal part of the protein (amino acids 1-178). Future study will validate or elucidate new interactions by using the C-terminal domain and/or the full-length protein. The results obtained from the N terminal MS data, integrated with other experimental findings, allow us to insert Eml1 in a network of proteins that are likely to regulate the assembly and function of the mitotic spindle in neural progenitors (3). More precisely, we showed that the protein regulates MT dynamics and its loss leads to perturbations in metaphase spindle length, which in turn impact progenitor morphology and behavior (3).  References 1. Kielar, M., et al. Mutations in Eml1 lead to ectopic progenitors and neuronal heterotopia in mouse and human. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 923–933 (2014). 2. Bizzotto, S., & Francis, F. Morphological and functional aspects of progenitors perturbed in cortical malformations. Front Cell Neurosci. 9, 30; 10.3389/fncel00030 (2015). 3. Bizzotto, S., et al. Eml1 loss impairs apical progenitor spindle length and soma shape in the developing cerebral cortex.  4. Richards, M. W., et al. Crystal structure of EML1 reveals the basis for Hsp90 dependence of oncogenic EML4-ALK by disruption of an atypical β-propeller domain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 5195–5200 (2014). 5. Richards, M. W., et al. Microtubule association of EML proteins and the EML4-ALK variant 3 oncoprotein require an N-terminal trimerization domain. Biochem. J. 467, 529–536 (2015).

### Sample Protocol
E13.5 timed-pregnant Swiss mice (Janvier Labs, France) were sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Embryos were dissected and both brain hemispheres collected in Leibovitz-15 (L-15, Gibco BRL) medium, and explants immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground into a powder. This was re-suspended in 10 μl/mg lysis buffer (Tris HCl 50 mM, NaCl 150 mM, EDTA 1 mM pH 8) supplemented with 1% NP-40 and protease inhibitors 1X (Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets EDTA-Free, Sigma-Aldrich). The lysate was homogenized by rotation during 45 min at 4°C, then centrifuged for pre-clearing 30 min at 15000 rcf and 4°C. Cortex extracts (15 μg tissue) were incubated overnight with pre-washed Glutathione-Agarose resin (Sigma- Aldrich) previously coupled with either purified GST-EML1 N-ter (Richards et al, 2014) or GST as control (4 μg total purified protein). Extracts were centrifuged (200 rcf, 1 min) to pellet the resin, supernatants were collected as un-bound fractions, and resins (bound fractions) were extensively washed with lysis buffer to remove non-specific interactions. Resins were re-suspended in freshly-made Laemmli buffer, heated 10 min at 95°C and centrifuged 2 min at maximum speed to dissociate the complexes from the resin and denaturate the proteins.  The EML1 N terminal (N-ter) construct, is predicted to bind MTs and not soluble tubulin (Richards et al., 2014). Indirect protein partners due to MT-mediated interactions were not favored because of the sample preparation conditions (4°C cold treatment causing depolymerization). The unlikely occurrence of soluble tubulin-mediated interactions was further confirmed by lack of detection on Western blots of pull-down samples, which nevertheless identified alpha-tubulin only in the unbound fraction.

### Data Protocol
For MS, two independent pull-down purifications (GST and GST-EML) were simultaneously separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with colloidal blue (LabSafe Gel Blue GBiosciences). Seven gel slices were excised for each purification. After washing, proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking of the gel pieces with 100% acetonitrile, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin (Gold, Promega) overnight in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 30°C. Peptides extracted from each band were analyzed by nano Liquid Chromatography (LC)-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex S.A.) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition was performed in the positive ion mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the 475-1200 m/z range for each sample, with the resolution set to a value of 60 000. Each scan was recalibrated in real time by co-injecting an internal standard from ambient air into the C-trap (‘lock mass option’). The 5 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 180 s.

### Publication Abstract
The ventricular zone (VZ) of the developing cerebral cortex is a pseudostratified epithelium that contains progenitors undergoing precisely regulated divisions at its most apical side, the ventricular lining (VL). Mitotic perturbations can contribute to pathological mechanisms leading to cortical malformations. The HeCo mutant mouse exhibits subcortical band heterotopia (SBH), likely to be initiated by progenitor delamination from the VZ early during corticogenesis. The causes for this are however, currently unknown. Eml1, a microtubule (MT)-associated protein of the EMAP family, is impaired in these mice. We first show that MT dynamics are perturbed in mutant progenitor cells in vitro. These may influence interphase and mitotic MT mechanisms and indeed, centrosome and primary cilia were altered and spindles were found to be abnormally long in HeCo progenitors. Consistently, MT and spindle length regulators were identified in EML1 pulldowns from embryonic brain extracts. Finally, we found that mitotic cell shape is also abnormal in the mutant VZ. These previously unidentified VZ characteristics suggest altered cell constraints which may contribute to cell delamination.

### Keywords
Mouse, Microtubules, Cortical development, Eml1, Neural progenitors

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP) Institut Curie

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP) Institut Curie


