### Accession
PXD007679

### Title
Allele-specific alterations in the peptidome underlie the joint association of HLA-A*29:02 and Endoplasmic Reticulum Aminopeptidase 2 (ERAP2) with Birdshot Chorioretinopathy

### Description
Birdshot chorioretinopathy (BSCR) is a rare inflammatory eye disease very strongly associated with HLA-A*29:02, with >95% of patients carrying this allele. BSCR is also associated with endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase (ERAP)2, an enzyme involved in processing HLA class I ligands. We analyzed the relationship between both risk factors, to address the basis for their joint association with BSCR. Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry was used to characterize the effects of ERAP2 on the A*29:02-bound peptidome. An ERAP2-negative cell line was transduced with lentiviral constructs containing GFP or GFP-ERAP2, and the A*29:02 peptidomes from mock- and ERAP2-transduced cells were compared. A similar analysis was performed with two A*29:02-positive, ERAP1-concordant, cell lines differing in their expression or not of ERAP2. In both comparisons the presence of ERAP2 affected the following features of the A*29:02 peptidome: 1) Length, with increased amounts of peptides >9-mers, and 2) N-terminal residues, with less ERAP2-susceptible and more hydrophobic ones. The paradoxical effects on peptide length suggest that unproductive binding to ERAP2 might protect some peptides from over-trimming. The influence on N-terminal residues is consistent with a double effect of ERAP2: a direct one on peptide trimming and improved processing in concert with ERAP1. The alterations in the A*29:02 peptidome suggest that the association of ERAP2 with BSCR is through its effects on peptide processing.  These differ from those on the ankylosing spondylitis-associated HLA-B*27. Thus, ERAP2 alters the peptidome of distinct HLA molecules as a function of their specific binding preferences, influencing different pathological outcomes in an allele-dependent way.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of HLA-A*29:02-bound peptidomes.  About 2x109 cells were lysed at 4ºC in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Igepal CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich) and a mixture of protease inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). After centrifugation, the supernatant was passed through a column containing the HLA-A-specific 108-2C5 mAb bound to CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) and washed with 20 column volumes each of 20 mM Tris-HCl,  pH 8.0 containing: 1) 150 mM NaCl, 2) 400 mM NaCl, 3) 150 mM NaCl, and 4) 40 column volumes of buffer without NaCl. Peptides were eluted with 1% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature, filtered through  Vivaspin 2, cutoff 5,000 Da (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Gottingen, Germany), concentrated in a SpeedVac and subjected to reversed phase purification using OMIX tips (Varian Inc. Palo Alto, CA) by elution with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA in water. The eluted peptides were dried and stored at −20°C.   Mass spectrometry. This was carried out as previously described with minor modifications. The recovered peptides were analyzed in a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer fitted with Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanocapillary UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The peptides were resolved on a capillary column (75 μm ID and  ≈20 cm long) pressure packed with C18 reversed-phase 3.5 μm beads (Reprosil-C18-Aqua, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany),  using a 7-28% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid during 180 min followed by 28-95%  during 15 min. The flow rate was 0.15 µL/min. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec and the automatic gain control value for the full MS was set to 3x106. The selected masses were fragmented from the survey scan of m/z 300-1,800 AMU at resolution 70,000. Data was acquired using a data-dependent "top-10" method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired starting at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500 . The target value of the MS/MS was set to 1x105 and the isolation window to 1.8 m/z. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms and normalized collision energy to 25 eV. No fragmentation was performed for peptides with unassigned precursor ion charge states or charge states of four and above. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Fragmented masses were dynamically excluded from further selection for fragmentation for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
A*29:02 ligands were identified from non-transduced, GFP-, and ERAP2-transduced PF cells. Three independent preparations from each cell line were obtained and analyzed in the same conditions, to provide for biological replicates and enable label-free quantitative comparisons of the A*29:02 peptides. Peptide sequences were assigned using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25 and Version 1.5.8.3) with the Andromeda search engine and the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2015_07, 20197 entries) under the following  parameters: precursor ion mass and fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm, false discovery rate (FDR) 0.05 for the peptide-spectrum matching. N-terminal acetylation, Gln-to-pyroglutamic cyclation and Met oxidation were included as variable modifications. Identifications derived from the reverse database and known contaminants were eliminated.

### Publication Abstract
Virtually all patients of the rare inflammatory eye disease birdshot chorioretinopathy (BSCR) carry the HLA-A*29:02 allele. BSCR is also associated with endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 2 (ERAP2), an enzyme involved in processing HLA class I ligands, thus implicating the A*29:02 peptidome in this disease. To investigate the relationship between both risk factors we employed label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to characterize the effects of ERAP2 on the A*29:02-bound peptidome. An ERAP2-negative cell line was transduced with lentiviral constructs containing GFP-ERAP2 or GFP alone, and the A*29:02 peptidomes from both transduced cells were compared. A similar analysis was performed with two additional A*29:02-positive, ERAP1-concordant, cell lines expressing or not ERAP2. In both comparisons the presence of ERAP2 affected the following features of the A*29:02 peptidome: 1) Length, with increased amounts of peptides &gt;9-mers, and 2) N-terminal residues, with less ERAP2-susceptible and more hydrophobic ones. The paradoxical effects on peptide length suggest that unproductive binding to ERAP2 might protect some peptides from ERAP1 over-trimming. The influence on N-terminal residues can be explained by a direct effect of ERAP2 on trimming, without ruling out and improved processing in concert with ERAP1. The alterations in the A*29:02 peptidome suggest that the association of ERAP2 with BSCR is through its effects on peptide processing. These differ from those on the ankylosing spondylitis-associated HLA-B*27. Thus, ERAP2 alters the peptidome of distinct HLA molecules as a function of their specific binding preferences, influencing different pathological outcomes in an allele-dependent way.

### Keywords
Hla-a*29:02, Birdshot chorioretinopathy, Endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 2 (erap2)

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Eilon Barnea

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology


