### Accession
PXD014962

### Title
TMT-based study of yeast metabolism and translation under nitrogen limitation

### Description
Tandem mass tag (TMT)-based relative quantification was used to study yeast metabolism under the stepwise reduction the nitrogen content in the growth medium.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (Matrix D (green-capped tubes); MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s, with 30-60 seconds pause between. The lysate was transferred to new tubes, diluted ten times with the lysis buffer and protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with BSA solutions as standards. Aliquots containing 30 ug of total protein from each sample and 30 ug from the reference pool were used for the TMT sample preparation. Samples were reduced by addition of 2M DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 100 mM and incubated at 56C for 30 min. The samples were trypsin digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method modified from (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, reduced samples diluted to 300 ul by addition of 8M urea were applied on Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Life Sciences) and 200 ul 8M urea were used to repeatedly wash away the SDS. Alkylation was performed with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added in a ratio of 1:100 relative to protein amount and the samples were incubated in 37°C overnight. Another portion of trypsin was added and incubated for 3 hours on the following morning. The peptides for the relative quantification were collected by centrifugation and subjected to isobaric mass tagging reagent TMT® according to the manufacturers instructions (Thermo Scientific). The labeled samples were combined into the pooled TMT sets, concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. The TMT-set was fractionated into 44 primary fractions with basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21+41, 2+22+42, … 20+40), dried and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae ATCC 204508 / S288c reference proteome database was downloaded from Uniprot (February 2018, 6049 sequences). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da; 1 missed cleavage was allowed; methionine oxidation was set as variable modification, methylthiolation on cysteine and TMT-6-plex on peptide N-terminus and on lysine were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. The identified PSMs and proteins were subsequently filtered with the target FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Cells maintain reserves in their metabolic and translational capacities as a strategy to quickly respond to changing environments. Here we quantify these reserves by stepwise&#xa0;reducing nitrogen availability in yeast steady-state chemostat cultures, imposing severe restrictions on total cellular protein and transcript content. Combining multi-omics analysis with metabolic modeling, we find that seven metabolic superpathways maintain &gt;50% metabolic capacity in reserve, with glucose metabolism maintaining &gt;80% reserve capacity. Cells maintain &gt;50% reserve in translational capacity for 2490 out of 3361 expressed genes (74%), with a disproportionately large reserve dedicated to translating metabolic proteins. Finally, ribosome reserves contain up to 30% sub-stoichiometric ribosomal proteins, with activation of reserve translational capacity associated with selective upregulation of 17 ribosomal proteins. Together, our dataset provides a quantitative link between yeast physiology and cellular economics, which could be leveraged in future cell engineering through targeted proteome streamlining.

### Keywords
Yeast, Tandem mass tag, Tmt, Metabolism, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Nielsen
Professor, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Wallenberg Center for Protein Research, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Gothenburg, Sweden; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark


