### Accession
PXD006753

### Title
Identification of novel Kv1.3 channel dependent mechanisms in microglial activation

### Description
Pro-inflammatory microglia contribute to disease progression in neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases. We identify novel Kv1.3 channel-dependent molecular and cellular mechanisms during microglial activation and unravel a Kv1.3-dependent pathway for MHCI-restricted antigen presentation by microglia to CD8+ T cells.

### Sample Protocol
BV2 microglia were grown to 75% confluence and then exposed to PBS, LPS (100ng/ml), ShK-223 (100nM) or LPS+ShK-223 for 24 hours and then harvested by scraping. Each cell pellet was individually homogenized in 300 µL of urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5), including 3 µL (100x stock) HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce). All homogenization was performed using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) according to manufacturer protocols. Briefly, each cell pellet was added to Urea lysis buffer in a 1.5 mL Rino tube (Next Advance) harboring 750 mg stainless steel beads (0.9-2 mm in diameter) and blended twice for 5 minute intervals in the cold room (4°C). Protein supernatants were transferred to 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) 3 times for 5 s with 15 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids and subsequently vortexed. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and samples were frozen in aliquots at −80°C. Protein homogenates (100 µg) were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of less than 2 M urea and then treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein was digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C for 2 hours and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum. For LC-MS/MS analysis, derived peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile). Peptide mixtures (2 µL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 µm Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 µM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific , San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 120 minute gradient at a rate of 400 nL/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 80% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The MS scans (400-1600 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (0.7 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant for label-free quantification and data analysis: Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading capability. The search engine Andromeda was used to build and search a concatenated target-decoy IPI/Uniprot mouse reference (downloaded Aug 14, 2015). Protein Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 miscleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±10 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, and 0.6 Da Tolerance for IT HCD MS/MS scans. Co-fragmented peptide search was enabled to deconvolute multiplex spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1 percent. Quantification settings were as follows: re-quantify with a second peak finding attempt after protein identification has completed; match full MS1 peaks between runs; a 1.5 min retention time match window was used after an alignment function was found with a 20 minute RT search space. The label free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014; Luber et al., 2010) was used for protein quantitation. Volcano plots were plotted with ggplot2 packages in R. Proteins with >25% overall missing data or more than 1 missing data point per treatment group were excluded from analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inflammation, Systems pharmacology, Potassium channel, Microglia, Bv2

### Affiliations
Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine


