### Accession
PXD029866

### Title
A Global Phosphorylation Atlas of Proteins within Pathological Site of Rotator Cuff Tendinopathy

### Description
Phosphorylation, as one of the most important and well-studied post-translational modifications, is tightly associated with protein activity and protein functional regulation. Here in this study, we generated a global protein phosphorylation atlas within the pathological site of human RCT patients by using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling combining with mass spectrometry. GO enrichment analyses and KEGG pathway analyses were performed. At last, a weighted kinase-site phosphorylation network was built to identify potentially core kinase.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction  The sample was taken out from -80 °C, and a proper amount of tissue sample was weighed and placed into a mortar precooled with liquid nitrogen, and then fully grounded to powder by adding liquid nitrogen. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer was added to the tissue powder, followed by sonication. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit Proteins extractions from the same group were pooled and used for the following steps. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM tetraethyl-ammonium bromide to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC Fractionation  The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment  Bio-material-based post-translational modification (PTM) enrichment (for phosphorylation): Peptide mixtures were first incubated with Fe-IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The Fe-IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the Fe-IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the Fe-IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ HF-X (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against swissprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. First search range was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions, Main search range set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. False Discovery Rate(FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  Bio-informatics analyses Functional analysis of proteins was determined by gene ontology (GO) enrichment. GO terms for biological processes (BP), molecular functions (MF), and cellular components (CC) charts were obtained using default statistical parameters. Regarding pathway analysis, firstly Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes(KEGG) pathways were constructed and the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) approach, which took the quantification information into account was further applied. For Inferring protein kinase identification, method by prior research was applied in our dataset (Abe et al. 2020). Briefly, we adopted iGPS1.0 software for predicting kinase-substrate regulations, which based on the theory of short linear motifs (SLMs) around phosphorylation sites (p-sites) provide the primary specificity. The software utilized GPS2.0 algorithm5 for the prediction of site-specific kinase-substrate relations (ssKSRs) and protein-protein interaction (PPI) information was used as the major contextual factor to filtrate potentially false-positive hits. A “medium” threshold was chosen and the parameter “Interaction” was set to “Exp./String”. Then GSEA method was used to predict kinase activities, in which log-transformed phosphorylation levels (or Ratio values) as a rank file and kinase-phosphorylation site regulations was formatted into a gmt file in a sample (or a comparable group). Normalized enrichment scores (NES) of enrichment result were regarded as kinase activity scores. For each kinase, the kinase was predicted as positive if the predominant change of substrates was an increase in phosphorylation and vice versa. At last, according to the complicated regulatory relationships, for each compare group, kinases predicted as positive or negative activity and significantly differential expressed phosphorylation sites were used to constructed kinase-substrate regulatory network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rotator cuff tendinopathy; phosphorylation; tnf signaling pathway; wnt; proteomics

### Affiliations
Harbin Medical University
Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China  National Clinical Research Center for Orthopedics, Sports Medicine & Rehabilitation, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Yuan Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Pengbin Yin
Department of Orthopedics, The Fourth Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China  National Clinical Research Center for Orthopedics, Sports Medicine & Rehabilitation, Beijing, China


