### Accession
PXD014357

### Title
Protein synthesis rates and ribosome occupancies reveal determinants of translation elongation rates

### Description
Although protein synthesis dynamics has been studied both with theoretical models and by profiling ribosome footprints, the determinants of ribosome flux along open reading frames (ORFs) are not fully understood. Combining measurements of protein synthesis rate with ribosome footprinting data, we here inferred translation initiation and elongation rates for over a thousand ORFs in exponentially-growing wildtype yeast cells. We found that the amino acid composition of synthesized proteins is as important a determinant of translation elongation rate as parameters related to codon and tRNA adaptation. We did not find evidence of ribosome collisions curbing the protein output of yeast transcripts, either in high translation conditions associated with exponential growth, or in strains in which deletion of individual ribosomal protein genes leads to globally increased or decreased translation. Slow translation elongation is characteristic of RP-encoding transcripts, which have markedly lower protein output compared to other transcripts with equally high ribosome densities.

### Sample Protocol
For the pSILAC experiment, the S. cerevisiae strain BY4741 was grown as described (22). Briefly, synthetic medium containing 2% glucose, yeast nitrogen base (6.7 gm/l), and dropout medium (2 g/l) containing all the amino acids except L-lysine was prepared. Initially, a pre-culture of yeast was grown at 30 °C, 200 rpm, in three biological replicates obtained by inoculating three different colonies in 5 ml of heavy SILAC synthetic medium containing heavy L-Lysine-2HCl, 13C6, 15N2 (ThermoFisher# 88209) at a final concentration of 30 mg/l. The pre-culture step was repeated one more time so that all the proteins became tagged with heavy isotope. The pre-culture thus obtained was used to grow cells at optical density of A600 = 0.4 in 200 ml. At this point, cells were centrifuged, washed twice with light SILAC synthetic medium containing light L-Lysine-2HCl (ThermoFisher# 89987) at concentration of 30 mg/l and transferred to 200 ml of light SILAC media. Cells were harvested at 0, 5, 15, 30, 60, 120, 180 minutes for the mass spectrometric analysis. Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate and 10mM TCEP using strong ultra-sonication (Bioruptor, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on/off, Diagenode, Belgium). Samples were heated to 95°C for 10 minutes and after cooling, the protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a small sample aliquot. 50 μg of protein were alkylated with 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C and incubated with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. After acidification using 5% TFA, precipitated detergent was removed by centrifugation (14k rpm, 5 min). Peptides were desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Microspin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. The setup of the μRPLC-MS system was as described previously (63). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 μg total peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3x106 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 105 ions, accumulation time of 50 ms and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 27%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), which was used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The generated mgf files were searched using MASCOT using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and heavy SILAC (K8) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on the peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. The relative quantitative data obtained were normalized and statistically analyzed using our in-house script (SafeQuant).

### Publication Abstract
Although protein synthesis dynamics has been studied both with theoretical models and by profiling ribosome footprints, the determinants of ribosome flux along open reading frames (ORFs) are not fully understood. Combining measurements of protein synthesis rate with ribosome footprinting data, we here inferred translation initiation and elongation rates for over a 1,000 ORFs in exponentially growing wild-type yeast cells. We found that the amino acid composition of synthesized proteins is as important a determinant of translation elongation rate as parameters related to codon and transfer RNA (tRNA) adaptation. We did not find evidence of ribosome collisions curbing the protein output of yeast transcripts, either in high translation conditions associated with exponential growth, or in strains in which deletion of individual ribosomal protein (RP) genes leads to globally increased or decreased translation. Slow translation elongation is characteristic of RP-encoding transcripts, which have markedly lower protein output compared with other transcripts with equally high ribosome densities.

### Keywords
Translation, Yeast, Ribosomal proteins, Protein charge, Tasep

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland


