### Accession
PXD037040

### Title
Tryptase regulation of joint lubrication and inflammation in osteoarthritis

### Description
Proteoglycan 4 (PRG4) is an extracellular matrix protein that maintains homeostasis through its boundary lubricating and anti-inflammatory properties. Altered expression and function of PRG4 have been associated with joint inflammatory diseases, including osteoarthritis (OA). We found that mast cell tryptase cleaves PRG4 in a dose- and time-dependent manner, which was confirmed by silver stain gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. Tryptase-treated PRG4 resulted in a reduction of lubrication. Compared to full-length, processed PRG4 was shown to further activate NF-B expression in cells overexpressing TLR2, -4, and -5. In the destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM) model of OA in rat, tryptase and PRG4 colocalized at the site of injury in knee cartilage and were associated with disease severity. Primary synovial fibroblasts from OA patients or healthy subjects treated with tryptase and/or PRG4, and synovial cells from OA patients, were subjected to a quantitative shotgun proteomics and proteome changes were characterized, further supporting the role of NF-B activation. We identified tryptase as a modulator of joint lubrication via the processing of PRG4 in OA.

### Sample Protocol
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry All liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry experiment were carried out by the Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry core facility at the SAMS. Analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1,200 system. Tryptic peptides (2 µg) were loaded onto a C18 trap (75 µm × 2 cm; Acclaim PepMap 100, P/N 164946; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 2 µL/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC-mass spectrometry grade water). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-mass spectrometry grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3% µL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 µm × 50 cm; PepMap RSLC C18; P/N ES803; Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were then eletrosprayed using 2.3 kV into the ion transfer tube (300° C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full mass spectrometry scan at a resolution of 120, 000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) between 375 and 1,575 and a +2 to +4 charge. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain Control) and the maximum injection time were set at 4 x 105 and 50 ms, respectively.  The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3s cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 2 x 104 were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window of m/z 0.7) and fragmented with HCD (38% collision energy) in the ion routing Multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. The AGC, the maximum injection time and the first mass were set at 1 x105, 105 ms, and 100 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s to avoid of the acquisition of the same precursor ion having a similar m/z (±10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data and bioinformatic analysis  Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database using the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.0.1, peptide-spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01 for the shotgun proteomics data and < 0.05 for the N-terminomics/TAILS data. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.05 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915Da). For the shotgun proteomics data, cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P (search for free N-terminus and only for lysines), with up to two missed cleavages allowed. The files evidence.txt and proteinGroups.txt were analyzed by MSstatsTMT (v2.4.0)40 using R software (v4.2.0) (R Core Team (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/) for the statistical analysis. For the N-terminomics/TAILS data, the cleavage site specificity was set to semi-ArgC (search for free N-terminus) for the TAILS data and was set to ArgC for the preTAILS data, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cut-off values were determined after log(2) transformation by boxplot-and-whiskers analysis using the BoxPlotR tool80. Database searches were limited to a maximal length of 40 residues per peptide. Peptide sequences matching reverse or contaminant entries were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteases, Tryptase, Proteomics, N-terminomics, Lubrication, Lubricin, Osteoarthritis, Proteoglycan-4, Single-cell rna-seq

### Affiliations
University of Calgay 
McCaig institute for Bone and Joint Health, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, AB, Canada

### Submitter
Nabangshu Das

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
McCaig institute for Bone and Joint Health, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, AB, Canada


