### Accession
PXD031371

### Title
NanoTACs: NanoLuc-Targeting Protein Degraders that Parallel Existing Technology

### Description
NanoLuc-targeting PROTACs (NanoTACs) hijack the CRBN and VHL cullin-RING ligase complexes to trigger proteasomal degradation of substrates tagged with the 19 kDa luminescent NanoLuc tag. In order to validate the system and confirm selective degradation of the target protein and assess any potential off-target degradation, here DDA-PASEF label-free quantification was performed to monitor target-induced degradation following addition of NC4.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were extracted with 5% SDS (including 100 mM TEAB) and processed using micro S-traps as described by the manufacturer (Protifi). 200 ng of reconstituted peptides were injected onto a M-Class UPLC (Waters) connected to a timsTOF pro II (Bruker). Peptides were separated using a 110-min gradient (solvent A, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B, 99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) on a C18 analytical column (IonOpticks, Aurora Series Emitter Column, AUR2-25075C18A 25 cm x 75 µm).

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent PASEF acquisition was performed and searched with MSfragger (v3.1) within the Fragpipe framework (v17.0) using the MaxLFQ algorithm at a 1% false-discovery rate. Data was processed and visualised with the DEP R package.

### Publication Abstract
Modulation of protein abundance using tag-Targeted Protein Degrader (tTPD) systems targeting FKBP12<sup>F36V</sup> (dTAGs) or HaloTag7 (HaloPROTACs) are powerful approaches for preclinical target validation. Interchanging tags and tag-targeting degraders is important to achieve efficient substrate degradation, yet limited degrader/tag pairs are available and side-by-side comparisons have not been performed. To expand the tTPD repertoire we developed catalytic NanoLuc-targeting PROTACs (NanoTACs) to hijack the CRL4<sup>CRBN</sup> complex and degrade NanoLuc tagged substrates, enabling rapid luminescence-based degradation screening. To benchmark NanoTACs against existing tTPD systems we use an interchangeable reporter system to comparatively test optimal degrader/tag pairs. Overall, we find the dTAG system exhibits superior degradation. To align tag-induced degradation with physiology we demonstrate that NanoTACs limit MLKL-driven necroptosis. In this work we extend the tTPD platform to include NanoTACs adding flexibility to tTPD studies, and benchmark each tTPD system to highlight the importance of comparing each system against each substrate.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Protac

### Affiliations
WEHI
Ubiquitin Signalling Division, WEHI

### Submitter
Simon Cobbold

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Cobbold
Ubiquitin Signalling Division, WEHI


