### Accession
PXD029481

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Analysis Expands the Roles of Lysine -Hydroxybutyrylation Pathway in Response to Environmental β-Hydroxybutyrate

### Description
Lysine -hydroxybutyrylation (Kbhb) is a newly identified protein post-translational modification that derived from the ketone body β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB). BHB is synthesized in the liver from fatty acids and could be delivered to peripheral tissues when the supply of glucose is too low for the body’s energetic needs. The plasma concentration of BHB can increase up to 20 mM during starvation and in pathological conditions. Despite the progresses, how the cells that do not produce BHB respond to elevated environmental BHB remains largely unknown. Given that BHB significantly drives Kbhb, here we performed a quantitative proteomics study to characterize the BHB-induced lysine -hydroxybutyrylome and acetylome. A total of 840 unique Kbhb sites across 429 proteins were identified, with 42 sites from 39 proteins being increased by more than 50% in response to BHB. The upregulated β-hydroxybutyrylome induced by BHB are involved in aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, 2-oxocarboxylic acid metabolism, citrate cycle (TCA cycle), glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and pyruvate metabolism pathways. Moreover, some BHB-targeted Kbhb substrates are potentially linked to diseases such as cancer. Taken together, this study revealed the dynamics of lysine -hydroxybutyrylome and acetylome in response to environmental BHB, which sheds light on the roles for Khib in regulation of diverse cellular processes and provides new insights into the biological functions of BHB.

### Sample Protocol
Dissolved the peptide obtained above in NETN buffer (100 mm NaCl, 1 mm EDTA, 50 mm Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with 20 μL of pan anti-Kbhb or pan anti-Kac antibody-immobilized protein A beads at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. After incubation, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
For the acquired raw files, searching was performed against UniProt Mouse protein database (17027 entries, http://http://www.uniprot.org) using Peaks Studio (Version 10.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). The enzyme was specified as trypsin, the peptide mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 0.05 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99 Da), acetylation of proteins N-termini (+42.01 Da), β-hydroxybutyrylation on lysine and acetylation on lysine were specified as variable modifications. Maximum missed cleavages per peptide was set as 3. Peptide sequences matching the Human UniProt database were obtained at a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01 for both proteins and peptides. A decoy fusion method was employed by PEAKS for FDR calculation. Quantitative data were generated by the PEAKS Q module using “Precursor Ion Quantification” under the “Quantifications” options, and “SILAC-2plex (R10, K8)” method was selected.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine <i>&#x3b2;</i>-hydroxybutyrylation (Kbhb) is a newly identified protein posttranslational modification (PTM) derived from <i>&#x3b2;</i>-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), a product of ketone body metabolism in liver. BHB could serve as an energy source and play a role in the suppression of oxidative stress. The plasma concentration of BHB could increase up to 20&#x2009;mM during starvation and in pathological conditions. Despite the progress, how the cells derived from extrahepatic tissues respond to elevated environmental BHB remains largely unknown. Given that BHB can significantly drive Kbhb, we characterized the BHB-induced lysine <i>&#x3b2;</i>-hydroxybutyrylome and acetylome by quantitative proteomics. A total of 840 unique Kbhb sites on 429 proteins were identified, with 42 sites on 39 proteins increased by more than 50% in response to BHB. The results showed that the upregulated Kbhb induced by BHB was involved in aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, 2-oxocarboxylic acid metabolism, citrate cycle, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and pyruvate metabolism pathways. Moreover, some BHB-induced Kbhb substrates were significantly involved in diseases such as cancer. Taken together, we investigate the dynamics of lysine <i>&#x3b2;</i>-hydroxybutyrylome and acetylome induced by environmental BHB, which reveals the roles of Kbhb in regulating various biological processes and expands the biological functions of BHB.

### Keywords
Posttranslational modification; lysine -hydroxybutyrylation; lysine acetylation; quantitative proteomics; substrate

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr He Huang
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica


