### Accession
PXD010683

### Title
Quantitative proteomics links the intermediate filament nestin to vemurafenib resistance in melanoma cell lines

### Description
Targeted inhibition of mutated kinases using selective MAP kinase inhibitors in malignant melanoma often results in temporary improvement of the metastatic disease followed by rapid development of resistance. To gain insights in molecular processes that govern resistance, we performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomics profiling of vemurafenib-resistant and -sensitive melanoma cells. Among downregulated proteins in vemurafenib-resistant cell lines we detected multiple proteins involved in cytoskeletal organization and signaling, including the intermediate filament nestin, which was one of the most down-regulated proteins. Previous studies showed that nestin is expressed in various types of solid tumors and its abundance correlates with malignant phenotype of transformed cells. However, the role of nestin in cancer cells with regard to acquired resistance is still poorly understood. We performed CRISPR/Cas9 knockout of the nestin gene (NES) in vemurafenib-sensitive cells and showed that loss of nestin leads to increased cellular proliferation and colony formation upon treatment with BRAF and MEK inhibitors. Moreover, nestin depletion led to increased invasiveness and metalloproteinase activity similar to resistant phenotype of melanoma cells. Finally, phosphoproteome analysis revealed that nestin depletion influenced signaling through integrin and PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathways and led to increased focal adhesion kinase expression and phosphorylation. Taken together, our results reveal that nestin is associated with acquired vemurafenib resistance in melanoma cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
The BRAFV600E-mutated melanoma cell line A375 was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection. A375 cells were either grown in RPMI-1640 SILAC lacking arginine, lysine and leucine. Leucine (12.5 mg/ml), penicillin/streptomycin (100 U/ml), dialyzed FBS (10%) and stable isotope-encoded arginine (Arg0, Arg6, Arg10) and lysine (Lys0, Lys4, Lys8) were added to the SILAC medium. Cells were grown in a humidified atmosphere, 5% CO2 at 37°C in either ‘light’, ‘medium’ or ‘heavy’ RPMI-1640 SILAC media. Cell lysis was performed in lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor (complete Mini EDTA-free tablets, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor buffers (5 mM glycerol-2-phosphate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) and 1% N-Octylglucoside (NOG) on ice for 10 min. DNA and RNA in the lysate was removed using benzonase for 10 min on room temperature followed by centrifugation at 2,800 xg (10°C, 20 min). Remaining NOG detergent was removed by acetone precipitation. Protein pellets were then resolved in lysis buffer without NOG and protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. Extracted proteins from each cell line were mixed 1:1 (‘light’ to ‘medium’) or 1:1:1 (‘light’ to ‘medium’ to ‘heavy’) and reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 1 µg of Lys-C for 3 h at RT. 1 µg of trypsin was added and tryptic digestion was carried out overnight. To stop the digestion, 1% TFA was added and peptides were purified on Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge and eluted in 80% ACN for high pH reverse phase chromatography or finally desalted on C18 StageTips. Prior mixing of protein samples, label incorporation and proper mixing was checked. FFPE tissue of pre-and post-treated patients with vemurafenib (2 serial sections, 5 µM thickwere first de-paraffinized by two washes in xylene (5 min, 50°C) followed by three serial washes in ethanol for 10 min each. Ethanol was removed completely and sections air-dried. Lysis was carried out in 4% SDS, 50 mM DTT, 100 mM HEPES pH 7.5 supplemented with protease inhibitor at 95°C for 60 min and by sonication for 15 min. 10 µg of proteins were purified by acetone precipitation and protein pellet was resolved in lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM Tris pH 8.0). Proteins in the cleared lysate (13,000 xg, 10 min) were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 60 min, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for an additional 60 min and LysC digestion was carried with 1 µg of LysC for 3 h at room temperature. After adding four volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 µg of trypsin was added for tryptic digestion overnight. Digestion was stopped by adding 1% TFA and peptides were loaded onto C18 StageTips for desalting and subsequent dimetylation labelling (35). Briefly, peptides were labelled with either 4% CH2O, 0.6 M NaBH3CN (‘light’) or 4% 13CD2O, 0.6 M NaBD3CN (‘heavy’) in phosphate buffer (50 mM NaH2PO4, 50 mM Na2HPO4). After washing with solvent A, peptides were eluted with solvent B and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.   1-2 mg of peptides were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 beads. Purified peptides were added to the TiO2 beads in DHB solution and incubated for 10 min. Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 beads were sequentially washed with 30% ACN in 1% TFA, 50% ACN in 1% TFA followed by 80% ACN in 1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 5% NH4OH in 60% ACN into 20% TFA followed by 80% ACN in 1% FA. The eluate was reduced by vacuum centrifugation, pH was adjusted to < 2.7 with TFA and peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips. All samples were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC coupled to an QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were separated on a 20 cm analytical column in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin. Peptides were eluted using a 90 min gradient for phosphoproteome, 230 min gradient for proteome analysis and 42 min gradients for fractionated peptide pools generated by solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% ACN in 0.1% acetic acid) at 40°C and a flow rate at 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode. Full MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 and within a mass range of m/z 300 to 1,650. For higher collision induced dissociation (HCD), the 12 most intensive peptides were selected and MS/MS spectra were recorded with a resolution of 60,000. For 45 min gradients, fast scanning top20 method using resolution of 15,000 for HCD scans with maximum fill time of 30 ms was acquired. For the analysis of TiO2 enriched phosphopeptides, full MS were acquired in the range of 300 - 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000. Seven most abundant precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation  and MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 on the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8). The Andromeda search engine (39) searched MS/MS data against Uniprot Homo sapiens (release 2015_10_23; 91,646 entries) database containing commonly observed contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation at serine (S), threonine (T) or tyrosine (Y) were defined as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as a protease. For quantification, the amino acids (Lys4)/(Arg6) and (Lys8)/(Arg10) were defined as ‘medium’ and ‘heavy’ labels for the comparison of cell lines. Dimethylation on peptide N termini and lysine residues was defined as light (+28.03 Da) and heavy (+36.08 Da) labels for the comparison of pre-and post-treated tumors (FFPE specimens). No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. The MS tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 20 ppm for the analysis using HCD fragmentation method. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set to 1%. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. Only protein groups with at least two peptides were included in the final datasets and all contaminants were removed. Protein groups were kept for further statistical analysis only if quantified in 3 out of 3 replicates (for the first experiment) and 2 out of 2 replicates (for the second experiment). To find significant differences between sensitive and resistant A375 cells, log2-transformed SILAC ratios were subjected to t-test in Perseus, with a permutation based FDR threshold of 0.01 and s0 value of 1. The SILAC ratio of identified phosphorylation sites were normalized to the ratios of corresponding protein groups. All term enrichment analyses were performed using Perseus, by mapping reference lists or subsets of proteins with annotation terms. The resources used for annotation of proteins were Gene Ontology (GO), Biological Processes (GOBP), GO Cellular Compartment (GOCC), GO Molecular Functions (GOMF) and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). In addition, significantly changing proteins determined by t-test analysis (FDR ≤ 0.1, s0 value of 1)were mapped to pathways and network associations using STRING against the whole genome as the statistical background. The top 20 significant pathways were selected. The median of the t-test difference of assigned significantly changing proteins was calculated for each pathway

### Publication Abstract
Targeted inhibition of mutated kinases using selective MAP kinase inhibitors in malignant melanoma often results in temporary improvement of clinical symptoms followed by rapid development of resistance. To gain insights in molecular processes that govern resistance, we performed SILAC-based quantitative proteomics profiling of vemurafenib-resistant and -sensitive melanoma cells. Among downregulated proteins in vemurafenib-resistant cell lines we detected multiple proteins involved in cytoskeletal organization and signaling, including the intermediate filament nestin, which was one of the most downregulated proteins. Previous studies showed that nestin is expressed in various types of solid tumors and its abundance correlates with malignant phenotype of transformed cells. However, the role of nestin in cancer cells regarding acquired resistance is still poorly understood. We performed CRISPR/Cas9 knockout of the nestin gene (<i>NES</i>) in vemurafenib-sensitive cells and showed that loss of nestin leads to increased cellular proliferation and colony formation upon treatment with BRAF<sup>V600E</sup> and MEK inhibitors. Moreover, nestin depletion led to increased invasiveness and metalloproteinase activity like the phenotype of melanoma cells with acquired resistance to the BRAF inhibitor. Finally, phosphoproteome analysis revealed that nestin depletion influenced signaling through integrin and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways and led to increased focal adhesion kinase abundance and phosphorylation. Taken together, our results reveal that nestin is associated with acquired vemurafenib resistance in melanoma cells.

### Keywords
Melanoma, Cytoskeletal proteins, Drug resistance, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Macek
Chair, Quantitative Proteomics Director, Proteome Center Tuebingen Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology University of Tuebingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tuebingen Germany


