### Accession
PXD019907

### Title
OTUD5 complex mass spectrometry

### Description
DUBs are involved in various pathways and signalling networks by pairing with E3 ubiquitin ligases in protein complexes. In order to test whether OTUD5 associates with an E3 ubiquitin ligase to regulate cell proliferation, the stable Flag-OTUD5/Hep3B cell line was established by transfecting Hep3B cells with plasmids expressing pCIN4-Flag-OTUD5. The cellular factors interacting with OTUD5 were purified by anti-Flag antibody-conjugated M2 beads.

### Sample Protocol
The nuclear extracts of the stable Flag-OTUD5/Hep3B cell line were prepared and subjected to a Flag M2 immunoprecipitation. The affinity purified OTUD5-associated proteins were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The data was processed in accordance with standard procedures.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic processes exert their greatest effect by targeting regulators of cell proliferation. Studying the mechanism underlying growth augmentation is expected to improve clinical therapies. The ovarian tumor (OTU) subfamily deubiquitinases have been implicated in the regulation of critical cell-signaling cascades, but most OTUs functions remain to be investigated. Through an unbiased RNAi screen, knockdown of OTUD5 is shown to significantly accelerate cell growth. Further investigation reveals that OTUD5 depletion leads to the enhanced transcriptional activity of TRIM25 and the inhibited expression of PML by altering the ubiquitination level of TRIM25. Importantly, OTUD5 knockdown accelerates tumor growth in a nude mouse model. OTUD5 expression is markedly downregulated in tumor tissues. The reduced OTUD5 level is associated with an aggressive phenotype and a poor clinical outcome for cancers patients. Our findings reveal a mechanism whereby OTUD5 regulates gene transcription and suppresses tumorigenesis by deubiquitinating TRIM25, providing a potential target for oncotherapy.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Otud5

### Affiliations
Peking university

### Submitter
Fangzhou Li

### Lab Head
Dr Fangzhou Li
Peking university


