### Accession
PXD018896

### Title
A broad response to intracellular long-chain polyphosphate in human cells

### Description
Polyphosphates (PolyP) are highly anionic, linear polymers composed of long chains of inorganic phosphates linked together by phosphoanhydride bonds. PolyP chains are found in all kingdoms of life, and play roles in phosphate homeostasis, cell growth, infection, and blood coagulation. Unlike in bacteria and yeast, the mammalian enzymes responsible for the synthesis and degradation of polyP are unknown, which presents a challenge for the study of polyP in higher eukaryotes. To overcome this, we use a system to produce polyP inside of human cells through the ectopic expression of the E. coli Ppk1 synthetic enzyme. Here, we present the results from large-scale transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of polyP producing HEK293T cells. We uncovered >350 RNAs and 14 proteins that show changes following in vivo polyP accumulation. Follow up on specific hits revealed that the internal accumulation of polyP resulted in a significant decrease in the dehydrogenase/reductase DHRS2 without a corresponding increase in p53 phosphorylation, and activation of the ERK1/2-ERG1 signaling axis. Finally, following upregulation of internal polyP we observed the relocalization and redistribution of several nuclear proteins, including chromatin bound proteins DEK, TAF10, GTF2I and the translation initiation factor eIF5b. Altogether, our work serves as a novel resource to understand the impact of increased intracellular polyP in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines & maintenance: The HEK293T cell lines used in this study were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC CRL-3216). Cells were grown at 37°C and 5% CO2 to ~70% confluency in DMEM (Wisent, 319-015-CL) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (Wisent, 080-150) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin-Amphotericin B solution (Wisent, 450-201-EL).   Transfection and lysate harvest:  HEK293T cells were grown to ~70% confluency and transiently transfected with 2-28 μg of either control plasmid (pcDNA3.1-) or ppk1+ expression plasmids (pcDNA3.1-ppk1+), (pcDNA3.1-HAppk1+) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 11668019) or Lipofectamine LTX Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 15338100). Transfected cells were grown for 48 hours in OptiMeM (Fisher Scientific, 31985-070) and then harvested.   Protein:  To isolate total protein, cells were washed with ice-cold 1 X PBS, scraped, and lysed in ~200 μL (3.5 cm plate) or ~1 mL (10 cm plate) of ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA) [50 mL ice cold lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, Hydrochloric acid (Fisher Scientific, A144 212), 100 mM NaCl (Fisher Scientific, AM9759), 1 mM EDTA (Sigma-Aldrich, 03690-100ml), 1 % IGEPAL (Sigma-Aldrich, I8896-50ML), 0.5 % Sodium Deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich, D6750-25G), 0.1 % SDS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 15525-017)], 500 μL Sodium Fluoride (0.5 M, Sigma-Aldrich, 201154-5G), 500 μL Glycerol-2-Phosphate (1 M), 500 μL Nicotinamide (1 M Sigma-Aldrich, N3376-100G), 500 μL PMSF (1 mg/mL Sigma-Aldrich, P7626-1G), 500 μL Sodium Butyrate (1 M Sigma-Aldrich, 303410-100G), and 1 cOmplete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche, 04693159001)]. Following a 15 minute incubation on ice, the cells were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 13,500 RPM. Supernatant was collected and either used immediately for analysis with immunoblotting or stored at -20C.  To isolate the cell population for cell fractionation experiments, cells were washed with ice-cold 1 X PBS, scraped, and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 4C at 350 RCF. Cell pellet was then resuspended in 1 X PBS and cell fractionation was carried out using the Cell Fractionation Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, 9038) according to manufacturer's protocol.   Preparation of mass spectrometry samples: Mass spectrometry was carried out on HEK293T cells transiently transfected in either CTRL or ppk1+ plasmid expressing conditions (five biological replicates each condition). Following a 48 hour transfection (detailed in “Transfection and lysate harvest”), proteins were harvested, pelleted, and frozen at -80 °C. A small amount of protein was used immediately for analysis on NuPAGE gels to confirm detection of shifts on target proteins DEK and MESD. Protein pellets were shipped overnight on dry ice to the UC Davis Genome Center Proteomics Core Facility.   Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis: Liquid Chromatography (LC) separation was carried out on a Proxeon Easy1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Proxeon nanospray source (operating in positive ionization mode). After LC separation, digested peptides were then reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. 1 μg of each sample was then loaded onto a 100 μm×25 mm Magic C18, 100Å 5 μm reverse phase trap wherein samples were desalted online, and directly eluted onto an analytical column (maintained at 40⁰ C) for on-line separation. The analytical column used was a 75um×150 mmMagic C18 200 Å 3um reverse phase column. Peptides were then eluted into the mass spectrometer using a 2-buffer gradient (Buffer A: 0.1 % formic acid in water and Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  A 144 minute gradient was run as follows: 2 to 25% Buffer B (90 minutes), 25% to 40% Buffer B (26 minutes), 40 to 100% Buffer B (4 minutes), held at 100% Buffer B (3 minutes). Finally, ending with 2% Buffer B (21 minutes). The analytical column used tapers off into the electrospray emitter. The peptides were then ionized (spray voltage 2.0 kV). An Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to collect the mass spectra. Mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent mode with the following: MS survey scan (m/z range 350–1,600), 70,000 resolution, target of 1 × 106 ions or a maximum injection time of 30 ms, 15 MS/MS scans (where the top 15 ions in the MS spectra were subjected to high-energy collisional dissociation, and normalised fragmentation energy of 27%. The MS/MS spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500 and a target of 5 × 104 ions or a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The isolation mass window used for precursor ion selection was 1.6 m/z, with accepted charge states 2-4, and a normalized collision energy of 27% used for fragmentation. Finally, precursor ion dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS RAW data files were converted to mzML files using MSConvert from ProteoWizard. mzML files were then searched using X! Tandem against the UniProt human protein sequence database (downloaded March 4, 2019, from uniprot.org; ) using a target-decoy strategy. The database contained 73,948 protein sequences amended with 49 potential contaminants from the cRAP database of common laboratory contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap) and an equal number of reversed decoy sequences. The database search was performed using trypsin as the digestive enzyme and allowing for one missed cleavage, as well as carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification. Up to five variable modifications were allowed per peptide, including oxidation of Met and Trp,,as well as n-terminal acetylation. Instrument parameters and match tolerances were set to Orbitrap defaults. A protein identification required at least one non-redundant peptide (unique) identification. Protein identifications were grouped and clustered using Scaffold (v4.1, Proteome Software). Protein and peptide identification confidence threshold was set to 1% and were matched between runs and second peptides enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Mathieu Lavallée-Adam

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Downey
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Canada


