### Accession
PXD032670

### Title
Amelioration of Pathologic -Synuclein-Induced Parkinson’s Disease by Irisin

### Description
Physical activity is thought to provide clinical benefit in Parkinson’s diseas (PD). Irisin is a blood-brain barrier permeable exercise-induced polypeptide secreted by muscle that mediates, in part, the beneficial effects of exercise. Here we show that irisin prevents pathologic -synuclein (-syn) induced neurodegeneration in the -syn preformed fibril mouse model of sporadic PD. Intravenous delivery of adenoviral irisin in vivo after the stereotaxic intrastriatal injection of -syn pre-formed fibrils reduced the formation of pathologic -syn and prevented the loss of dopamine neurons and reductions in striatal dopamine.  Irisin also reduced the -syn pre-formed fibril induced motor deficits as assessed by the pole test and grip strength test.   Administration of recombinant irisin in primary cortical neurons prevented pathologic -syn toxicity. Tandem mass spectrometry and biochemical analysis revealed that irisin reduced pathologic -syn by enhancing endolysosomal degradation of pathologic -syn. Our findings highlight the potential for therapeutic disease modification of irisin in PD.

### Sample Protocol
Primary cortical neurons were pre-incubated with Irisin (50 ng/ml) for 1 h and -syn PFF was administered the neurons were further incubated with Irisin for 1 or 4 days. Soluble lysates were extracted from cells using a buffer comprised of 1 % Triton X-100 in tris buffer saline (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) with a protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein concentration was determined using a Peirce BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 15 g of protein from each sample was prepared for MS analysis. Samples were diluted with an equal volume of prep buffer (400 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 0.5% SDS, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride) and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. Iodoacetimide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM to each sample and incubated for 25 min in the dark. Finally, DTT was added to each sample to a final concentration of 10 mM. A buffer exchange was carried out using a modified SP3 protocol (41, 42). Briefly, ~250 g of each SpeedBead Magnetic Carboxylate modified particles (Cytiva; 45152105050250, 65152105050250) mixed at a 1:1 ratio were added to each sample. 100% ethanol was added to each sample to achieve a final ethanol concentration of at least 50%. Samples were incubated with gentle shaking for 15 min. Samples were washed three times with 80% ethanol. Protein was eluted from SP3 beads using 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 containing trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) and Lys-C (Wako). Samples were digested overnight at 37° C with vigorous shaking. Acetonitrile was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of ~33%. Each sample was labelled, in the presence of SP3 beads, with ~65 g of TMTpro-18plex reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) (Thompson et al., 2019, Li, et al., 2020, Li, et al., 2021). Following confirmation of satisfactory labelling (>97%), excess TMTpro reagents were quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3%. The full volume from each sample was pooled and acetonitrile was removed by vacuum centrifugation for one hour. The pooled sample was acidified using formic acid and peptides were de-salted using a Sep-Pak Vac 50 mg tC18 cartridge (Waters). Peptides were eluted in 70% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 5% acetonitrile and fractionated by basic pH reverse phase HPLC. In total 24 fractions were collected. The fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and desalted by stage-tip. Final peptides were eluted in, 70% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid, dried, and finally resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid. In the end, 11 of 24 fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle(44). Database searching included all mouse entries from Uniprot (downloaded in July, 2014). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g., trypsin, keratins, etc.) were appended as well. Searches were performed using the comet search algorithm. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 1.0005 Da product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification.       Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (45). PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously (46), while considering the following parameters: comet log expect, different sequence delta comet log expect (percent difference between the first hit and the next hit with a different peptide sequence), missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, precursor mass accuracy, and fraction of ions matched. Each run was filtered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated at a data set level. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method (47), proteins were filtered to the target 1% FDR level.      For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 160 or greater across all channels. For each protein, the filtered peptide TMTpro SN values were summed to generate protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Physical activity provides clinical benefit in Parkinson's disease (PD). Irisin is an exercise-induced polypeptide secreted by skeletal muscle that crosses the blood-brain barrier and mediates certain effects of exercise. Here, we show that irisin prevents pathologic &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;-syn)-induced neurodegeneration in the &#x3b1;-syn preformed fibril (PFF) mouse model of sporadic PD. Intravenous delivery of irisin via viral vectors following the stereotaxic intrastriatal injection of &#x3b1;-syn PFF cause a reduction in the formation of pathologic &#x3b1;-syn and prevented the loss of dopamine neurons and lowering of striatal dopamine. Irisin also substantially reduced the &#x3b1;-syn PFF-induced motor deficits as assessed behaviorally by the pole and grip strength test. Recombinant sustained irisin treatment of primary cortical neurons attenuated &#x3b1;-syn PFF toxicity by reducing the formation of phosphorylated serine 129 of &#x3b1;-syn and neuronal cell death. Tandem mass spectrometry and biochemical analysis revealed that irisin reduced pathologic &#x3b1;-syn by enhancing endolysosomal degradation of pathologic &#x3b1;-syn. Our findings highlight the potential for therapeutic disease modification of irisin in PD.

### Keywords
Irisin, Neurodegeneration, Alpha-synuclein, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

### Submitter
Jonathan Van Vranken

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce Spiegelman
Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA


