### Accession
PXD005864

### Title
Proteomic analysis of neuroblastoma-derived exosomes LC-MS

### Description
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor. At diagnosis, around 70% of patients with metastatic disease present bone-marrow (BM) infiltration; however, the mechanism underlying this specific tropism has to be elucidated. Tumor-derived exosomes may support metastatic progression in several tumors by interacting with the microenvironment, and may serve as tumor biomarkers. The main objective of this study was to identify an exosomal signature associated with NB metastatic BM dissemination. Therefore, we characterized the proteomic cargo of exosomes isolated from NB cell lines derived from primary tumor (PT) and BM metastasis. The comparison among all exosomal proteins showed 15 proteins exclusively present in PT, mainly involved in neuronal development, and 6 proteins in BM metastasis-derived exosomes related to cancer progression. Significant proteins obtained with t-test analysis, performed between the 2 groups (PT and BM metastasis), revealed that PT exosomes contain a higher level of proteins involved in extra-cellular matrix (ECM) assembly and adhesion, as well as in neuronal development. Exosomes isolated from BM metastasis showed proteins involved in ameboidal cell migration and mitochondrial activity. This work shows that proteomic profiling of NB-derived exosomes reflects the advanced tumor stage and may be considered as potential tumor biomarker

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes pellets obtained by sequential centrifugation were re-suspended in 25 µl of lysis buffer (6M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH8.5). The exosomes were lysed, reduced and alkylated and lastly digested in a single step and then loaded into StageTip.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software, version 1.5.5.30, was used to process the raw data. Perseus software, version 1.5.5.3, was used to analyze the label-free experiments. Protein groups were filtered to require 100% valid values in at least one experimental group.  The network analysis was performed using Cytoscape core app.

### Publication Abstract
Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor. Around 70% of patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis present bone-marrow infiltration, which is considered a marker of poor outcome; however, the mechanism underlying this specific tropism has to be elucidated. Tumor-derived exosomes may support metastatic progression in several tumors by interacting with the microenvironment, and may serve as tumor biomarkers. The main objective of this study is to identify an exosomal signature associated with NB metastatic bone-marrow dissemination. Therefore, the proteomic cargo of exosomes isolated from NB cell lines derived from primary tumor and bone-marrow metastasis is characterized. The comparison among exosomal proteins show 15 proteins exclusively present in primary tumor-derived exosomes, mainly involved in neuronal development, and 6 proteins in metastasis-derived exosomes related to cancer progression. Significant proteins obtain with statistical analysis performed between the two groups, reveal that primary tumor exosomes contain a higher level of proteins involved in extra-cellular matrix (ECM) assembly and adhesion, as well as in neuronal development. Exosomes isolated from bone-marrow metastasis exhibit proteins involved in ameboidal cell migration and mitochondrial activity. This work suggests that proteomic profiling of NB-derived exosomes reflects the tumor stage and may be considered as potential tumor biomarker.

### Keywords
Signature, Proteomics, Neuroblastoma, Metastasis, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Istituto G. Gaslini
Gaslini Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Istituto G. Gaslini


