### Accession
PXD040086

### Title
Contrasting effects of whole-body and hepatocyte-specific deletion of the RNA polymerase III repressor Maf1 in the mouse

### Description
The conserved phosphoprotein MAF1 is the main known direct repressor of RNA polymerase III (Pol III). MAF1 is phosphorylated and inactivated by the nutrient-sensing TORC1 kinase, making MAF1 a nutrient effector for Pol III transcription. MAF1 has been associated with lipid metabolism in D. melanogaster, C. elegans, and the mouse. However, whereas downregulation of Maf1 generally increases lipogenesis, Maf1-/- mice are lean even under a High Fat (HF) diet. Here we compared Maf1-/- mice fed a Chow diet with mice lacking Maf1 specifically in hepatocytes (Maf1hep-/- mice) fed either a Chow or HF diet. Unlike Maf1-/- mice, Maf1hep-/- mice become slightly heavier than control mice at an old age and much earlier under a HF diet, with increased adiposity. Liver ChIPseq, RNAseq and proteomics analyses indicate increased Pol III occupancy at Pol III genes, very few differences in mRNA accumulation, and subtle changes in protein accumulation that are consistent with increased lipogenesis. RNAseq and metabolite profiling indicate that liver phenotypes of Maf1-/- mice are strongly influenced by systemic inter-organ communication. Notable changes observed in the three phenotypically distinct cohorts include downregulation of Mouse Urinary Proteins, upregulation of Cyp2a4 expression, suggestive of an alteration of Growth Hormone levels or secretion pattern, and downregulation of Angiogenin, a phenomenon that might be directly linked to increased Pol III occupancy of tRNA genes in the main Angiogenin promoter region.

### Sample Protocol
We set up three cohorts of 13 to 14 week-old animals: Maf1-/- mice under a Chow diet and Maf1hep-/- mice under both a Chow and a High Fat diet (HF, with 60% of calories coming from lard) from 4-5 weeks of age, with Control mice for each condition. All mice were under the C57BL/6 background. Animals were housed under 12h light/dark conditions, at a constant temperature of 22°C and fed ad-libitum with free access to water. Animals were weighed, fasted overnight, refed for 4 hours, and then sacrificed to provide samples for ChIPseq, RNAseq, and proteomic analyses. Liver were flushed with PBS prior to dissection to remove blood. Liver samples (mean of 25 mg per sample) were extracted in 350 ul of Urea buffer. Fifty microliters aliquots of replicate samples were precipitated with 4 volumes of cold acetone. After resuspension in miST lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate , 100mM Tris pH 8.6 , 10 mM DTT ), samples were heated 5 min at 95°C. 50 ug of proteins were transferred in new tubes, based on tryptophane quantification, and digested following a modified version of the iST method (named miST method). Briefly, after addition of 0.02 ug of yeast ADH digest as standard for quality control, samples were diluted 1:1 (v:v) with water containing 4mM MgCl2 and benzonase, and incubated for 15 minutes at RT to digest nucleic acids. Reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding ¼ vol (25 ul) of 160 mM chloroacetamide (final 32 mM) and incubating at 25°C for 45min in the dark. Samples were adjusted to 3 mM EDTA and digested with 0.5 ug Trypsin/LysC mix  for 1h at 37°C, followed by a second 1h digestion with an additional 0.5ug of proteases. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two sample volumes of ethyl acetate 100%/1% TFA were added to the digests, the bottom aquous phases were collected and desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) SOLA plate by centrifugation. After washing with ethyl acetate/0.5% TFA and 2% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA, peptides were eluted in 300 ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia. Eluates after SCX desalting were dried, and resuspended in 50 ul of 50 mM TEAB buffer, pH 8.0.  For labelling, 0.2 mg of TMT reagent in 20ul acetonitrile were added to 25 ul of samples for 1h at RT, after which excess reagent was quenched with 4ul of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT. After mixing, the TMT multiplex samples were dried and desalted on a SepPak micro C18 96-well plate. The dried desalted eluate was dissolved in 4M Urea containing 0.1% Ampholytes pH 3-10. 75% of the sample (187 ug) was fractionated by off-gel focusing. The 24 peptide fractions obtained were desalted on a SepPak micro C18 96-well plate, dried and dissolved in 25 ul of 0.05% trifluroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analyses. Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses of TMT samples were carried out on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer  interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 40 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles) with a 4-76% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 140 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur 4.2 software was used that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 1.5s. The precursor isolation window used was 0.7 Th. Peptides were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized energy of 37%. MS2 scans were done at a resolution of 50’000 in the Orbitrap cell, to resolve 10-plex TMT reporter ions. The m/z of fragmented precursors was then dynamically excluded from selection during 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed with MaxQuant 1.6.3.4 incorporating the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT labelling (peptide N-termini and lysine side chains) were selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The sequence databases used for searching were the mouse (Mus musculus) reference proteome (RefProt_Mus_musculus_171029.fasta) based on the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, version of October 29th, 2017, containing 52’572 sequences), and a “contaminant” database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc). Mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 20 ppm on HCD fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences. For TMT analysis, the raw reporter ion intensities generated by MaxQuant (with a mass tolerance of 0.003 Da) and summed for each protein group were used in all following steps to derive quantitation. The MaxQuant output tables “proteinGroups.txt” were processed with Perseus software to remove proteins matched to the contaminants database as well as proteins identified only by modified peptides or reverse database hits, and those without any quantitative values. Next, the tables were filtered to retain only proteins identified by a minimum of three peptides. After log-2 transformation of all intensity values, and normalization by median substraction, a two-samples T-test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction (threshold at 0.05 on the adjusted p-value) was performed between KO and WT groups. GO annotation enrichment test was carried out with Perseus, using average difference in log-2 scale between both groups, and applying a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 2%.

### Publication Abstract
MAF1 is a nutrient-sensitive, TORC1-regulated repressor of RNA polymerase III (Pol III). MAF1 downregulation leads to increased lipogenesis in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>, <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i>, and mice. However, <i>Maf1</i> <sup><i>-/-</i></sup> mice are lean as increased lipogenesis is counterbalanced by futile pre-tRNA synthesis and degradation, resulting in increased energy expenditure. We compared Chow-fed <i>Maf1</i> <sup><i>-/-</i></sup> mice with Chow- or High Fat (HF)-fed <i>Maf1</i> <sup><i>hep-/-</i></sup> mice that lack MAF1 specifically in hepatocytes. Unlike <i>Maf1</i> <sup><i>-/-</i></sup> mice, <i>Maf1</i> <sup><i>hep-/-</i></sup> mice become heavier and fattier than control mice with old age and much earlier under a HF diet. Liver ChIPseq, RNAseq and proteomics analyses indicate increased Pol III occupancy at Pol III genes, very few differences in mRNA accumulation, and protein accumulation changes consistent with increased lipogenesis. Futile pre-tRNA synthesis and degradation in the liver, as likely occurs in <i>Maf1</i> <sup><i>hep-/-</i></sup> mice, thus seems insufficient to counteract increased lipogenesis. Indeed, RNAseq and metabolite profiling indicate that liver phenotypes of <i>Maf1</i> <sup><i>-/-</i></sup> mice are strongly influenced by systemic inter-organ communication. Among common changes in the three phenotypically distinct cohorts, Angiogenin downregulation is likely linked to increased Pol III occupancy of tRNA genes in the Angiogenin promoter.

### Keywords
Hepatocyte, Mouse, Metabolic regulation, Rna polymerase iii, Transcription repressor, Maf1

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Nouria Hernandez
Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne


