### Accession
PXD009109

### Title
Oxidative posttranslational modifications of cysteine are associated to high intrinsic aerobic capacity in the skeletal and cardiac muscle

### Description
Oxidative posttranslational modifications (Ox-PTMs) regulate cellular homeostasis in several tissues, including skeletal and cardiac muscles. The putative relationship between Ox-PTMs and intrinsic components of oxidative energy metabolism has not been previously described. We determined the metabolic phenotype and the Ox-PTM profile in the skeletal and cardiac muscles of rats selected for low (LCR) or high (HCR) intrinsic aerobic capacity. The HCR rats have a pronounced increase in mitochondrial content and antioxidant capacity when compared to LCR rats in the skeletal muscle, but only modest changes in the cardiac muscle. Redox proteomics analysis reveals that HCR and LCR rats have different Ox-PTM of cysteine (Cys) residue profile in the skeletal and cardiac muscles. HCR rats have higher number of oxidized Cys residues in the skeletal muscle and conversely display higher number of reduced Cys residues in the cardiac muscle than LCR rats. Most of the proteins with differentially oxidized Cys residues in the skeletal muscle are important regulators of the oxidative metabolism. The most significantly oxidized protein in the skeletal muscle of HCR rats is malate dehydrogenase (MDH1). Interestingly, HCR rats show higher MDH1 activity in the skeletal muscle, but not in the cardiac muscle. Thus, this study uncovers an association between Ox-PTMs and intrinsic aerobic capacity, providing new insights into the role of Ox-PTMs as essential signaling to maintain metabolic homeostasis in different muscle types.

### Sample Protocol
After desalting, peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analyzed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, IL, US) interfaced with an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, IL, US) via a nanospray ESI ion source (Proxeon, Odense). Peptides were injected into a C-18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and further separated on a C-18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 50 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) using a multistep gradient with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid): From 0-6%B in 5 min, 6-20% B in 78 min, 20-25% B in 8 min, 25-40%B in 5 min, 40-100%B in 4min, 100% B in 10 min, 100-0% B in 1min and 9min with 100% A. The flow rate was 250 nl/min. Peptides eluted were analyzed on the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer operating in positive ion- and data dependent acquisition mode using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy 35, automatic gain control target value of 1E6 for Orbitrap MS and 1E3 for MS/MS scans. Each MS scan (m/z 400–1600) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM, followed by 20 MS/MS scans triggered for intensities above 500, at a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms for MS and 120 ms for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., US) using the SEQUEST HT search engine with the Dec 2013 version of the Rat protein sequence database from UniProt (UniProt Consortium). Enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum of two missed cleavages allowed was searched. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. The cysteine residue (labeled with OxICAT) oxidation was set as dynamic modification. The Percolator tool was used for peptide validation and a cutoff value of 0.01 for false discovery rate. Only peptides with high confidence were used for final protein identification. In order to further understand the biological relevance of the identified proteins, we performed functional enrichment analysis in the context of the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) databases using the Enrichr 40 and QIAGEN’S Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). A p value cut-off of 0.001 was used to identify enriched processes.

### Publication Abstract
Given the association between high aerobic capacity and the prevention of metabolic diseases, elucidating the mechanisms by which high aerobic capacity regulates whole-body metabolic homeostasis is a major research challenge. Oxidative post-translational modifications (Ox-PTMs) of proteins can regulate cellular homeostasis in skeletal and cardiac muscles, but the relationship between Ox-PTMs and intrinsic components of oxidative energy metabolism is still unclear. Here, we evaluated the Ox-PTM profile in cardiac and skeletal muscles of rats bred for low (LCR) and high (HCR) intrinsic aerobic capacity. Redox proteomics screening revealed different cysteine (Cys) Ox-PTM profile between HCR and LCR rats. HCR showed a higher number of oxidized Cys residues in skeletal muscle compared to LCR, while the opposite was observed in the heart. Most proteins with differentially oxidized Cys residues in the skeletal muscle are important regulators of oxidative metabolism. The most oxidized protein in the skeletal muscle of HCR rats was malate dehydrogenase (MDH1). HCR showed higher MDH1 activity compared to LCR in skeletal, but not cardiac muscle. These novel findings indicate a clear association between Cys Ox-PTMs and aerobic capacity, leading to novel insights into the role of Ox-PTMs as an essential signal to maintain metabolic homeostasis.

### Keywords
Heart, Oxidative stress, Cysteine, Mdh1, Ox-ptm, Cardiac, Skeleta, Icat, Redox proteomics, Mitochondria, Exercise, Aerobic, Posttranslational modifications, Oxidation, Muscle

### Affiliations
Engineer at NTNU, Norway
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Fakultet for medisin og helsevitenskap  geir.slupphaug@ntnu.no  72573076  91825455 Laboratoriesenteret, 231.05.034, Øya, Erling Skjalgssons g 1

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Fakultet for medisin og helsevitenskap  geir.slupphaug@ntnu.no  72573076  91825455 Laboratoriesenteret, 231.05.034, Øya, Erling Skjalgssons g 1


