### Accession
PXD028393

### Title
THE PHARMACOLOGICAL RESCUE OF CFTR BY LUMACAFTOR (VX-809) IN THE CYSTIC FIBROSIS BRONCHIAL EPITHELIUM IS ASSOCIATED WITH AN EXTENSIVE REORGANIZATION OF MITOCHONDRIA.

### Description
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder CF is caused by mutations of the gene encoding for the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator protein (CFTR), a transmembrane anion channel expressed at the apical membrane of several organs, including the epithelial cells of the airway. CFTR mutations result in dysfunctional ion transport across the apical membrane at the surface of the epithelia, generating thickened and dehydrated secretions. In the lung, this leads to a decrease in the mucociliary clearance, favoring bacterial colonization and progressive obstruction of the duct. Although over 2000 CFTR variants have been identified so far, the most common mutation is a deletion of the phenylalanine in position 508 (F508del), which shows an allelic frequency of around 90% among CF patients. F508del-CFTR is incorrectly folded, causing its retention at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and subsequent proteasomal degradation. Among the several drugs available in CF pharmacological treatment, VX-809 (commercial name Lumacaftor) is the most used drug for patients carrying F508del-CFTR mutation. This drug corrects the aberrant folding of F508del-CFTR by favoring the correct intramolecular interactions, thus enabling a higher number of copies of the defective protein to reach the plasma membrane. Localization of Organelle Proteins by Isotope Tagging after Differential ultra-Centrifugation (LOPIT-DC, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w) workflow was used to study the spatial localization of proteins in the CFBE41o- cells and how it is impacted by CFTR rescue triggered by VX-809. LOPIT-DC is a powerful and well-established tool for the investigation of the spatial distribution of global proteome within cells, which combines subcellular fractionation based on differential centrifugation, quantitative mass spectrometry, and machine learning. Its application provides a global snapshot of the steady-state subcelluler distribution of proteins. The aim of this project is to identify proteins that change their cellular localization in association with the treatment, to uncover molecules that play a role in the trafficking of the defective CFTR to the plasma membrane.

### Sample Protocol
CFBE41o- cells stably overexpressing F508del-CFTR (70 milions per flask) were selected and cultured until confluent. Three independent biological replicates were prepared. For each replicate, cells were incubated for 24hrs with medium containing either the VX-809 1 µM or DMSO. Cells were harvested with TrypLE Express Enzyme (Gibco) and pelleted at 300xg for 7 minutes at 4°C. Cell pellets were suspended in 5 mL of a gentle lysis buffer (0.25M sucrose, 10mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2mM EDTA, 2mM magnesium acetate, protease inhibitors). Cells were then lysed using a pair of 1 mL syringes in a ball-bearing homogenizer (Isobiotec): each aliquot of cells suspension was passed through the homogenizer chamber 30 times using a 18 µm ball-bearing clearance, keeping the homogenizer on ice. Cell lysates were processed following the differential centrifugation workflow (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w). 50 µg of proteins from each of the ten fractions from LOPIT-DC workflow was transferred into new Eppendorf Lo-bind tubes and in-solution digestion was performed. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 µL dithiothreitol (DTT) 100 mM at 56 °C for 30 minutes; the corresponding cysteine residues were then alkylated with 30 µL of iodacetamide (IAA) 100 mM for 20 minutes in the dark. Proteins were precipitated overnight with cold Acetone at -20 °C. After a centrifugation step (20000xg for 30 minutes at 4 °C), the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was then dissolved for an overnight trypsin digestion at 37 °C in digestion buffer. The tryptic peptides were labelled with TMT isobaric tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol. After the TMT labelling, all the fractions were pooled together and dried under vacuum. Dried TMT-labelled peptides were resuspended in 1.8 mL of 0.1% TFA and 600 µL of this solution was used for the peptides fractionation using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol. To decrease the number of the samples for downstream MS analysis (8 fractions of peptides per sample, 6 samples in total), the resulting fractions were combined into 4 fractions per sample. All MS runs were performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate TM 3000 RSLnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each of the fractionated samples was dissolved in 60 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2 µL were injected onto a micro precolumn (300-μm x 5 mm, C18 PepMap 100, 5-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the trapping phase (3 minutes). After the switching of the valve from load to inject, the peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC column (PharmaFluidics). The nanoLc gradient was set as follows: from 3 to 40% of ACN in water + 0.1% FA at 300 nL/min for 340 minutes. The column was then washed using 95% of ACN + 0.1% FA for 9 minutes and re-equilibrated for 40 minutes. Total run time was 390 minutes. The MS workflow parameters were set as follows using the Method Editor in XCalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the SPS-MS3 acquisition method: Detector type: Orbitrap—Resolution: 120,000—Mass range: Normal—Use quadrupole isolation: Yes—Scan range: 400–1,500—RF lens: 30%—AGC target: 40000—Max inject time: Auto—Microscans: 1—Data type: Profile—Polarity: Positive—Monoisotopic peak determination: Peptide—Relax restrictions when too few precursors are found: Yes—Include charge state(s): 2–6—Exclude after n times: 1—Exclusion duration (s): 70—Mass tolerance (p.p.m.): Low: 10; high: 10— Exclude isotopes: Yes—Perform dependent scan on single charge state per precursor only: Yes—Intensity threshold: 5.0e3—Data-dependent mode: Cycle time —Number of scan event types: 1—Scan event type 1: No condition—MSn level: 2— Isolation mode: Quadrupole—Isolation window (m/z): 0.7—Activation type: CID —CID collision energy (%): 35—Activation Q: 0.25—Detector type: Ion trap—Scan range mode: Auto—m/z: Normal—Ion trap scan rate: Rapid—AGC target: 1.0e4— Max inject time (ms): 35—Microscans: 1—Data type: Centroid—Mass range: 400–1500—Exclusion mass width: m/z: Low: 0; high: 0—Reagent: TMT— Precursor priority: Most intense—Scan event type 1: No condition—MSn level: 3— Isolation mode: Quadrupole—Isolation window (m/z): 0.7—Activation type: HCD —Collision energy (%): 65—Detector type: Orbitrap—Scan range mode: Define—m/z: 100-500—AGC target: 1.0e4— Max inject time (ms): 105—Microscans: 1—Data type: Centroid. An electrospray voltage of 2.1 kV was applied. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion data- dependent mode for SPS-MS3 with the real-time (RT) search using the Homo sapiens Swiss proteome (downloaded 09/04/2018 as FASTA file). The parameters for the RT-search were: enzyme: trypsin; max variable mods:2; max missed cleavage: 1; Static modification: carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT-10plex on lysine and peptide N terminus; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer version v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer with Mascot and SequestHF algorithms against the Homo sapiens database (canonical and isoform, 42,118 sequences, downloaded on 04/11/2016) together with common contaminants (cRAP). The research parameters were set as follows: precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da; enzyme used for digestion: Trypsin; maximum missed cleavage: 2; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT10plex tagging of lysine and peptide N terminus for TMT labelled samples; dynamic modifications: oxidation of methionine and deamidated asparagine and glutamine. Percolator node was used for false discovery rate estimation and only rank 1 peptide identifications of high confidence (FDR < 1%) were accepted. TMT reporter values were assessed through Proteome Discoverer v2.3 using the Most Confident Centroid method for peak integration and integration tolerance of 20 p.p.m. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents (according to the manufacturer specifications for the respective batch number). Percolator was used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) and only high-confidence peptides were retained. Additional data reduction filters were: peptide rank= 1 and ion score >20. Quantification at the MS3 level was performed within the Proteome Discoverer workflow using the centroid sum method and an integration tolerance of 2 mmu. Isotope impurity correction factors were applied. Protein grouping was carried out according to the minimum parsimony principle and the median of all sum-normalised PSM ratios belonging to each protein group was calculated as the protein group quantitation value. Only proteins with a full reporter ion series were retained. In three individual biological replicates of CFBE41o- cultures treated with DMSO as control, we identified 5949 ± 168 proteins at 1% FDR; following a well-established protocol for the analysis of LOPIT datasets (doi: 10.12688/f1000research.10411.2), each replicate was separately normalized by sum to 1 across the 10 channels for each replicate respectively. After the removal of the missing values, the three replicates were concatenated, leaving a total of 4842 proteins with spatial information common to the 3 replicates.  The quantified proteins were analyzed using the R Bioconductor (https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2004-5-10-r80) packages MSnbase (v. 2.12) (10.1093/bioinformatics/btr645) and pRoloc (v1.26) (https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.10411.2) following a well-established protocol for LOPIT datasets (https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.10411.2). After the removal of the missing values, the three replicates were combined to obtain a map of the organelles for each condition. A list of 577 manually-curated marker proteins (defined as proteins known to localize only in one specific organelle) was used to pinpoint 11 subcellular localizations: cytosol, ER, proteasome, Golgi, lysosomes, mitochondria, nucleus, chromatin, ribosome, peroxisomes and plasma membrane. To predict protein localization of the proteins quantified both in the controls and the treated samples, a support vector machine (SVM) classifier was used, following a protocol already available in literature (https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.10411.2). The algorithmic performance was estimated by the use of 100 rounds of five-fold cross-validation (creating stratified training/testing partitions).  Classifier accuracy was estimated using the macro F1 score (the harmonic mean of precision and recall). The best values for sigma (the inverse kernel width for the radial basis kernel) and cost (the cost of constraints violation) were 0.1 and 16, respectively for both the control and the treated samples. All the proteins were then ordered according to their SVM score and the proteins below a 5% FDR cutoff were classified as proteins with unknown localization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spatial proteomics, Vx-809, Cystic fibrosis, Cfbe41o- cells, Lopit-dc

### Affiliations
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,  Cambridge, UK
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

### Submitter
Clarissa Braccia

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn S. Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road,  Cambridge, UK


