### Accession
PXD033050

### Title
Compound interaction screen on a photoactivatable cellulose membrane (CISCM) identifies drug targets

### Description
Here, we present a compound interaction screen on a photoactivatable cellulose membrane (CISCM) that enables target identification of several drugs in parallel. To this end, we use diazirine-based undirected photoaffinity labeling (PAL) to immobilize compounds on cellulose membranes. Functionalized membranes are then incubated with protein extract and specific targets are identified via quantitative affinity purification and mass spectrometry. CISCM reliably identifies known targets of natural products in less than three hours of analysis time per compound. In summary, we show that combining undirected photoimmobilization of compounds on cellulose with quantitative interaction proteomics provides an efficient means to identify the targets of natural products.

### Sample Protocol
First, a cellulose membrane (CM) was functionalized with a photocrosslinker using a N-Hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) based approach. Second, small molecules were spotted onto this membrane. The spotted small molecules were immobilized via undirected photocrosslinking. Then the membranes were incubated with Jurkat whole cell extract for 2 hours at 4°C, followed by mild washing. Individual spots were excised and further processed with dithiothreitol and iodacetamide in 8 M urea/thiourea denaturation buffer. Proteins were pre-digested with LysC and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using StageTip purification and analyzed on a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer connected to a nLC1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using gradients of 45 min (buffer A: 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water; buffer B: 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water) per replicate and data dependent acquisition (DDA, MS2-resolution: 15K, column: 1.9µm).

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were analysed in MaxQuant (MQ version 1.6.3.3) using a protein and peptide FDR of 1%, label-free-quantification, match-between-runs, re-quantifiy and MQ standard parameters. Reverse hits, potential contaminants, and only identified by side were filtered out, the LFQ data was log2-transformed and replicates grouped together. The data was then filtered on valid values (minimum 3 in at least one group) and missing values were imputed from normal distribution(width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). First multiple sample testing was performed using LFQ intensities (ANOVA, permutation-based FDR: 5%, 250 randomizations) and ANOVA significant hits were Z-scored and clustered hierarchically. Second protein abundances in the three replicates for a given compound were compared to all other samples using the Student’s t-test. Identified proteins with a t-test p-value < 0.01 and fold changes with at least 4 were identified as specific binders. Data filtering and statistical integration was performed in Perseus version 1.6.7.0. Hierarchical clustering was performed in R version 4.1.1.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying the protein targets of drugs is an important but tedious process. Existing proteomic approaches enable unbiased target identification but lack the throughput needed to screen larger compound libraries. Here, we present a compound interaction screen on a photoactivatable cellulose membrane (CISCM) that enables target identification of several drugs in parallel. To this end, we use diazirine-based undirected photoaffinity labeling (PAL) to immobilize compounds on cellulose membranes. Functionalized membranes are then incubated with protein extract and specific targets are identified via quantitative affinity purification and mass spectrometry. CISCM reliably identifies known targets of natural products in less than three hours of analysis time per compound. In summary, we show that combining undirected photoimmobilization of compounds on cellulose with quantitative interaction proteomics provides an efficient means to identify the targets of natural products.

### Keywords
Human affinity purification-mass spectrometry samples

### Affiliations
Proteome Dynamics Lab, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association

### Submitter
Fiona Teresa Melder

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics Lab, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin, Germany


