### Accession
PXD005004

### Title
C. rodentium remodels metabolism in IEC

### Description
The mechanisms by which the mouse pathogen Citrobacter rodentium triggers effacement of the brush border microvilli, colitis, hyperplasia and dysbiosis remain poorly understood. We investigated the impact of C. rodentium infection on the proteomic and metabolic landscapes of intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) in vivo using isobaric labeling proteomics and targeted metabolomics. We found that infection depletes proteins involved in butyrate uptake, glycolysis, TCA cycle, lipid metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation with aparallel, increased production of creatine/phosphocreatine and cholesterol. The evolving ecological niche within the infected gut was concomitant with a reduction in butyrate-producing commensal bacteria and expansion of Proteobacteria that can metabolize cholesterol. These changes coincide with the modulation of IEC transcription factors by C. rodentium, specifically phosphorylation of Kdm5a, demethylation of histone H3 (Lys-4) and cleavage of Srebp2. Taken together our results show that whilst engaging with the host in a race to control innate immune responses, C. rodentium and the changing microbiota shape the metabolism flow in IECs.

### Sample Protocol
IEC pellets were dissolved in 100 μL 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 0.1% SDS assisted with pulsed probe sonication. Protein concentration was measured with Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots containing 100 μg of total protein were prepared for trypsin digestion. Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxymethyl phosphine (TCEP) final concentration followed by 1h incubation at 60°C, then blocked with a final concentration of 10mM freshly prepared Iodoacetamide (IAA) solution in dark for 30 min. Trypsin (Pierce, MS grade) was added at a final concentration 70 ng/μL for overnight digestion. The resultant peptides were diluted up to 100 μL with 0.1 M TEAB buffer and labelled with TMT 10-plex reagent vial (Thermo Scientific) according to manufactures instructions. Basic reverse-phase peptide fractionation Offline peptide fractionation based on high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography was performed using the Waters, XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, 120 Å) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with an auto sampler. Mobile phase A was composed of 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was composed of 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was reconstituted in 100 μL mobile phase A, for fractionation using a multi-step gradient elution method at 0.2 mL/min as follows: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected in a time dependent manner every 30 sec and dried. Liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) Analysis LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and a volume of 7 μL was loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with the μlPickUp mode at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then subjected to a multi-step gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column (Dionex) retrofitted to an electrospray emitter (New Objective, FS360-20-10-D-20) at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was composed of 100% H2O, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method at flow rate 300 nL/min was as follows: for 95 min gradient to 42% B, for 5 min up to 95% B, for 8 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 2 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. Precursors between 400-1500 m/z were selected with mass resolution of 120k, AGC 3×105 and IT 100 ms with the top speed mode in 3 sec and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th. Collision energy was set at 35% with AGC 1×104 and IT 35 ms. MS3 quantification spectra were acquired with further HCD fragmentation of the top 10 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) excluding neutral losses of maximum m/z 30. Quadrupole isolation width was set at 0.5 Th, collision energy was applied at 45% and the AGC setting was at 6×104 with 100ms IT. The HCD MS3 spectra were acquired only for the mass range 120-140 with 60k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification The acquired mass spectra were submitted to the SequestHT search engine implemented in the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) software for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages and minimum length of 6 amino acids. TMT6plex at N-terminus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N,Q. A maximum of two different dynamic modifications were allowed for each peptide. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. All spectra were searched against a fasta files containing the UniProt Reference Proteomes of 16,608 mouse reviewed protein entries and 4,862 Citrobacter rodentium protein entries. The reporter ion quantifier node included a custom TMT 10plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification. The enterocytes obtained at days 8 and 14 post PBS treatment were used as the controls for log2Ratio calculations. The WT and ΔespO+espO infections were used as biological replicates in each day post treatment for the characterization of the mouse enterocytes response to Citrobacter infection. Differential expression p-values were computed based on a single-sample t-test using the Perseus proteomics tool and the average protein log2Ratios from the two measurements in each time point were used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) that line the gut&#xa0;form a robust line of defense against ingested pathogens. We investigated the impact of infection with the enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium on mouse IEC metabolism using global proteomic and targeted metabolomics and lipidomics. The major signatures of the infection were upregulation of the sugar transporter Sglt4, aerobic glycolysis, and production of phosphocreatine, which mobilizes cytosolic energy. In contrast, biogenesis of mitochondrial cardiolipins, essential for ATP production, was inhibited, which coincided with increased levels of mucosal O<sub>2</sub> and a reduction in colon-associated anaerobic commensals. In addition, IECs responded to infection by activating Srebp2 and the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway. Unexpectedly, infected IECs also upregulated the cholesterol efflux proteins AbcA1, AbcG8, and ApoA1, resulting in higher levels of fecal cholesterol and a bloom of Proteobacteria. These results suggest that C.&#xa0;rodentium manipulates host metabolism to evade innate immune responses and establish a favorable gut ecosystem.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Mouse, Tmt, Colon, Citrobacter rodentium

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


