### Accession
PXD038997

### Title
N2-methylguanosine modifications on human tRNAs and snRNA U6 are important for colon cancer cell proliferation, protein translation and pre-mRNA splicing

### Description
Modified nucleotides in non-coding RNAs, such as tRNAs and snRNAs, represent an important layer of gene expression regulation through their ability to fine-tune mRNA maturation and transla-tion. Growing evidences support important roles of tRNA/snRNAs modifications and hence the enzymes that install them, in eukaryotic cell development and their dysregulation has been linked to various human pathologies including neurodevelopmental disorders and cancers. Human TRMT112 (Trm112 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae) functions as an allosteric regulator of several methyltransfer-ases (MTases) targeting molecules (tRNAs, rRNAs and proteins) involved in protein synthesis. Here, we have investigated the interaction network of human TRMT112 in intact cells and identify three poorly characterized putative MTases (TRMT11, THUMPD3 and THUMD2) as direct part-ners. We demonstrate that these three proteins are active N2-methylguanosine (m2G) MTases and that TRMT11 and THUMPD3 methylate positions 10 and 6 of tRNAs, respectively. In contrast, we discovered that THUMPD2 directly associates with the U6 snRNA and is required for the for-mation of m2G in this core component of the catalytic spliceosome. Consistently, our data reveal the combined importance of TRMT11 and THUMPD3 for optimal protein synthesis and cancer cell proliferation as well as a role for THUMPD2 in fine-tuning pre-mRNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
The BioID experiments were performed mostly as described in Chapat et al. (10.1073/pnas.1701488114). Briefly, 8x106 HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM complete medium (DMEM medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 200 U/mL of Penicillin and 200 µg/mL streptomycin) in 15 cm plates at 37°C and 5% of CO2. 24 h after seeding or when the cells reached 80% confluence, pcDNA3.1-based plasmids for the expression of BirA(R118G)*-HA tagged GFP (pMG1127), TRMT112 (pMG891) or TRMT112-T5R (pMG906) or the BirA*-HA cassette alone (Addgene #36047) were transiently transfected (Supplementary Table S1). For transient transfection, 5 μg of plasmids (2 μg of pcDNA3.1 MCS-BirA(R118G)-HA or of pMG1127 supplemented with 3 μg of empty pcDNA3.1 plasmid or 5 μg of pMG891 or of pMG906) in a total volume of 300 µL of Opti-MEM medium (Gibco) were mixed with 300 µL of Opti-MEM medium containing 15 μL of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and added gently to the plates. After 24 h, 50 μM biotin was added to the culture medium and cells were grown for a further 24 h. Cells were washed with 1xPBS (Gibco) and harvested in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.4% SDS, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, benzonase, and cOmplete EDTA-free Protease inhibitor (1×PIC). Lysates were rotated at 4 °C for 30 min and then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. For each condition, equal amounts of proteins were incubated with anti-Streptavidin high performance affinity resin (Cytiva; #17511301) pre-equilibrated in lysis buffer and incubated overnight at 4°C. Next, the supernatant was discarded and the beads were washed once with 500 µl of SDS wash buffer (50 mM Tris⋅HCl, pH 7.5, and 2% SDS), twice with lysis buffer, three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). Proteins aggregated on beads were resuspended in 100 µL of NH4HCO3 at 25 mM containing 2 µg of Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Mass Spec Grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Digestion was performed under agitation at 37°C during 4h. Then, the same enzyme amount was added to the solution and the second digestion step was conducted overnight at 37°C under agitation. Supernatant was collected after a centrifugation at 500 x g for 2 min, and beads were washed with water. Both solutions were pooled. The enzymatic digestion was stopped by adding 6 µL of pure formic acid (2% final concentration). Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 min and supernatants were collected (90% of the solution). Finally, the samples were vacuum dried, and then resolubilized in 400 µL of H2O/ACN/FA (98/2/0.1 v/v/v) prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Each condition was performed in five replicates. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded on a symmetry C18 pre-column (20 mm × 180 μm with 5 μm diameter particles, Waters) before being separated on an ACQUITY UPLC BEH130 C18 column (250 mm × 75 μm with 1.7 μm diameter particles). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (solvent B). Samples were loaded into the enrichment column over 3 min at 5 μL/min with 99% of solvent A. Peptides were then eluted at 450 nL/min with the following gradient of solvent B: from 1 to 8% over 2 min, 8 to 35% over 77 min, and 35 to 90% over 1 min. The system was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with automatic switching between MS (mass range 375-1500 m/z with R = 120,000 at 200 m/z, automatic gain control fixed at 3.106 ions, and a maximum injection time set at 60 ms) and MS/MS (mass range 200-2000 m/z with R = 15,000 at 200 m/z, automatic gain control fixed at 1.105, and the maximal injection time set to 60 ms) modes. The twenty most abundant peptides were selected on each MS spectrum for further isolation and higher energy collision dissociation (normalized collision energy set to 27), excluding unassigned, singly charged and over seven times charged ions. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 40 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw nanoLC-MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0). Peaks were assigned with the Andromeda search engine with trypsin specificity. The database used for the searches was extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt and included all Homo sapiens entries (22 July 2019; Taxonomy ID=9606; 20,409 entries). The minimum peptide length required was seven amino acids and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Methionine oxidation and acetyl (Protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. The maximum false discovery rate was 1% for peptides and proteins with the use of a decoy strategy. The “match between runs” option was desactivated. Unique peptides were used but modified peptides as well as their unmodified counterparts, were excluded from protein quantification. We used the “proteingroups.txt” file with intensities (non-normalized intensities). Statistical analyses were performed using ProStaR software. Only proteins for which 5 intensity values were available in a single condition were kept. After log2 transformation, intensities were normalized within condition using vsn method and imputation of missing values were performed. For each sample, the slsa algorithm was used for the POV (Partially Observed Values) imputation, and missing values were replaced by the 2.5 percentile value for the MEC (Missing on the Entire Condition); statistical testing was performed using Limma. Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to adjust p-values for multiple testing and differentially expressed proteins were sorted out using a p-value threshold that guarantees a FDR below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid experiment

### Affiliations
CNRS University of Strasbourg
LSMBO-IPHC UMR7178 CNRS University of Strasbourg

### Submitter
Carapito Christine

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
LSMBO-IPHC UMR7178 CNRS University of Strasbourg


