### Accession
PXD037816

### Title
Utility of CYP2D6 copy number variants as prognostic biomarker in localized anal squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Anal squamous cell carcinoma (ASCC) is an infrequent tumor. Since 70s, treatment of stages II-III consists on a combination of 5-fluorouracil (5FU), mitomycin C (MMC), and radiotherapy. The aim of this study is the identification of biomarkers that allow personalized treatment and improvement of therapeutic outcomes. Forty-six tumor paraffin samples from ASCC patients were analyzed by whole-exome sequencing. Single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variants (CNVs) were identified and their relation to disease-free survival (DFS) was studied using BRB Array Tool and Kaplan-Meier analyses. Obtained findings were validated in an independent retrospective cohort of 101 ASCC patients with stages I-III from eleven hospitals within the Multidisciplinary Spanish Digestive Cancer Group (GEMCAD) using qPCR Copy Number Assays. GEMCAD validation cohort was also analyzed using mass spectrometry proteomics to assess the biological features of these tumors.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE sections were deparaffinized in xylene and washed twice in absolute ethanol. Protein isolates were prepared in 2%SDS using a protocol based on heat-induced antigen retrieval. Protein quantification was done using MicroBCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce-Thermo Scientific) and protein isolates were digested with trypsin (1:50). SDS was removed using Detergent Removal Spin Columns (Pierce). Finally, peptides were cleaned up using C18 stage-tips, re-solubilized in MS sample buffer and spiked with indexed retention time (iRT)-peptides. Each sample was run individually. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to an M-Class UPLC (Waters), operated in trapping mode. Peptides were loaded onto a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a gradient from 5% to 22% in 109 min. The DIA runs were acquired in Orbitrap-Orbitrap mode with isolation windows of 24 m/z covering a range from 385 to 1015 m/z (DIA) with 1 Da overlap.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut 15.4.210913was used for directDIA analysis with default parameter settings . Spectra were searched against a canonical SwissProt database for human and common protein contaminants (NCBI taxonomy ID9606, release date 20190709). Protein quantification was performed in Spectronaut using default settings andquantitative data were extracted using the BGS Factory Report (default) for follow-up analyses. To perform statistical modeling, fragment intensities were aggregated into precursor and peptide intensities. Log2 transformation and filtering according 75% of valid values were done using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mmc, Anal squamous cell carcinoma, Ffpe, 5fu, Lc-ms/ms, Radiotherapy, Ascc, Dia

### Affiliations
Molecular Oncology and Pathology Lab, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain
ETH

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Feliu
Molecular Oncology and Pathology Lab, Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain


