### Accession
PXD036506

### Title
Alteration in Tyrosine Phosphorylation of Cardiac Proteome and EGFR Pathway Contribute to Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy

### Description
Alterations of serine/threonine phosphorylation of the cardiac proteome are a hallmark of heart failure. However, the contribution of tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) to the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy remains unclear. We use global mapping to discover and quantify site-specific pTyr in two cardiac hypertrophic mouse models, i.e., cardiac overexpression of ErbB2 (TgErbB2) and myosin heavy chain R403Q (R403Q-aMyHC Tg), compared to control hearts. From this, there are significant phosphoproteomic alterations in TgErbB2 mice in right ventricular cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) pathways. On the other hand, R403Q-aMyHC Tg mice indicated that the EGFR1 pathway is central for cardiac hypertrophy, along with angiopoietin, ErbB, growth hormone, and chemokine signaling pathways activation. Surprisingly, most myofilament proteins have downregulation of pTyr rather than upregulation. Kinase-substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) shows a marked downregulation of MAPK pathway activity downstream of k-Ras in TgErbB2 mice and activation of EGFR, focal adhesion, PDGFR, and actin cytoskeleton pathways. In vivo ErbB2 inhibition by AG-825 decreases cardiomyocyte disarray. Serine/threonine and tyrosine phosphoproteome confirms the above-described pathways and the effectiveness of AG-825 treatment. Thus, altered pTyr may play a regulatory role in cardiac hypertrophic models.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation: The TgErbB2 (B6SJLF1/J stain) and R403Q-αMyHC (C57/Bl6) mice were obtained to establish breeding colonies. Male or female mice (6-9 months) were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital IP (75 mg/kg) or isoflurane (5%); the hearts were dissected, followed by thermal stabilization (Denator T1 Heat Stabilizor) and stored at -80°C. TgErbB2 and R403Q-αMyHC mice hearts (n=5 per group) were processed in parallel. Cardiac ventricles were homogenized on ice-cold buffer: 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 1mM, 1.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, PhosStop, and 9M urea at 10 μl/mg. The homogenate was cooled on ice, followed by brief sonication on ice, centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The protein was quantified by Lowry method.  Protein from lysates was reduced in dithiothreitol (DTT) 5 mM at 60 °C for 20 minutes and alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide (IDA) at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. 30 mg per mouse, (5 mice per genotype) was digested with proteomics grade Trypsin at a ratio of 1:200 in 2M urea, 20mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.0 at room temperature overnight. Digestion was terminated with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 1%. Samples were centrifuged 5 min at 1800g, and desalted by solid-phase extraction (SepPak C18 10cc cartridge) and lyophilized for three days at -20°C. 150 mg of lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 1.4 ml immunoprecipitation buffer (IAP buffer 50mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10mM sodium phosphate, 50mM NaCl, pH 7.0). 80μL of protein agarose G beads was conjugated with 300μg of Phospho-Tyrosine Mouse monoclonal antibody (p-Tyr-100). The conjugate was transferred to the peptide tube and incubated with gentle rotation for 2 hr at 4°C. The beads were washed and eluted with 55 μl and 45 μl of 0.15% TFA, respectively, and pooled together. The peptide mixtures were purified by solid-phase extraction (stage tips C18) and vacuum dried. This approach was repeated 3x with samples from all 3 groups in parallel, 15 hearts per genotype in 3 technical replicates; the immunoprecipitation buffer flow-through subjected to TMT 9-plex. Tryptic peptides were desalted and labeled with 9-plex isobaric TMT for 1 hr at room temperature, followed by quenching with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0.   LC-MS/MS Analysis: Phosphopeptides were dissolved in 10μl of 0.1% TFA, 2%ACN (v/v) followed by RF-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis, then separated on a C18 reversed-phase column with a linear gradient of acetonitrile (4−40%) for 120 min and analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite MS with neutro loss triggered HCD. For cardiac sarcomere pTyr proteomics, myofilament enriched preparations were obtained by rinsing freshly isolated hearts in ice-cold PBS (Proteinase Inhibitors (PI) 1X and PhosStop 1X), ventricular tissue minced in ice-cold standard buffer (60 mM KCl, 30 mM Imidazole pH 7.0, 2mM MgCl2, PI 1X and PhosStop 1X). Tissues were homogenized with on ice, centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min. The myofilament pellets were resuspended in a skinning solution (10 mK EGTA 8.2 mM MgCl2, 14.4 mM KCl, 60 mM imidazole pH 7.0, 5.5 mM ATP, 12 mM creatine phosphate, 10U/mL creatine phosphokinase, 1% Triton 100X, PI 1X and PhosStop 1X) and incubated on ice for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged 15 min at 1100 g and washed in standard buffer. Pellets now containing isolated myofilaments were diluted in standard buffer and quantified with Lowery assay. Myofilament proteins (~7 mg) from each mouse heart were resuspended in 8 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, followed by reduction alkylation, and digested as previously described. Then, labeled with 6-plex TMT for 1 hr at room temperature, followed by quenching with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Followed by pTyr enrichment using PTMScan® Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb (P-Tyr-1000) kit in the same conditions as described previously. The eluted samples were desalted using C18 STAGE tips, vacuum dried, and kept at −80°C before LC-MS analysis. From flow-through, a quantification of the full proteome was made to serve as a reference for pTyr findings.  LC-MS/MS Analysis: Peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid coupled with Easy-nanoLC 1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system. The peptides were reconstituted in 10% formic acid and loaded on Acclaim PepMap100 Nano Trap Column (100 μm × 2 cm), packed with 5 μm C18 particles at a flow rate (FR) of 5 μl per minute. Peptides were resolved at 250 nl/min FR using a linear gradient of 10-35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 120 minutes on the EASY-Spray column (50cm x 75µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, and 2µm C18 particles) fitted on an EASY-Spray ion source operated at 2.0 kV voltage. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out with full scans of m/z 350 to 1500. For acquisitions and measurements Orbitrap mass analyzer was used. Full MS scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Precursor ions were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation method and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 was used for identification and quantification against uniport_mouse_120119_UP000000589. The search parameters used are as follows; a) trypsin (up to two missed cleavages), b) minimum amino acid length: 6, c) minimum peptides for protein: 1, d) Fixed modifications TMT6plex on any N-terminus and Lysis residue, Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, e) Dynamic modifications: Oxydation on Methionine, acetyl on N-terminus, Met-loss on M and Met loss +acetyl on M and f) 1% false discovery rate for peptide and protein levels. Peptide Identification, Quantification, and Statistics: Raw MS data were searched with Mascot 2.3, and label-free quantification with MS1 extracted ion chromatograms were performed using MaxQuant software. For statistical analysis first, Partek software was used to calculate each peptide intensity's p-values, q-values, fold change, and ratio. Phosphosites with less than 50% of missing density values were subjected to statistical analysis, and the reminding missing values were filled with the K-nearest neighbors. Then, a normalization of the Log2 densities by median subtraction and determined the fold-change, ratio, and statistical significance (q and p values), from each of the selected phosphosites of the data set. The volcano plots were made with GraphPad Prism 7®. Unsupervised PCA was used in both data sets separately with Partek® software. The data set was segregated along with each component concerning the pTyr abundance (normalized, mean=0, variance=1).  Peptide search, Identification, and Statistics: MaxQuant 1.5 was used for quantitation and identification against a mouse RefSeq database (version 78) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. The search parameters used are as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages) b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; d) Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02Da) and TMT tags (+229.16 Da) on lysine residue and peptide N-termini as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da) and phosphorylation of serine/threonine/tyrosine (+ 79.96 Da) as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed, and 'match between runs' was enabled. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate. Proteins with a q-value lower than 0.05 will be considered as differentially expressed with statistical significance. In a complementary way, R software was used. A two-sided t-test and the moderated p-values and q-values were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Alterations of serine/threonine phosphorylation of the cardiac proteome are a hallmark of heart failure. However, the contribution of tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) to the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy remains unclear. We use global mapping to discover and quantify site-specific pTyr in two cardiac hypertrophic mouse models, i.e., cardiac overexpression of ErbB2 (TgErbB2) and &#x3b1; myosin heavy chain R403Q (R403Q-&#x3b1;MyHC Tg), compared to control hearts. From this, there are significant phosphoproteomic alterations in TgErbB2 mice in right ventricular cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) pathways. On the other hand, R403Q-&#x3b1;MyHC Tg mice indicated that the EGFR1 pathway is central for cardiac hypertrophy, along with angiopoietin, ErbB, growth hormone, and chemokine signaling pathways activation. Surprisingly, most myofilament proteins have downregulation of pTyr rather than upregulation. Kinase-substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) shows a marked downregulation of MAPK pathway activity downstream of k-Ras in TgErbB2 mice and activation of EGFR, focal adhesion, PDGFR, and actin cytoskeleton pathways. In vivo ErbB2 inhibition by AG-825 decreases cardiomyocyte disarray. Serine/threonine and tyrosine phosphoproteome confirm the above-described pathways and the effectiveness of AG-825 Treatment. Thus, altered pTyr may play a regulatory role in cardiac hypertrophic models.

### Keywords
Heart, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Serine phosphorylation, Proteomics, Threonine phosphorylation

### Affiliations
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) School of Medicine, Department of Molecular Science
6Department of Molecular Science/UT Health Rio Grande Valley, USA

### Submitter
Genaro Ramirez-Correa

### Lab Head
Dr Genaro Ramirez Correa
6Department of Molecular Science/UT Health Rio Grande Valley, USA


