### Accession
PXD030729

### Title
Identification of CCNF/Cyclin F targets

### Description
The founding member of the F-box protein family, Cyclin F, serves as substrate adaptor for the Ubiquitin E3 ligase Skp1-Cul1-F-box (SCF)Cyclin F which is responsible for ubiquitination of proteins involved in cell cycle progression, DNA damage and mitotic fidelity. Missense mutations in CCNF encoding for Cyclin F are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). However, it remains elusive whether CCNF mutations affect the substrate adaptor function of Cyclin F and whether altered SCFCyclin F mediated ubiquitination contributes to ALS pathogenesis in CCNF mutation carrier. To start addressing these questions, we set out to identify new SCFCyclin F targets in neuronal and patient-derived cells. Mass spectrometry-based ubiquitinome profiling of CCNF knockout and mutant cell lines as well as Cyclin F proximity and interaction proteomics converged on the HSP90 chaperone machinery as new substrate candidate. Biochemical analyses confirmed the Cyclin F dependent binding and ubiquitination of HSP90AB1 and unveiled a regulatory role of this ubiquitination in controlling the binding of a number of HSP90 clients and co-factors, thereby implying chaperone dysregulation and CCNF loss-of-function mechanism in ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation: Cells grown in 2-4x15 cm cell culture plates per sample were harvested by scraping on ice and stored at -80. Lysis was performed for 30 min at 4°C with MCLB buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 1x PhosStop,1x protease inhibitor) or Glycerol buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% TritonX, 1x PhosStop, inhibitor, 1x protease inhibitor). Samples were cleared from debris by centrifugation (20.000 g for 10 min at 4°C) and Ultrafree®-CL spin-filter tubes. Protein concentrations of lysates were adjusted following determination by BCA and samples incubated overnight with pre-equilibrated anti-HA-agarose or anti-Flag M2 affinity gel using an overhead shaker at 4°C. Subsequently, agarose beads were washed five times with the respective buffer and eluted by boiling in SDS sample buffer (200 mMTris-HCL, 6 % SDS, 20 % Glycerol, 300 mM DTT and Bromophenol Blue) (5 mins at 95°C) or washed 5 more times with DPBS prior to elution with HA peptide. Eluted immune complexes were precipitated with TCA (final concentration 20%) and washed with ice cold acetone. Samples were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 10% acetonitrile and trypsinized for 4 h at 37°C.  Proximity biotinylation: Cells were grown in the presence of 500 µM biotin-phenol for 30 min at 37°C and pulsed with 1 mM H2O2 at RT. Biotinylation was stopped by washing three times with quencher solution (10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM 6-Hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman2-carboxylic acid, DPBS). The third quenching step was performed for 15 min before washing three times with DPBS. Biotinylated samples were thawed on ice and lysed in qRIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium desoxycholate, 1% Triton-X, 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM TROLOX, PhosStop and protease inhibitor) for 40 min at 4°C. Samples were cleared from debris (20.000g, 10 min, 4°C) and incubated with pre-equilibrated streptavidin agarose beads overnight at 4°C in an overhead shaker. Pulldowns were washed twice with RIPA buffer followed by four times washing with 3 M urea wash buffer (50 mM ABC buffer, 3 M urea). TCEP was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 min at 55°C. Once cooled to RT samples were incubated with iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min at RT in the dark followed by addition of DTT (20 mM). Samples were then washed with 2 M urea wash buffer (50 mM ABC buffer, 2 M urea) prior to trypsinization overnight at 37°C.  DiGly: Cells were cultured in lysine- and arginine-free DMEM supplemented with dialyzed FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, penicillin/streptomycin and light (K0) lysine and arginine. Heavy media was the same except the light lysine was replaced with K8-lysine. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in 5 ml denaturing lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris [pH 8], 50 mM NaCl, 1X PIC [protease inhibitor cocktail, EDTA-free], 50 µM DUB inhibitor PR-619). Samples were incubated on ice for 10 min and then sonicated with 3x 20 s pulses. Following removal of non-solubilized material (15,000xg/10 min), differentially labeled lysates were mixed at equal ratios based on total protein determined by BCA. Following reduction with 5 mM DTT and alkylation with 10 mM chloroacetamide, lysates were digested with 5 ng/μl lys-C for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequent digestion of peptides with trypsin was performed as described. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1.5 ml IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS [pH 7.4], 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl) and centrifuged to remove any insoluble material (2500xg/5 min). The supernatant was incubated with anti-diGly antibody (32 μg/IP) conjugated to protein A agarose beads for 1 h at 4°C. Unbound peptides were removed through 3x washing with IAP buffer and once with PBS. Bound material was eluted 4x with 50 µl 0.15% TFA and peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tip method. Each sample was immunoprecipitated sequentially two times and each IP was analyzed separately.

### Data Protocol
Proximity and interaction proteomics: Using an Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography (ThermoFisher Scientific), peptides were loaded onto custom filled C18 reversed-phase columns and separated using a gradient of 5%–33% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid over 90 min and detected on an Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s and singly charged species or species for which a charge could not be assigned were rejected. MS data was processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (1.6.0.1)and Perseus (1.6.10.43). Proximity proteomics was performed in triplicates and interaction proteomics experiments were performed in quadruplicates. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Matches to common contaminants, reverse identifications and identifications based only on site-specific modifications were removed prior to further analysis. Log2 H/L ratios were calculated. Student t-tests were used to determine statistical significance between treatments. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. DiGly protepmics: Peptides samples were separated on a nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) using a 226 min gradient of 5-33% acetonitrile containing 0.5% acetic acid on custom filled C18 reversed-phase columns and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition selecting the most intense peaks from each full MS scan acquired in the Orbitrap for subsequent MS/MS while excluding peptides with unassigned charge states or charge states below +3 from fragmentation. Raw data files from quadruplicate samples were processed with MaxQuant (1.6.0.1) as described previously using a human (UP000005640) UNIPROT database and the following parameter settings: first search peptide mass tolerance 20 ppm, main search peptide mass tolerance 0.5 Da, tryptic digestion allowing up to two missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021464) as fixed modification, methionine oxidation (15.994946), N-terminal protein acetylation (42.010565) and diGG (114.042927; excluded from C-terminus) as variable modifications, revert decoy mode and peptide, protein and site FDR ≤ 0.01. Perseus (1.6.10.43) was used for data sorting. diGly sites were considered regulated, if they showed >1.4-fold change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Mouse, Ccnf, Als, Cyclin f

### Affiliations
SyNergy, LMU München
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy) Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Behrends

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Behrends
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy) Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany


