### Accession
PXD011702

### Title
A well-controlled BioID design for endogenous bait proteins

### Description
The CRISPR/Cas9 revolution is profoundly changing the way life sciences technologies are used. Many assays now rely on engineered clonal cell lines to eliminate overexpression issues. Control cell lines are typically provided by non-engineered cells or by engineered clones implying a considerable risk for artefacts because of clonal variation. Genome engineering can also be expected to transform BioID , an elegant proximity labeling method that relies on fusing a bait protein to a promiscuous biotin ligase, BirA*, which results in the tagging of vicinal proteins. We here propose an innovative design to enable BioID for endogenous proteins. To enable this design wherein, we introduced a T2A-BirA* module at the C-terminus of endogenous p53 by genome engineering. This leads to bi-cistronic expression of both p53 and BirA* under control of the endogenous promoter ensuring low background biotinylation in these control cells. By targeting a Cas9-cytidine deaminase base editor to the T2A auto-cleavage site, we can efficiently derive an isogenic population expressing a functional p53-BirA* fusion protein. By A quantitative proteomics workflow we show significant benefits over other experimental settings including forced expression of p53-BirA* and parental control cell lines, and we provide a  enabled a ffirst well-controlled view on the proximal proteins of endogenous p53. This novel application for base editors expands the CRISPR/Cas9 toolbox and may prove to be a valuable addition for synthetic biology.

### Sample Protocol
For every sample three 145 cm2 culture dishes (Nunc) were seeded with 4.5x106 HCT116 TP53+/T2A-BirA* cells cultured on McCoy’s 5A modified medium supplemented with dialyzed FBS. 24 h after seeding 1 µM doxorubicin was added. To every culture dish biotin was added to a final concentration of 50 µM at the start of the treatment. 24 h after treatment the growth medium was replenished to deprive free biotin from the culture. 3 h later, the growth medium was aspirated and cells were washed once with cold PBS before detachment in PBS using a cell scraper. After pelleting cells by centrifugation for 5 min at 500 g on 4°C, a second PBS washing step occurred prior to cell lysis in a 15 ml tube. 2 ml of ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer containing 250 U of benzonase (Sigma, E1014) was added to each pellet. Lysis was obtained by incubation with agitation for 1 h on 4°C prior to sonication (30% amplitude, 5 x 6 s burst, 2 s interruption) on ice. The insoluble fraction of the lysate was removed by centrifugation for 15 min at 16000 g on 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a new 15 ml tube. The total protein concentration was determined by the Bradford protein assay to normalize input material to the maximum shared total protein amount throughout the samples. For every sample, 90 µl Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance bead suspension (GE Healthcare, 17-5113-01) was used for enrichment of biotinylated proteins. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min and washed once in wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0,1% SDS) prior to addition to the lysate. Samples were incubated for affinity purification on a rotator at 4°C for 3 h. Afterwards, beads were recovered by centrifugation of the samples at 500 g for 1 min at 4 °C and aspirating the supernatant. Beads were washed three times in wash buffer, twice in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 and once with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2 prior to resuspension in 20 µl 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Trypsin digest occurred overnight by addition of 1 µg trypsin (Promega, V5111) to each sample. Digestion mixtures were depleted of beads upon centrifugation at 500 g for 1 min, after which the supernatant was transferred to a mass spectrometry vial. To ensure complete digestion, peptide mixtures were incubated with an additional 500 ng trypsin for 3 h before addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 2%. All experiments were performed in biological triplicate for downstream label-free quantitative proteome analysis.

### Data Protocol
Obtained Xcalibur Raw Files (.raw) were analyzed using MaxQuant and maxLFQ algorithms (MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3) 45, 46. Spectra were searched against the human UniProt sequence database (as available on 01/09/2017). Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and lysine biotinylation were set as variable modifications, with a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide. The minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids and a maximum peptide mass of 4600 Da was used. PSM, protein and site false discovery rates were set at 0.01. The minimum Label-Free Quantitation (LFQ) ratio count was 2 and the Fast LFQ option was disabled. 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm mass accuracies were used for the first and main search respectively. After completion of searches, LFQ intensities were loaded in Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) 47 for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The CRISPR/Cas9 revolution is profoundly changing the way life sciences technologies are used. Many assays now rely on engineered clonal cell lines to eliminate the overexpression of bait proteins. Control cell lines are typically nonengineered cells or engineered clones, implying a considerable risk for artifacts because of clonal variation. Genome engineering can also transform BioID, a proximity labeling method that relies on fusing a bait protein to a promiscuous biotin ligase, BirA*, resulting in the tagging of vicinal proteins. We here propose an innovative design to enable BioID for endogenous proteins wherein we introduce a T2A-BirA* module at the C-terminus of endogenous p53 by genome engineering, leading to bicistronic expression of both p53 and BirA* under control of the endogenous promoter. By targeting a Cas9-cytidine deaminase base editor to the T2A autocleavage site, we can efficiently derive an isogenic population expressing a functional p53-BirA* fusion protein. Using quantitative proteomics we show significant benefits over the classical ectopic expression of p53-BirA*, and we provide a first well-controlled view of the proximal proteins of endogenous p53 in colon carcinoma cells. This novel application for base editors expands the CRISPR/Cas9 toolbox and can be a valuable addition for synthetic biology.

### Keywords
Protein protein interaction; bioid proximity labeling; (t2a) autocleavage; genome engineering; p53; base editor

### Affiliations
1 VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium 2 Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium
VIB-Ugent

### Submitter
Giel Vandemoortele

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
1 VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium 2 Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium


