### Accession
PXD022653

### Title
Quantitative proteome of urinary extracellular vesicles (uEVs) from hypertensive patients with raised aldosterone-to-renin ratios (ARRs) that underwent seated saline suppression testing (SSST)

### Description
This dataset contains quantitative proteome from Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) based quantitative proteomic analysis on uEVs from hypertensive patients with raised aldosterone-to-renin ratios (ARR) that underwent seated saline suppression testing (SSST).

### Sample Protocol
We performed TMT labeling-based relative quantification of the proteome in uEVs isolated from hypertensive patients with raised ARR (n=13, F8/M5) before and after the SSST. In total, four TMT sets were used to label 32 samples (6 samples not included in this study). One TMT set includes nine channels, with eight of them labeling uEVs from samples collected before and after SSST in four patients and one dedicated to a universal control channel Of the 13 patients (26 samples) included in this study, 10 were confirmed primary aldosteronism (PA) and 3 were designated as low renin essential hypertension [LRH]).

### Data Protocol
Raw files belonging to one TMT set were searched together against Uniprot human protein database (downloaded on 25 January 2019) using both the Sequest and Mascot algorithms (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) through Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Quantification of peptides and proteins was done through the reporter ion quantification module of Proteome Discoverer, with corrections for TMT isotopic interferences enabled. Precursor mass tolerance was set as 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set as 0.02 Da, and a maximum of 2 miss cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, TMT labeling of peptide N-terminus and lysine were set as variable modifications. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by Percolator and confined to ≤1%. A paired t-test of logarithmically transformed protein ratios was performed using R, to determine the proteins that showed significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Urinary extracellular vesicle, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark


