### Accession
PXD006212

### Title
Strength of Neisseria meningitidis binding to endothelial cells requires highly-ordered CD147/β2-adrenoceptor clusters assembled by alpha-actinin-4

### Description
Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) is an invasive bacterial pathogen that colonizes human vessels, causing thrombotic lesions and meningitis. Establishment of tight interactions with endothelial cells is crucial for meningococci to resist hemodynamic forces. Two endothelial receptors, CD147 and the β2-adrenergic receptor (β2AR), are sequentially engaged by meningococci to adhere and promote signaling events leading to vascular colonization, but their spatiotemporal coordination is unknown. Here we report that CD147 and β2AR form constitutive hetero-oligomeric complexes. The scaffolding protein alpha-actinin-4 directly binds to the cytosolic tail of CD147 and governs the assembly of CD147/β2AR complexes in highly-ordered clusters at bacterial adhesion sites. This multi-molecular assembly process increases the binding strength of meningococci to endothelial cells under shear stress, and creates molecular platforms for the elongation of membrane protrusions surrounding adherent bacteria. Thus, the specific organization of cellular receptors has major impacts on host-pathogen interaction.

### Sample Protocol
We searched for proteins that interact with CD147 in human endothelial cells either non-infected or infected by Neisseria meningitidis. Proteins co-immunoprecipitated with CD147 from non-infected and infected endothelial cell lysates were analyzed using nano-LC/MS/MS tandem mass spectrometry  Analysis was performed by the 3P5 proteomics facility of the Université Paris Descartes as follows. In-gel trypsin digestion: In-gel digestion with trypsin was carried out as described 1  using a digester/spotter robot (Tecan, Männedorf, CH) at all steps. Gel bands were destained twice with a mix of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) : pure acetonitrile (ACN from Carlo Erba) (1:1 volume) for 45 min at 22°C and then dried using pure ACN for 15 min. Gel bands were then treated with 25 mM ABC containing 20 mM DTT for 1 h at 60°C, then alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ABC for 30 min in the dark at 22°C, washed twice with 25 mM ABC, shrunk twice with pure ACN for 15 min and finally dried out using a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf) for 10 min. Gel pieces were pre-incubated with 13 µl of 12.5 ng/µl modified trypsin “Sequencing Grade” (Promega, WI, USA) in 40 mM ABC- 10% ACN pH 8.0, for 30 min on ice. Excess liquid was removed and gel pieces were incubated in 20 µL of 25 mM ABC overnight at 37°C. After digestion, peptides were collected in the supernatant and pooled with two 1% formic acid gel-washes and one pure acetonitrile gel-wash. Extracts were then dried-out using a vacuum centrifuge. Reverse-Phase Nano Liquid Chromatography Fractionation: Dried peptide eluates were redissolved in 20 µl resuspension solution consisting of 0.1% trifuoroacetic acid (TFA from Fluka) and 10% ACN, vortexed and centrifuged 5 min at 12,000 g. A 10 µL portion was injected on an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC (Thermo). Peptides were purified and first concentrated on a C18 PepMap pre-column (0.3 mm I.D.×5 mm, 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size from Thermo) at a flow rate of 30 μl/min in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile (solution A). Subsequently, peptides were separated on a C18 PepMap100 analytical reverse phase column (75 μm I.D.×150 mm, 100 Å pore size, 3 μm particle size from Thermo) at 300 nl/min with a 32 minutes gradient of solution B (20% solution A mixed vol:vol with 80% acetonitrile) rising from 7% B to 50% B. Fractionation was done for each sample using the Probot automated fraction collector (Dionex). Fraction collection was started after a 13 min dead volume delay following the injection signal and was performed directly on a MALDI target (blank plate, ABSciex). Fractions were collected every 10 sec for a total of 192 spots per sample. Eluent and matrix solutions were mixed on-target. α-cyano-4-hydrocinnamic acid (CHCA, Laserbio-Labs) matrix was dissolved at 2.5 mg/ml in 70% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA Offline mass spectrometry analysis:  Mass spectra were measured with a 4800 MALDI-TOF-TOF mass spectrometer (ABSciex) equipped with a Nd:YAG pulsed laser (355 nm wavelength,<500 ps pulse and 200 Hz repetition rate). Spectra acquisition and processing were performed using the 4000 series explorer software (ABSciex) version 3.5.28193 build 1011 in positive reflectron mode at fixed LASER fluency with low mass gate and delayed extraction. External plate calibration was performed using Pepmix1 peptides from ABSciex. For each fraction, steps of 50 spectra in the range of 850 to 4000 Da were acquired. Five hundred spectra per sample were summed, processed to obtain monoisotopic values from isotopes clusters with a raw spectra signal to noise ratio of 20. MS spectra generated by each nLC fraction were treated automatically, allowing the 12 most abundant precursors to be selected for fragmentation starting with the least abundant unless its intensity was higher in a neighboring fraction. A cut-off was applied at a minimum s/n of 15. Neighboring precursors within 200 resolutions were excluded. One thousand MS/MS spectra per precursor were summed by increment of 50 and were subjected to baseline subtraction and Savitsky–Golay smoothing (with a polynomial order of 4 and 15 point across peak).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification: Extracted MS/MS peaklists were subsequently submitted to an in-house mascot (Matrix science) version 2.2 search engine 2. The Swiss-prot database (May 2007, 267,354 sequences; 98,158,671 residues) was used restricted to the Homo sapiens subset of sequences (16529 sequences). Parent and fragment mass tolerances were respectively set to 100 ppm and 0.3 Da, partial modification (oxidisation) of methionines was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins by iodoacetamide were considered as complete. Missed trypsin cleavage sites were limited to 1. A filter was applied to the search in order to reduce false positives and matching redundancies of the same peptide in several hits. All peptide matches above 1% risks of random matching were eliminated (p<0.01). Individual minimum peptide score was set to 15. False positives rates were evaluated using Mascot. Under these stringent parameters, the minimum protein score was 34. Unless a specific peptide could differentiate them, the best matching protein was selected even when a subset of peptides could match another protein isoform. The probability score calculated by the software was used as a primary criterion for correct identification.    1. Shevchenko, A., Chernushevic, I., Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M. & Mann, M. "De novo" sequencing of peptides recovered from in-gel digested proteins by nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Mol Biotechnol 20, 107-118 (2002). 2. Perkins, D.N., Pappin, D.J., Creasy, D.M. & Cottrell, J.S. Probability-based protein identification by searching sequence databases using mass spectrometry data. Electrophoresis 20, 3551-3567 (1999).

### Publication Abstract
Neisseria meningitidis (meningococcus) is an invasive bacterial pathogen that colonizes human vessels, causing thrombotic lesions and meningitis. Establishment of tight interactions with endothelial cells is crucial for meningococci to resist haemodynamic forces. Two endothelial receptors, CD147 and the &#x3b2;2-adrenergic receptor (&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR), are sequentially engaged by meningococci to adhere and promote signalling events leading to vascular colonization, but their spatiotemporal coordination is unknown. Here we report that CD147 and &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR form constitutive hetero-oligomeric complexes. The scaffolding protein &#x3b1;-actinin-4 directly binds to the cytosolic tail of CD147 and governs the assembly of CD147-&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR complexes in highly ordered clusters at bacterial adhesion sites. This multimolecular assembly process increases the binding strength of meningococci to endothelial cells under shear stress, and creates molecular platforms for the elongation of membrane protrusions surrounding adherent bacteria. Thus, the specific organization of cellular receptors has major impacts on host-pathogen interaction.

### Keywords
Basigin, Nano-lc/ms/ms tandem mass spectrometry, Neisseria meningitidis, Cd147, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Inserm, France
INSTITUT COCHIN Inserm U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris Dsecartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France

### Submitter
Sandrine BOURDOULOUS

### Lab Head
Dr Sandrine BOURDOULOUS
INSTITUT COCHIN Inserm U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris Dsecartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, France


