### Accession
PXD027014

### Title
Identification of proteins specifically binding to ac4C RNA probes

### Description
As a newly identified mRNA modification, the regulation of ac4C remains largely unexplored. RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that specifically binds to ac4C modification and mediate downstream cellular activities (readers) have not been reported yet. We synthesized acetylated and non-acetylated RNA probes by in vitro transcription. The sequences of the probes were segments of FUS and 18s rRNA, which contain ac4C sites as reported. A biotin-RNA pulldown assay and mass spectrometry were performed with HEK 293T cell lysates.

### Sample Protocol
Acetylated and non-acetylated RNA probes were synthesized by in vitro transcription. he sequences of the probes were segments of FUS and 18s rRNA, which contain ac4C-modified sites. A biotin-RNA pulldown assay was performed using HEK 293T cell lysates. The proteins interacting with the RNA probes were subsequently detected by label-free mass spectroscopy after reductive alkylation and protease digestion.

### Data Protocol
TripleTOF 5600+ LC/MS/MS system (SCIEX) was used for mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis. For IDA (information-dependent acquisition), the primary mass spectrometry was performed with an ion accumulation time of 250ms. The secondary mass spectra of 40 precursor ions were collected at an ion accumulation time of 50ms. The main search parameters were set as followings: Type of search, Identification; Enzyme, Trypsin; Cys Alkylation, Iodoacetamide; Instrument, TripleTOF 5600; Bias Correction, TRUE; Background Correction, TRUE; ID focus, Biological modifications; Search Effort, Thorough ID; Protein Mass, Unrestricted; Database, uniprot_swissprot-Homosapiens+contaminants.fasta. For ProteinPilot identification, GO annotation, COG annotation and KEGG annotation were performed. For Skyline quantification, GO enrichment, pathway enrichment and hierarchical clustering were conducted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna pulldown, Acetylated rna probes, Ac4c

### Affiliations
 the Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University
Reproductive Medicine Center, the Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
Yuting Xiang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyan Liang
Reproductive Medicine Center, the Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University


