### Accession
PXD027712

### Title
A proteomic study on the membrane protein fraction of T cells confirms high substrate selectivity for the ER translocation inhibitor cyclotriazadisulfonamide

### Description
Cyclotriazadisulfonamide (CADA) inhibits the co-translational translocation of type I integral membrane protein human CD4 (huCD4) across the ER in a signal peptide (SP)-dependent way. Previously, sortilin was identified as a secondary substrate for CADA but showed reduced CADA sensitivity as compared to huCD4. We performed a quantitative proteomic study on the membrane fraction of human T-cells to analyze how many integral membrane proteins are sensitive to CADA. We employed stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) technique in combination with quantitative mass spectrometry on CADA-treated human T-lymphoid SUP-T1 cells expressing high levels of huCD4. In line with our previous reports, our current proteomic analysis demonstrated that only a very small subset of proteins is depleted by CADA. Our data also confirmed that cellular expression of both huCD4 and sortilin are affected by CADA-treatment of SUP-T1 cells. Furthermore, three additional targets for CADA are identified, namely, Endoplasmic Reticulum Lectin 1 (ERLEC1), Inactive Tyrosine-Protein Kinase 7 (PTK7), and DnaJ Homolog Subfamily C member 3 (DNAJC3). The sensitivity of these proteins for the translocation inhibitor CADA was confirmed by biochemical experiments including Western blots, flow cytometry and cell free in vitro translation/translocation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC experiments were carried out according to the supplier's recommendations outlined in the Pierce SILAC protein quantification kits. To obtain 90% labelling, SUP-T1 cells were grown on 60 mm diam. dishes for 2 weeks in DMEM containing either 12C6 L-Lysine (1 mM) and 12C6 14N4 L-Arginine (0.48 mM) (“light” sample) or 13C6 L-Lysine (0.96 mM) and 13C6 15N4 L-Arginine (0.45 mM) (“heavy” sample). Cells of the light sample were treated 17 h with 10 μM of CADA whereas cells of the heavy sample served as a DMSO-treated control. For the isolation of the total integral membrane proteins, cells were washed twice with cold PBSI [phosphate buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluorid (PMSF), 3.2 μg/μl soybean trypsin inhibitor (STI), 0.5 mM benzamidine, 1.4 μg/μl trasylol; pH 7.4]. Cells were disrupted in 100 μl cold fractionation buffer [250 mM sucrose, 20 mM 4(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM ethylenediamine tetra-acetate (EDTA), 1 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 0.5 mM PMSF, 3.2 μg/μl STI, 0.5 mM benzamidine, 1.4 μg/μl trasylol; pH 7.4] using a potter homogenizer. Lysates of the light and heavy samples were combined and cell nuclei were removed by centrifugation (4°C, 720×g, 5 min). The crude membrane fraction was collected (4°C, 100,000×g, 1 h), resuspended in fractionation buffer and centrifuged for a second time as described above. The pellet containing the integral membrane proteins was resuspended in 50 μl Rotiload buffer supplemented with 15 μl Tris-HCl (100 mM, pH 8.5). Proteins were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) (5 mM, 30 min, 55°C) and alkylated using iodoacetamide (15 mM, 30 min, room temperature) in the dark. Separation of the proteins was carried out by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Each gel lane was cut by hand into 14 slices, and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by a reversed-phase capillary liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system; Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). LC separations were performed on a capillary column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 3 m, 100 Å, 250 mm x 75 m i.d., Thermo Scientific) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nl/min using a linear gradient of 3–35% B in 60 min. Mobile phase A contained 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with one MS survey scan with a resolution of 60,000 (Orbitrap Elite) and MS/MS scans of the 15 most intense precursor ions in the linear trap quadrupole.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteins were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) software. Data were searched against the Uniprot protein database (July 2015). The initial maximum mass deviation of the precursor ions was set at 20 ppm, and the maximum mass deviation of the fragment ions was set at 0.35 Da. Methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were used as variable modifications. False discovery rates were <1% based on matches to reversed sequences in the concatenated target-decoy database All SILAC experiments were repeated with switched isotopic coding (forward and reverse experiment) and analyzed separately. Proteins were considered if at least two sequenced peptides were identified (at least one unique peptide and at least two razor + unique peptides). The criterion for quantification was a ratio count of at least two. We considered proteins as CADA-sensitive if the ratio of protein expression following DMSO or CADA treatment (DMSO/CADA) was higher than 2.0 in both experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclotriazadisulfonamide (CADA) inhibits the cotranslational translocation of type I integral membrane protein human CD4 (huCD4) across the endoplasmic reticulum in a signal peptide (SP)-dependent way. Previously, sortilin was identified as a secondary substrate for CADA but showed reduced CADA sensitivity as compared with huCD4. Here, we performed a quantitative proteomic study on the crude membrane fraction of human T-cells to analyze how many proteins are sensitive to CADA. To screen for these proteins, we employed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture technique in combination with quantitative MS on CADA-treated human T-lymphoid SUP-T1 cells expressing high levels of huCD4. In line with our previous reports, our current proteomic analysis (data available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027712) demonstrated that only a very small subset of proteins is depleted by CADA. Our data also confirmed that cellular expression of both huCD4 and sortilin are affected by CADA treatment of SUP-T1 cells. Furthermore, three additional targets for CADA are identified, namely, endoplasmic reticulum lectin 1 (ERLEC1), inactive tyrosine-protein kinase 7 (PTK7), and DnaJ homolog subfamily C member 3 (DNAJC3). Western blot and flow cytometry analysis of ERLEC1, PTK7, and DNAJC3 protein expression validated susceptibility of these substrates to CADA, although with varying degrees of sensitivity. Additional cell-free in&#xa0;vitro translation/translocation data demonstrated that the new substrates for CADA carry cleavable SPs that are targets for the cotranslational translocation inhibition exerted by CADA. Thus, our quantitative proteomic analysis demonstrates that ERLEC1, PTK7, and DNAJC3 are validated additional substrates of CADA; however, huCD4 remains the most sensitive integral membrane protein for the endoplasmic reticulum translocation inhibitor CADA. Furthermore, to our knowledge, CADA is the first compound that specifically interferes with only a very small subset of SPs and does not affect signal anchor sequences.

### Keywords
Cd4; cyclotriazadisulfonamide (cada); er co-translational translocation; signal peptide; silac

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)

### Submitter
Fan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)


