### Accession
PXD034538

### Title
The choice of feed composition exerts a considerable influence on phenotypic, metabolic and proteomic outcome in BL/6 male mice

### Description
The multitude of obesogenic diets used in rodent studies is enormous and thus hardly manageable. Since standardization is missing and it is presumed that individual compositions provoke individual effects, the choice of quality, quantity and combination of diet ingredients seems to be crucial for the outcome and interpretation of obesity studies. Therefore, the present study was conducted to compare the effects of three commonly used obesogenic diets on selected parameters. Besides basic phenotypic and metabolic characterization, one main aspect was a comparative liver proteome analysis. As expected, the obtained results picture differentiated consequences mainly depending on fat source and/or fat- and sugar quantity. By confirming the general presumption that the choice of nutritional composition is a pivotal factor, the present findings demonstrate that a conscious selection is indispensable for obtaining reliable and sound results in obesity research.In conclusion, we strongly recommend a thorough selection of the appropriate obesogenic diet prior to an experiment and in consideration of the individual research question.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were analyzed by the CECAD Proteomics Facility. Samples were measured on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm — 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 121.0 min, 30-40% solvent B within 19.0 min, 40-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 25.0 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (UP000000589, downloaded at: 26.08.2020) database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ft liver

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Forschungslabor Fetale Programmierung, Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Uniklinik Köln, Gebäude 44a, Robert-Koch Str. 16, 50931 Köln

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Janoschek
Forschungslabor Fetale Programmierung, Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Uniklinik Köln, Gebäude 44a, Robert-Koch Str. 16, 50931 Köln


