### Accession
PXD008708

### Title
Coordinated regulation of transcription by CcpA and the Staphylococcus aureus two component system HptRS

### Description
Total cytosolic protein fractions of Staphylococcus aureus strains SA564, SA564-ΔhptRS, SA564-ΔccpA and SA564-ΔhptRS/ccpA were analyzed by LC-MSE .  Five biological replicates of each strain, cultivated in TSB and TSB-dex, during the exponential (2h) and post exponential (6h) growth phases (80 samples) were investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Collection and Processing Bacteria (10 O.D.600 units) were harvested (2 and 6 h post-inoculation) by centrifugation and suspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCL, 8 M urea, 1.5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride.  The bacterial suspensions were lysed for 40 s at a setting of 6 m/s in a FastPrep instrument (MP biomedical), and the lysate was clarified by centrifugation for 5 min at 20,800 x g at 4°C, and stored at -80°C. Protein concentrations were determined using a Modified Lowry Protein Assay Kit (Fisher Scientific) and diluted to a final concentration of 235 µg/mL in ultrapure water.  Proteins samples were mixed with a 3X volume of cold acetone and incubated at -20°C for 30 min and centrifuged for 2 min at 15,000 x g to pellet the precipitated proteins.  Protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone, dried 15 min in a speed vacuum, and stored at -80°C.  Protein samples were solubilized in 20 µL denaturing buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0; 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP); 5% sodium deoxycholate) and incubated for 10 min at 60°C.  Thiol alkylation was achieved by adding 5 µl alkylation buffer (100 mM iodoacetamide in water) and incubating the samples for 1 h at room temperature.  Following alkylation, samples were diluted with 275 µL dilution buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8), 2 µL trypsin solution  (1 mg/mL,Promega ) was added, and incubated overnight at 37°C. To stop the reaction, 10µL of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added, incubated for 30 min, and centrifuged at 15,000 x g.  Supernatants were transferred to microfuge tubes and used for LC-MS/MSMSE analysis. LC-MS/MSMSE Analysis All analyses were carried out using a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC System coupled to a Waters Synapt G2 mass spectrometer. The mobile phases were composed of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in CAN).  Injection volume was 2 µL. Following injection, the peptides were concentrated on Trap C-18 enrichment column (0.3 x 1 mm, Waters) and washed at 10 µL/min with Solvent A for 3 min. The enrichment column was then switched into the nanoflow path (500 nL/min) and further separated on C-18 reversed phase nanocolumn (0.075 x 250 mm; Waters) coupled with the nanoelectrospray ionization (nESI) source of Synapt G2 mass spectrometer. Separation of peptides was achieved at the following gradient: T = 0 min: 5% B; T = 95 min: 50% B; T = 96 min: 85% B; T = 97 min: 85% B; T = 98 min: 5% B; T = 99 min: 5% B; T = 100 min: 85%; B; T = 101 min: 85% B T = 102 min: 5% B; and T = 120 min: 5% B (column re-equilibration). MS data was collected in positive, Data Independent Acquisition (MSE) mode under a capillary voltage of 2,900 V. The source temperature was set at 70 °C. Cone gas flow was maintained 6 L/min. Acquisition range was 50 – 2,000 m/z. MSE data was collected with alternating low (4 eV) and elevated (ramp from 17 to 42 eV) energy over a 100–1500 m/z range.

### Data Protocol
Spectra and peptide identification statistical analysis was carried out using Progenesis software (Waters) and was searched against all S. aureus Mu50 predicted proteins (NCBI database).

### Publication Abstract
The success of Staphylococcus aureus as a pathogen is due in part to its ability to adapt to changing environmental conditions using signal transduction pathways, such as metabolite- responsive regulators and two-component systems. S. aureus has a two-component system encoded by the gene pair sav0224 (hptS) and sav0223 (hptR) that regulate the hexose phosphate transport (uhpT) system in response to extracellular glucose-6-phosphate. Glycolytic intermediates such as glucose-6-phosphate are important carbon sources that also modulate the activity of the global metabolite-responsive transcriptional regulator CcpA. Because uhpT has a putative CcpA binding site in its promoter and it is regulated by HptR, it was hypothesized the regulons of CcpA and HptR might intersect. To determine if the regulatory domains of CcpA and HptRS overlap, ccpA was deleted in strains SA564 and SA564-&#x394;hptRS and growth, metabolic, proteomic, and transcriptional differences were assessed. As expected, CcpA represses hptS and hptR in a glucose dependent manner; however, upon CcpA derepression, the HptRS system functions as a transcriptional activator of metabolic genes within the CcpA regulon. Importantly, inactivation of ccpA and hptRS altered sensitivity to fosfomycin and ampicillin in the absence of exogenous glucose-6-phosphate, indicating that both CcpA and HptRS modulate antibiotic susceptibility.

### Keywords
Postexponential growth phase, Hptr, Hpts, Hptrs, Glucose, Carbon catabolite, Ccpa, Staphylococcus aureus, Exponential growth phase

### Affiliations
UNL
School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences  University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA

### Submitter
Ryan Grove

### Lab Head
Dr Greg A. Somerville
School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences  University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, USA


