### Accession
PXD042379

### Title
Proteomics of plasma and plasma-treated podocytes: application to focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis

### Description
Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a severe form of idiopathic nephrotic syn-drome (INS), a glomerulopathy of presumable immune origin and attributed to extrarenal path-ogenic circulating factors. FSGS recurrence (rFSGS) after transplant occurs in 30 to 50% of cases. Direct analysis of patient plasma proteome has been scarcely addressed to date, mainly due to methodological difficulties associated with plasma complexity and dynamic range. In this study, firstly we compared different methods of plasma preparation, secondly we compared the plasma proteome of rFSGS and controls using two preparation methods, and thirdly we analyzed the early proximal signaling events in podocytes subjected to patient plasma, by a combination of phosphoproteomics and lipid raft proteomics (raftomics). By combining immunodepletion and high pH fractionation, we performed a differential proteomic analysis of soluble plasma pro-teins and of extracellular vesicles (EV) obtained from healthy controls, non-INS patient controls, and rFSGS patients (n=4). In both soluble and EV protein sets from rFSGS patients we found a statistically significant increase in a cluster of proteins involved in neutrophil degranulation. A group of lipid binding proteins, generally associated with lipoproteins, was found decreased in the soluble set from rFSGS patients. In addition, three aminoacid transporters involved in mTORC1 activation were found significantly increased in EV from rFSGS. Next, we incubated human podocytes for 30min with 10% plasma from both groups of patients. Phosphoproteomics and raftomics of podocytes revealed profound differences in proteins involved in the mTOR pathway, in autophagy, and in cytoskeleton organization. We analyzed the correlation between the abundance of plasma and plasma-regulated podocyte proteins. The observed changes high-light some of the mechanisms involved in FSGS recurrence and could be used as specific early markers of circulating factor activity on podocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma immunodepletion using Proteome PurifyTM kit Proteome PurifyTM 12 Human Serum Protein Immunodepletion Resin kit (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was used to deplete the TOP12 most abundant proteins accord-ing to the manufacturer’s protocol with some modifications. Resin (1mL) was centrifuged for 30s at 1000g. PE and plasma were thawed on ice, 10µL of each sample were mixed with 500µL of PBS and incubated with the resin under rotary agitation for 1h at room temperature. After incubation, samples were centrifuged on Spin-X 0.22µm cellulose ace-tate membrane filters (Corning Costar®, NY, USA) to remove the resin and further centri-fuged on 3kDa Microcon (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) to concentrate the depleted sam-ples.  Suspension trapping (S-Trap) S-TrapTM micro spin column digestion was performed on OptiPrepTM raft fractions accord-ing to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, proteins were precipitated overnight using 10% TCA final concentration and washed four times with cold ethanol. Proteins were resus-pended and solubilized in 5% SDS, 50mM TEAB (pH 7.55), reduced with 20mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) solution and alkylated by the addition of chloroacetam-ide to a final concentration of 50mM. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to a final con-centration of 1.2%. Colloidal protein particulate was formed with the addition of 231µL of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). The mixture was placed on S-Trap micro 1.7mL columns and centrifuged at 4,000g for 10 seconds. Col-umns were washed five times with 150µL S-Trap binding buffer and centrifuged at 4,000g for 10 seconds with 180-degree rotation of the columns between washes. Samples were di-gested with 2µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. Peptides were eluted with 40µL of 50mM TEAB followed by 40µL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and by 35µL 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were finally vacuum dried. Samples were resus-pended in 20 µL of 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. High pH fractionation Samples were fractionated by in-tip high pH reverse phase chromatography, using 1 mg of C18-AQ 5 µm beads (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) per sample. Beads were conditioned twice with 50 µL of 50% ACN and twice with 50 µL of 0.1% TFA, centri-fuged 2 min at 1500g. Peptides were resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1% TFA and added onto the stage tip centrifuged 2 min at 1500g. The stage tip was washed with 50 µL of HPLC-grade water and the peptides were sequentially eluted with 0.1% trimethylamine and an increasing percentage of ACN (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20% and 50%). The 26 fractions were concatenated in 13 fractions (F1-F14, F2-F15, F3-F16... F12-F25, F13-F26). These 13 fractions were dried and resuspended in 14 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification Samples were resuspended in 35 µL of 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 5 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim Pep-Map 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatography column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the col-umn with the following gradient: 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (5 minutes). At 125 minutes, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between samples to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using a top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissoci-ation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds dura-tion. Three separate mass spectrometry runs (i.e. technical replicates) were acquired for each biological replicate under the identical mass spectrometric conditions to account for instrument-related variability and to improve accuracy of the label-free quantification.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and bioinformatics were done as previously described with some modifications (63). Briefly, raw MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software ver-sion 1.5.8.3 and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release May 2019, 20,199 entries). To search for parent mass and fragment ions, we set the mass deviation at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was re-quired, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Match between runs was allowed. Car-bamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and pro-tein N-terminal acetylation phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) were set as variable modifica-tions (only for phosphoproteomics analysis) were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calcu-lated in MaxQuant as described previously (63) Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps were performed with Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was performed on Perseus software. We retrieved annotations to the GO cellular component terms “membrane”, “extracellular vesicular exosome”, “plasma membrane”, “mitochondrion” and “endoplasmic reticulum membrane”. The phosphopeptides output table and the corresponding logarithmic intensities were used for phosphopeptide analysis. The phosphopeptide table was expanded to separate individual phosphosites, and we kept all sites identified in four replicates in at least one group (CTRL vs rFSGS). Missing values were imputed using width=0.2 and down-shift=3. We represented on a heatmap the significantly altered phosphosites (t-test S0=0.1, FDR=0.05). The protein groups output table was used for total proteome analysis, we kept only pro-teins identified in all four replicates in at least one group (CTRL vs rFSGS). Missing values were imputed using width=0.3 and down-shift=2.5. For volcano plot we used t-test, S0=0.5, FDR=0.01 (for class B proteins) and the outer volcano using S0=0.5, FDR=0.001 (class A proteins).

### Publication Abstract
Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a severe form of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (INS), a glomerulopathy of presumably immune origin that is attributed to extrarenal pathogenic circulating factors. The recurrence of FSGS (rFSGS) after transplant occurs in 30% to 50% of cases. The direct analysis of patient plasma proteome has scarcely been addressed to date, mainly due to the methodological difficulties associated with plasma complexity and dynamic range. In this study, first, we compared different methods of plasma preparation, second, we compared the plasma proteomes of rFSGS and controls using two preparation methods, and third, we analyzed the early proximal signaling events in podocytes subjected to patient plasma, through a combination of phosphoproteomics and lipid-raft proteomics (raftomics). By combining immunodepletion and high pH fractionation, we performed a differential proteomic analysis of soluble plasma proteins and of extracellular vesicles (EV) obtained from healthy controls, non-INS patient controls, and rFSGS patients (n = 4). In both the soluble- and the EV-protein sets from the rFSGS patients, we found a statistically significant increase in a cluster of proteins involved in neutrophil degranulation. A group of lipid-binding proteins, generally associated with lipoproteins, was found to be decreased in the soluble set from the rFSGS patients. In addition, three amino acid transporters involved in mTORC1 activation were found to be significantly increased in the EV from the rFSGS. Next, we incubated human podocytes for 30 min with 10% plasma from both groups of patients. The phosphoproteomics and raftomics of the podocytes revealed profound differences in the proteins involved in the mTOR pathway, in autophagy, and in cytoskeleton organization. We analyzed the correlation between the abundance of plasma and plasma-regulated podocyte proteins. The observed changes highlight some of the mechanisms involved in FSGS recurrence and could be used as specific early markers of circulating-factor activity in podocytes.

### Keywords
Plasma, Raftomics, Phosphoproteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Immunodepletion

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
Institut Mondor de Recherche Biomédicale, INSERM, U955, 94010 Créteil, France Université Paris Est Créteil, 94010, Créteil, France

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Ollero
Institut Mondor de Recherche Biomédicale, INSERM, U955, 94010 Créteil, France Université Paris Est Créteil, 94010, Créteil, France


