### Accession
PXD005897

### Title
ERCC1-XPF Cooperates with CTCF and the Cohesin to Facilitate the Developmental Silencing of Imprinted Genes

### Description
Inborn defects in DNA repairare associated with complex developmental disorders whose causal mechanisms are poorly understood. Using an in vivo biotinylation tagging approach in mice, we show that the nucleotide excision repair (NER) structure-specific endonuclease ERCC1-XPF complex interacts with the insulator binding protein CTCF, the cohesin subunits SMC1A and SMC3 and with MBD2; the factors co-localize with ATRX at the promoters and control regions (ICRs) of imprinted genes during postnatal hepatic development. Loss of Ercc1or exposure to mitomycin C triggers the localization of CTCF to heterochromatin, the dissociation of the CTCF-cohesin complex and ATRXfrom promoters and ICRs,altered histone marks and the aberrant developmental expression of imprinted genes without altering DNA methylation. We propose that ERCC1-XPF cooperates with CTCF and the cohesinto facilitatet he developmental silencing of imprinted genes and that persistent DNA damage triggers chromatin changes that affect gene expression programs associated with NER disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry studies. Proteins eluted from the beads were separated by SDS/PAGE electrophoresis on an 10% polyacrylamide gel and stained with Colloidal blue silver (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA; 9). The entire lane was cut out and divided into at least 20 gel plugs, which were each further reduced to 1 mm3 gel pieces and placed in low-bind tubes (Eppendorf UK). Proteins were in-gel-digested by using modified trypsin (Roche Diagnostics) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nLC-ESI-MS/MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL coupled to an Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific).The sample preparation and the nLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis were performed as previously described 10 with minor modifications. Briefly, the dried peptides were dissolved in 0.5% formic acid aqueous solution, and the tryptic peptide mixtures were separated on a reversed-phase column (Reprosil Pur C18 AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH), fused silica emitters 100 mm long with a 75 μm internal diameter (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) packed in-house using a packing bomb (Loader kit SP035, Proxeon). Tryptic peptides were separated and eluted in a linear water-acetonitrile gradient and injected into the MS.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: For microarrays, qPCR data or ChIP signals, a two-way analysis of variance was used to extract the statistically significant gene expression data by means of the IBM SPSS Statistics 19 (IBM, NY, USA), Spotfire (Tibco, CA, USA), Partek (Partek INCoR1porated, MO, USA) and R-statistical package (www.r-project.org/). Significant overrepresentation of pathways and gene networks was determined by DAVID (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/summary.jsp; through BBID, BIOCARTA and KEGG annotations) as well as by means of the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (www.ingenuity.com). For mass spectrometry(MS), the MS/MS raw data were loaded in Proteome Discoverer 1.3.0.339 (ThermoFischer Scientific, USA) and run using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) search algorithm against the Mus musculus theoretical proteome (Last modified July 6, 2015) containing 46,470 entries15. A list of common contaminants was included in the database 16. For protein identification, the following search parameters were used: precursor error tolerance 10ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.8Da, trypsin full specificity, maximum number of missed cleavages 3 and cysteine alkylation as a fixed modification. The resulting .dat and .msf files were subsequently loaded and merged in Scaffold (version 3.04.05, Proteome Software) for further processing and validation of the assigned MS/MS spectra employing PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms for the identification of proteins17-19. Thresholds for protein and peptide identification were set to 99% and 95% accordingly, for proteins with minimum 1 different peptides identified, resulting in a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.1%. For single peptide identifications, we applied the same criteria in addition to manual validation of MS/MS spectra. Protein lists were constructed from the respective peptide lists through extensive manual curation based on previous knowledge.  For label-free relative quantitation of proteins, we applied a label-free relative quantitation method between the different samples (control versus bait) in order to determine unspecific binders during the affinity purification. All .dat and .msf files created by Proteome Discoverer were merged in Scaffold where label-free relative quantification was performed using the total ion current (TIC) from each identified MS/MS spectra. The TIC is the sum of the areas under all the peaks contained in a MS/MS spectrum and total TIC value results by summing the intensity of the peaks contained in the peak list associated to a MS/MS sample. This approach has advantages in comparison to other label-free methods, such as increased dynamic range and quantification for low spectral counts 20. Protein lists containing the calculated by Scaffold total TIC quantitative value for each protein ware exported from to Microsoft Excel for further manual processing including categorization and additional curation based on previous knowledge. The fold change of protein levels was calculated by dividing the mean total TIC quantitative value in bait samples with the mean value of the control samples for each of the proteins. Proteins having ≥60% protein coverage, ≥1 peptide in each sample and a fold change ≥1,2 in all three measurements were selected as being significantly enriched in bXPF compared to BirA liver samples. Proteins that were significantly enriched in bait samples were considered these with p-value ≤0.05 and a fold change ≥ 2. Significant overrepresentation of pathways, protein-protein interactions and protein complexes were derived by STRING 21 (http://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Inborn defects in DNA repair are associated with complex developmental disorders whose causal mechanisms are poorly understood. Using an in vivo biotinylation tagging approach in mice, we show that the nucleotide excision repair (NER) structure-specific endonuclease ERCC1-XPF complex interacts with the insulator binding protein CTCF, the cohesin subunits SMC1A and SMC3 and with MBD2; the factors co-localize with ATRX at the promoters and control regions (ICRs) of imprinted genes during postnatal hepatic development. Loss of Ercc1 or exposure to MMC triggers the localization of CTCF to heterochromatin, the dissociation of the CTCF-cohesin complex and ATRX from promoters and ICRs, altered histone marks and&#xa0;the aberrant developmental expression of imprinted genes without altering DNA methylation. We propose that ERCC1-XPF cooperates with CTCF and cohesin to facilitate the developmental silencing of imprinted genes and that persistent DNA damage triggers chromatin changes that affect gene expression programs associated with NER disorders.

### Keywords
In vivo biotinylation tagging, Ap-ms, Mouse, Ner, Label-free, Ercc1-xpf, Levers

### Affiliations
IMBB-FORTH/AUTH
IMBB-FORTH

### Submitter
Michalis Aivaliotis

### Lab Head
Dr George Garinis
IMBB-FORTH


