### Accession
PXD013856

### Title
Stabilizing Heterochromatin by DGCR8 Alleviates Senescence and Osteoarthritis

### Description
DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 (DGCR8) is a critical component of the canonical microprocessor complex for microRNA biogenesis. However, the non-canonical functions of DGCR8 have not been studied. Here, we demonstrate that DGCR8 plays an important role in maintaining heterochromatin organization and attenuating aging. An N-terminal-truncated version of DGCR8 (DR8dex2) accelerated senescence in human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) independent of its miRNA-processing activity, which is mediated by its C-terminal domains. Further studies revealed that DGCR8 maintained heterochromatin organization by interacting with the nuclear envelope protein Lamin B1, and heterochromatin-associated proteins, KAP1 and HP1 Overexpression of any of these proteins, including DGCR8, reversed premature senescent phenotypes in DR8dex2 hMSCs. Finally, DGCR8 was downregulated in pathologically and naturally aged hMSCs, whereas DGCR8 overexpression alleviated hMSC aging and osteoarthritis in mice. Taken together, these analyses uncovered a novel, miRNA processing-independent role for DGCR8 in maintaining heterochromatin organization and attenuating senescence. DGCR8 may therefore represent a new therapeutic target for alleviating human aging-related disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) For exogenous Co-IP, HEK293T cells transfected with plasmid expressing Flag-DGCR8 were lysed in CHAPS lysis buffer (120 mM NaCl, 0.3% CHAPS, 1 mM EDTA, 40 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, and 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). For endogenous Co-IP, hMSCs were lysed in CHAPS lysis buffer. HEK293T cells or hMSCs were lysed at 4 °C for 2 hours, and then centrifuged at 12 000 g at 4 °C for 30 minutes. For endogenous Co-IP, lysates (1 mg protein) were pre-cleared with 20 μl of Protein A/G-PLUS Agarose beads (Santa Cruz) for 2-4 hours, and then the supernatants were collected by centrifugation at 3 000 rpm at 4 °C for 3 minutes. The supernatants mixed with the indicated antibodies and beads were rotated overnight at 4 °C. The immunocomplexes were washed with CHAPS buffer three times and then eluted by boiling in 1× SDS-loading buffer for 10 minutes.  LC-MS/MS analysis  The elution proteins of immunoprecipitation were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE gel and visualized by Pierce™ Silver Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following decoloration and dehydration of the gels, the proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Worthington). Subsequently, the peptides were extracted from gel pieces with 0.1% formic acid and 50% acetonitrile, dried in a vacuum centrifuge (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA), dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and separated by a C18 reverse phase column (75μm20cm, 3μm). The column was then eluted with a linear gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid at the rate of 300 nL/min for 100 minutes. The mass spectra were acquired by nanoLC-Q EXACTIVE (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nano-ES ion source (Proxeon Biosystems, Denmark). Full scan spectra (from m/ z 300−1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/ z after the accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The five most-intense ions per scan were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap after the accumulation of 3,000 ions. The maximal filling times were set at 500 ms for the full scans and 150 ms for the MS/MS scans. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 60 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software (Version 1.3.0.5). The generated peak list files were searched with Thermo Proteome Discoverer（1.4.0.288）against the UniProt-proteome-human database (update-20160226). The search parameters were set as follows: enzyme was trypsin; up to two missed cleavages; alkylated cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation methionine as variable modifications. MS tolerance was 10 ppm while MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide and protein levels, and the minimum required peptide length was 7 amino acids. At least one unique or razor peptide per protein group was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 (DGCR8) is a critical component of the canonical microprocessor complex for microRNA biogenesis. However, the non-canonical functions of DGCR8 have not been studied. Here, we demonstrate that DGCR8 plays an important role in maintaining heterochromatin organization and attenuating aging. An N-terminal-truncated version of DGCR8 (DR8<sup>dex2</sup>) accelerated senescence in human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) independent of its microRNA-processing activity. Further studies revealed that DGCR8 maintained heterochromatin organization by interacting with the nuclear envelope protein Lamin B1, and heterochromatin-associated proteins, KAP1 and HP1&#x3b3;. Overexpression of any of these proteins, including DGCR8, reversed premature senescent phenotypes in DR8<sup>dex2</sup> hMSCs. Finally, DGCR8 was downregulated in pathologically and naturally aged hMSCs, whereas DGCR8 overexpression alleviated hMSC aging and mouse osteoarthritis. Taken together, these analyses uncovered a novel, microRNA processing-independent role in maintaining heterochromatin organization and attenuating senescence by DGCR8, thus representing a new therapeutic target for alleviating human aging-related disorders.

### Keywords
Heterochromatin, Dgcr8, Aging

### Affiliations
National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
IBP, CAS

### Submitter
Zunpeng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Guang-Hui Liu
National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


