### Accession
PXD025293

### Title
Lima1 mediates the pluripotency control of membrane dynamics and cellular metabolism

### Description
Lima1 is an extensively studied prognostic marker of malignancy and is also considered to be a tumour suppressor, but its role in a developmental context of non-transformed cells is poorly understood. Here, we characterised the expression pattern and examined the function of Lima1 in mouse embryos and pluripotent stem cell lines. We found that Lima1 expression is controlled by the naïve pluripotency circuit and is required for the suppression of membrane blebbing. Moreover, Lima1 is essential for proper mitochondrial energetics, which is crucial for the growth of solid tumours. Forcing Lima1 expression enabled human pluripotent stem cells to be incorporated into murine pre-implantation embryos, trespassing the interspecies engraftment barrier. Thus, Lima1 is a key effector molecule that mediates the pluripotency control of membrane dynamics and cellular metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Upon proximity-dependent biotinylation of potential Lima1 interactors approximately 1 mg of protein lysate per sample was digested using endoproteinase LysC and trypsin. Desalted and lyophilized peptide samples were then dissolved in 1.5 ml IAP buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate dibasic, 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 20 μl of agarose beads covalently linked to anti-biotin antibody (ImmuneChem, ICP0615) at 4 °C for 1 h to extract biotinylated peptides. Bound peptides were then eluted using 0.15 % (v/v) TFA, desalted using C18 Stage tips and stored on-tip until subjected to measurement on the MS system.Peptide samples were measured on a hybrid timsTOF pro mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoElute UHPLC system via a Captive Spray ion source (Bruker). Peptides were separated on a self-packed C18 reverse phase capillary column with pulled emitter tip (nanoseparations; 360 µm OD x 75 µm ID × 250 mm; Reprosil pur C18-aq, 1.9 µm; Dr. Maisch) within 90 min with a linear gradient from 3 – 35 % buffer B using a constant flow of 300 nl/min (Buffer A: 0.1 % formic acid; Buffer B: 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile). At the end of the gradient the column was flushed with 90 % B before re-equilibration at starting conditions. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded in positive mode from m/z 100 to 1700 Da, using the PASEF scan mode. Each duty cycle consisted of 1 TIMS-MS and an average of 10 PASEF MS/MS frames, each one containing multiple MS/MS spectra, which resulted in a total cycle time of 1.1 s. To exclude the majority of singly charged ions with low m/z for PASEF precursor selection, a polygon filtering was applied to the m/z over ion mobility area. For the 90 min runs target intensity was set to 20,000 cts/s and an ion mobility range (1/K0) of 0.6–1.6 Vs/cm2 was used. Data were acquired with a 100 ms ramp time. The Bruker Hystar/oTOF Control software was used to control the LC-MS system and record the data (version 3.2; Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform. Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse mouse Uniprot database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; version April 2019) including common lab contaminants. Default values of MaxQuant remained unchanged. Trypsin was selected as a protease allowing up to two missed cleavages, and the peptide search was limited to a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. Oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation as well as the biotinylation of lysine (+226.07759 Da), biotin-phenol modification of tyrosine (+361.14601 Da), and oxidized-biotin-phenol modification of tyrosine (+377.141 Da) were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylations of cysteine were defined as fixed modification. For peptide and protein identifications, a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was required. The match between runs option was enabled setting a retention time matching window of 0.7 min that included also a 1/K0 matching window of 0.05 V∙s/cm2 for measurements that were obtained on the timsTOF. The calculation of iBAQ values was enabled on all occasions.  Relative label-free quantification using the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was based on the measurements of three biological replicates for each sample. Data processing was performed using Perseus versions 1.6.12.0 or 1.6.14.0. First, reverse and contaminant hits as well as proteins that were identified by a single modified peptide only were eliminated from the list of identified protein groups. Proteins eventually included for further analysis had to be identified with at least one unique peptide. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and filtered so that at least two valid values were present in at least one of the experimental groups. Still missing values (NaN) were replaced by imputation (downshift 1.8, width 0.3), simulating signals of low abundant proteins within the distribution of measured values. To identify in a supervised manner the sets of proteins that significantly distinguish the different parent cell lines, a Student’s t-test was performed with p = 0.05 as cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lima1, Lim domain and actin binding 1, Lc-msms, Eplin, Stem cells, Proteomics, Development, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


