### Accession
PXD028080

### Title
The permanently chaperone-active small heat shock protein Hsp17 from C. elegans exhibits topological separation of its N-terminal regions

### Description
Small Heat shock proteins (sHsps) are a family of molecular chaperones that bind non-native proteins in an ATP-independent manner. C. elegans encodes 16 different sHsps, among them Hsp17, which is evolutionarily distinct from other sHsps in the nematode. The structure and mechanism of Hsp17 and how these may differ from other sHsps remain unclear. Here, we find that Hsp17 has a distinct expression pattern, structural organization, and chaperone function. Consistent with its presence under non-stress conditions, and in contrast to many other sHsps, we determined that Hsp17 is a mono-disperse, permanently active chaperone in vitro, which interacts with hundreds of different C. elegans proteins under physiological conditions. Additionally, our cryo-EM structure of Hsp17 reveals that in the 24-mer complex, 12 N-terminal regions are involved in its chaperone function. These flexible regions are located on the outside of the spherical oligomer, whereas the other 12 N-terminal regions are engaged in stabilizing interactions in its interior. This allows the same region in Hsp17 to perform different functions depending on the topological context. Taken together, our results reveal structural and functional features that further define the structural basis of permanently active sHsps.

### Sample Protocol
To identify and compare interaction partners of Hsp17, Sip1, and Hsp16.2, co-immunoprecipitations were performed. Experiments were carried out in Protein LoBind® tubes from Eppendorf. For each reaction, a 200 µL volume was used with a protein concentration of the C. elegans lysate of 1 mg/mL and added purified sHsp had a concentration of 10 µg/mL in PBS + 0.1 % NP-40. In the controls, sHsps were left out. Samples were first incubated for 1 h at 4 °C and then shifted to 20 °C or 37 °C for 45 min. Before the incubation was continued at 4 °C, to each sample, 5 µL antisera and 20 µL Protein G SepharoseTM Beads (GE Healthcare) were added. Beads were washed twice with 750 µL PBS + 0.1 % NP-40 in advance. Purified Hsp17 was used to make the antiserum against Hsp17 (Pineda, Berlin, Germany). The Sip1 antiserum was previously described (Fleckenstein et al., 2015). For Hsp16.2 an antiserum that was made with purified Hsp16.48 (Pineda, Berlin, Germany) was used, which binds Hsp16.2 as well due to the high sequence identity. In the control sample, 5 µL pre-immune serum were added. Samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C while being slowly rotated. The co-IP samples were washed three times with 750 µL PBS + 0.2 % NP-40 and a fourth, final washing step, was done with 750 µL PBS. All centrifugation steps in between were carried out at 2000 rpm for 2 min at 6 °C. The supernatant was carefully removed, and the bead fractions were stored at -80 °C until the on-bead digestion and desalting step were performed.  On bead digestion and sample desalting  After thawing the co-immunoprecipitation samples, proteins were digested similarly to the protocol from Keilhauer et al. (2015). Beads were resuspended in 25 µL buffer I (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5 ng/µL Trypsin, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT) and incubated at room temperature. After 2 h, 100 µL buffer II (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 5 mM IAA) was added. The samples were further incubated overnight, shaking on a table sample shaker at 25 °C. Then the temperature was switched to 37 °C and incubation was continued for 3 h. 1.5 µL formic acid was added to stop the tryptic digestion. To spin down the Sepharose beads, the samples were centrifuged for 2 min at 510 g. Afterwards, samples were desalted using self-packed stage tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Stage tips were prepared by cutting out small round pieces of a double layer of EmporeTM C18 material (3M) with a diameter of 1 mm and transferring it into the tip. The self-packed stage tips were pre-equilibrated with 70 µL of methanol and pre-washed three times with 70 µL 0.5 % formic acid with centrifugation step at 960 x g in between. Next, 150 µL supernatant from the on-bead digested samples were added. Samples were again centrifuged and washed three times with 70 µL 0.5 % formic acid. As final step the bound peptides were eluted by adding two times 30 µL buffer III (80 % acetonitrile, 0.5 % formic acid). Samples were dried after the elution in a speed vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and stored at -80 °C. On the day of the measurement, samples were dissolved in 25 µL 1 % formic acid, sonicated for 15 min and then filtered through a Ultrafree® PVDF membrane (0.22 µM, Merck Millipore) by centrifugation for 2 min at 7,000 g. Finally, the samples were transferred into Chromacol vials (Thermo Scientific).   MS/MS measurement MS measurements were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion that is coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data acquisition Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 3.0sp2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Next, for separation a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C was used. Each measurement was done with a flow rate of 400 nL/min and a gradient over 135 min, 5-90 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid (7 min 5 % acetonitrile, 105 min to 22 %, 10 min to 32 %, 10 min to 90 %, 10 min wash at 90 %, 10 min equilibration at 5 %). Survey scans (m/z 300-1,500) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (AGC target 2.0e5). The HCD collision energy was set to 30 % and charge states 2-7 were selected. The maximum injection time in the ion trap was set to 100 ms with an AGC target of 1.0e4. At all available parallelization time injection of ions was allowed and dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 1 min.

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008). Raw files were searched against the unreviewed C. elegans (taxon identifier: 6239) proteome dataset which was downloaded from UniprotDB (date: 20.01.2021). Basically, default settings were applied. All files were assigned to the same fraction and the tryptic cleavage sites before proline were included. For the peptides up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed as well as a peptide tolerance of 4.5 ppm. Carbamidomethylation were selected as fixed modification as well as N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Further up to 5 modifications per peptide were allowed and the min. ratio count for label free quantification (LFQ) was set to 1. Peptide length had to be in a range between 7 and 25 amino acids, borders are included. Match between runs was applied (match time window 0.7 min; align window 20 min) and all proteins were identified with a FDR of 1 %. Unique and razor peptides were included with a min. ratio count of 1. For the statistical validation of the results, the peptides a search against reverse decoy database had been performed. Evaluation of the processed MS was done with Perseus (version 1.6.2.1) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Protein groups file were by potential contaminant hits, hits from the reverse database and hits only identified by site. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, grouped into replicates and the rows filtered on 3 valid values in at least one replicate group. For Hsp17 6 replicates were available which allowed us to filter on 5 valid values in at least one group. Missing values were calculated from the Gaussian distribution (width: 0.3; downshift: 1.8) and volcano plots with a two-sided t-test (FDR: 0.05; S0 = 0.1) were plotted (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). For detailed analysis of the interactome, only hits with a log fold change ≥ 2 and a p value ≤ 0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Small Heat shock proteins (sHsps) are a family of molecular chaperones that bind nonnative proteins in an ATP-independent manner. Caenorhabditis elegans encodes 16 different sHsps, among them Hsp17, which is evolutionarily distinct from other sHsps in the nematode. The structure and mechanism of Hsp17 and how these may differ from other sHsps remain unclear. Here, we find that Hsp17 has a distinct expression pattern, structural organization, and chaperone function. Consistent with its presence under nonstress conditions, and in contrast to many other sHsps, we determined that Hsp17 is a mono-disperse, permanently active chaperone in&#xa0;vitro, which interacts with hundreds of different C.&#xa0;elegans proteins under physiological conditions. Additionally, our cryo-EM structure of Hsp17 reveals that in the 24-mer complex, 12 N-terminal regions are involved in its chaperone function. These flexible regions are located on the outside of the spherical oligomer, whereas the other 12 N-terminal regions are engaged in stabilizing interactions in its interior. This allows the same region in Hsp17 to perform different functions depending on the topological context. Taken together, our results reveal structural and functional features that further define the structural basis of permanently active sHsps.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Cehsp17, Shsps, Chaperone, Hsp17, Small heat shock protein, Hsp-17

### Affiliations
Center for Protein Assemblies and Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Strasse 8, 85747 Garching, Germany
Dept. Chemie
Lichtenbergstraße 4
85748 Garching


### Submitter
Moritz Mühlhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Buchner
Center for Protein Assemblies and Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Strasse 8, 85747 Garching, Germany


