### Accession
PXD026367

### Title
Structural basis for the specificity of PPM1H phosphatase for Rab GTPases

### Description
LRRK2 serine/threonine kinase is associated with inherited Parkinson’s disease. LRRK2 phosphorylates a subset of Rab GTPases within their switch 2 motif to control their interactions with effectors. Recent work has shown that the metal-dependent protein phosphatase PPM1H counteracts LRRK2 by dephosphorylating Rabs. PPM1H is highly selective and closely related PPM1J/M exhibit virtually no activity toward substrates such as Rab8a phosphorylated at T72 (pT72). Here we have identified the structural determinant of PPM1H specificity for Rabs. The crystal structure of PPM1H reveals a conserved catalytic domain that adopts a β-sandwich fold. The striking difference is that PPM1H has evolved a 110-residue flap domain that punctuates the catalytic domain. The flap domain distantly resembles tudor domains that interact with histones in the context of epigenetics. Cellular assays and 3-D modelling suggest that the flap domain encodes the docking motif for phosphorylated Rabs. Consistent with this hypothesis, a PPM1J chimera with the PPM1H flap domain dephosphorylates pT72 of Rab8a with a higher specific activity than PPM1H. Therefore, PPM1H has acquired a Rab-specific interaction domain within a conserved phosphatase fold.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared in similar manner to the nature protocol (A cross-linking/mass spectrometry workflow based on MS-cleavable cross-linkers and the MeroX software for studying protein structures and protein–protein interactions). One of the tryptic digested samples from each experimental set (Rab-8A, PPM1H, and mixture of Rab-8A and PPM1H) were re-dissolved in 1 mL aqueous solution containing 4% (v/v) H3PO4.  Samples were then sonicated in water bath for 30 minutes.  MCX cartridge was used to enrich the cross-linked peptides according to the previous protocol.1  The MCX cartridges were first washed with 2 mL MeOH, then re-conditioned with 2 mL aqueous solution containing 4% (v/v) H3PO4 prior to sample loading.  Samples were then individually loaded onto the MCX cartridges, followed by washing with 500 µL aqueous solution containing 4% (v/v) H3PO4 and 500 µL of 10% (v/v) MeOH solution with 0.1% (v/v) FA.  Low-charged peptides were removed by 500 µL solution composed of 500 mM NH4OAc in 40% (v/v) MeOH solution with 0.1% (v/v) FA.  High-charged peptides were eluted by 700 µL solution containing 2000 mM NH4OAc in 80% (v/v) MeOH solution with 0.1% (v/v) FA. The eluted samples were further dried by SpeedVac. All dried samples were re-suspended in 30 µL solution containing 3% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% FA, and further sonicated in water bath for 30 minutes.  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) experiment was performed on an Ultrimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480 mass spectrometer.  3 – 14 µL solution from each sample was loaded onto the nano-HPLC system individually.  Peptides were trapped by a precolumn (Acclaim PepMapTM 100, C18, 100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm, 100 Å) using aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA.  Peptides were then separated by an analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å) at 45oC using a linear gradient of 1 to 35% solvent B (solution containing 80% ACN and 0.1% FA) for 90 minutes, 35 to 85% solvent B for 5 minutes, 85% solvent B for 10 minutes, 85% to 1% solvent B for 1 minute, and 1% solvent B for 14 minutes.  The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min for all experiments. Data were acquired with data-dependent MS/MS mode.  For each MS scan, the scan range was set between 375 and 1500 m/z with the resolution at 120,000 and 300% automatic gain control (AGC) was used. The maximum injection time for each MS scan was 100 ms.  The 10 highest abundant peptides with charge state between 2 and 8 as well as intensity threshold higher than 1.0e+4 were then isolated with a 1.2 Da isolation window sequentially. Stepped HCD with normalized collision energy of 27, 30, and 33% was applied to fragment the isolated peptides.  For each MS/MS scan, the resolution was set at 15,000 with a normalized AGC at 200%.  The maximum injection time was set at 250 ms.  Dynamic exclusion with 60 s duration and 2 ppm window was enabled for the experiment.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files obtained from the LC MS/MS experiments were converted into .mgf files using RawConverter software.2  The .mgf files were submitted to search using MeroX software against PPM1H and Rab-8A protein sequences to identify potential cross-linked peptides.3  Digestive enzyme, trypsin, trypsin and AspN, or trypsin and GluC, were selected according to the experimental setup.  3 maximum missed cleavages with peptide length ranged from 3 to 50 were applied.  Carbamidomethylation at Cysteine residue was set as fixed modification; while oxidation at methionine residue and deamidation at asparagine residue were included in variable modification.  DSBU cross-linker was selected with specificity cross-linked sites at Lysine, Serine, Threonine, and Tyrosine residues.  10 ppm and 20 ppm were used to filter the mass error in precursor ion (MS1) and fragment ion (MS2) scans.  Only ions with signal-to-noise ratio high than 2 were used for database search.  RISEUP searching mode was applied, minimum 2 fragments per peptide and 5% false discovery rate (FDR) were required for a cross-linked peptide identification.  Potential cross-linked peptides with score higher than 50 were then manually check to guarantee the cleavage information obtained from the MS experiment could identify only a single cross-linked site in a peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rab8a, Dsbu crosslinking, Ppm1h

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit University of Dundee Sir James Black Centre Dundee DD1 5EH United Kingdom

### Submitter
Yuko Pui Yiu Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Dario R. Alessi
MRC Protein Phosphorylation & Ubiquitylation Unit University of Dundee Sir James Black Centre Dundee DD1 5EH United Kingdom


