### Accession
PXD042965

### Title
BAG5, a co-chaperone protein, regulates the assembly of HTCA in sperm

### Description
Acephalic spermatozoa syndrome is severe teratozoospermia, displaying the separation of the sperm head and tail. In 2015, we first reported that genetic ablation of SPATA6 results in the separation of sperm head and tail. Here, we focus on a co-chaperone protein BAG5 that interacts with SPATA6 and expresses in steps 9-16 spermatids. The deficiency of BAG5 in male mice causes the abnormal assembly of the head-tail coupling apparatus (HTCA), leading to acephalic spermatozoa and male infertility. In vivo and in vitro experiments demonstrated that HTCA formation-related proteins (SPATA6), cargo transport-related myosin proteins (MYO5A and MYL6) and dynein proteins (DYNLT1, DCTN1 and DNAL1) were misfolded after loss of BAG5. Further, BAG5 interacts with HSPA8 to regulate its affinity with SPATA6, myosin proteins and dynein proteins. Therefore, we speculate that BAG5 regulates the assembly of the head-tail coupling apparatus (HTCA) by activating the protein-folding function of HSPA8.

### Sample Protocol
After protein extraction and trypsin digestion of testis, the peptide was desalted using C18 Cartridge (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and processed for tandem mass tag (TMT) kit/isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) kit. After TMT/iTRAQ labeling, the peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length).

### Data Protocol
After HPLC fractionation, the tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS). The LC/MS raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (v.2.4, Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bag5, Infertility, Flagellum, Protein-folding, Acephalic sperm

### Affiliations
tongji
Institute of Reproductive Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

### Submitter
世明 甘

### Lab Head
Dr Shiming Gan
Institute of Reproductive Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.


