### Accession
PXD034029

### Title
Global and tissue-specific aging effects on murine proteomes

### Description
Maintenance of protein homeostasis degrades with age, contributing to aging-related decline and disease. Previous studies have primarily surveyed transcriptional aging changes. To define the effects of age directly at the protein level, we perform discovery-based proteomics in 10 tissues from 20 C57BL/6J mice, representing both sexes at adult and late midlife ages (8 and 18 months). Consistent with previous studies, age-related changes in protein abundance often have no corresponding transcriptional change. Aging results in increases in immune proteins across all tissues, consistent with a global pattern of immune infiltration with age. Our protein-centric data reveal tissue-specific aging changes with functional consequences, including altered endoplasmic reticulum and protein trafficking in the spleen. We further observe changes in the stoichiometry of protein complexes with important roles in protein homeostasis, including the CCT/TriC complex and large ribosomal subunit. These data provide a foundation for understanding how proteins contribute to systemic aging across tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were dounce homogenized and resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 150 mM NaCl, Roche protease inhibitor tablets) and cells were lysed by sonication (procedure). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (15 min at 20,000xg) and protein concentrations were measured using Pierce BCA assay kits. Proteins were then reduced with dithiothreitol (5mM for 30 minutes at room temperature) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (15mM for 60 minutes in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding an additional aliquot of DTT. For each sample, 100ug of protein was aliquoted and diluted to a final concentration of 1mg/mL. Proteins were digested using LysC (Wako, overnight, room temperature, moderate agitation) followed by trypsin (6 hr, 37C, 200rpm). The resulting peptides were then labeled with individual TMT (Thermo) reporters (1.5 hours at room temperature) and the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine (5% in water for 5 minutes). Labeled peptides were mixed into a set of two plexed for each tissue analysis. After labeling and mixing, peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 seppak cartridges (1mg, Waters). Desalted peptides were then fractionated using basic-pH reverse phase chromatography. Fractionated peptides were desalted using Stage-tips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral information was converted to mzXML format, and spectra were matched using the Comet search algorithm comparing against the ENSEMBL_GRCm39 database. Peptides and proteins were filtered to a 1% using rules of protein parsimony (Schweppe et al. JPR 2020).

### Publication Abstract
Maintenance of protein homeostasis degrades with age, contributing to aging-related decline and disease. Previous studies have primarily surveyed transcriptional aging changes. To define the effects of age directly at the protein level, we perform discovery-based proteomics in 10 tissues from 20 C57BL/6J mice, representing both sexes at adult and late midlife ages (8 and 18&#xa0;months). Consistent with previous studies, age-related changes in protein abundance often have no corresponding transcriptional change. Aging results in increases in immune proteins across all tissues, consistent with a global pattern of immune infiltration with age. Our protein-centric data reveal tissue-specific aging changes with functional consequences, including altered endoplasmic reticulum and protein trafficking in the spleen. We further observe changes in the stoichiometry of protein complexes with important roles in protein homeostasis, including the CCT/TriC complex and large ribosomal subunit. These data provide a foundation for understanding how proteins contribute to systemic aging across tissues.

### Keywords
Tissue proteomics, Mouse, Aging, Tmt, Real-time search, Multiplexed proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Washingt, Department of Genome Sciences
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Devin Schweppe

### Lab Head
Dr Devin Schweppe
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington


