### Accession
PXD025906

### Title
Anabolic Factors and Myokines Improve Differentiation of Human Embryonic Stem Cell Derived Skeletal Muscle Cells.

### Description
Skeletal muscle weakness is linked to many adverse health outcomes. Current research to identify new drugs has often been inconclusive due to lack of adequate cellular models. We have previously developed a scalable monolayer system to differentiate human embryonic stem cell (hESC) into mature skeletal muscle cells (SkMCs) within 26 days without cell sorting or genetic manipulation. Here, building on our previous work, we show that differentiation and fusion of myotubes can be further enhanced using the anabolic factors testosterone (T) and follistatin (F) in combination with a cocktail of myokines (C). Importantly, combined TFC treatment significantly enhanced both hESC-SkMC fusion index and expression of various skeletal muscle markers including the motor protein Myosin Heavy Chain (MyHC). Transcriptomic and proteomic analysis revealed oxidative phosphorylation as the most up-regulated pathway, suggesting energy metabolism is coupled to enhanced muscle differentiation. This cellular model will be a powerful tool for studying in vitro myogenesis and for drug discovery to further enhance muscle development or treat muscle diseases.

### Sample Protocol
]. Cells were lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer and heat inactivated for 10 minutes at 100C. Sonicated samples were quantified using bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions to determine protein concentration. Samples were digested with trypsin (1/50 trypsin:protein) for 16 hours at 37oC. Samples were prepared for MS/MS using SDB RPS stagetip cleanup. Samples were suspended in 5% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant using human UniProt database. A total of 6,894 proteins were identified and the quantification of proteins in LFQ intensity values were log-transformed (base 2). We next filtered proteins requiring all biological replicates to be quantified in at least one condition, which lead to 4,007 proteins after filtering. After filtering, the missing values were then imputed using the tail imputation method with a Gaussian distribution of N(μ-σ*1.8,σ*0.3) as in [56]. The imputed data were next converted to ratios relative to the control condition and normalized using Combat[57] for removing additional unwanted variation. Differentially regulated proteins were determined using ANOVA test with an adjusted p<0.05 and post-hoc Dunnett’s test (p<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle weakness is linked to many adverse health outcomes. Current research to identify new drugs has often been inconclusive due to lack of adequate cellular models. We previously developed a scalable monolayer system to differentiate human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into mature skeletal muscle cells (SkMCs) within 26 days without cell sorting or genetic manipulation. Here, building on our previous work, we show that differentiation and fusion of myotubes can be further enhanced using the anabolic factors testosterone (T) and follistatin (F) in combination with a cocktail of myokines (C). Importantly, combined TFC treatment significantly enhanced both the hESC-SkMC fusion index and the expression levels of various skeletal muscle markers, including the motor protein myosin heavy chain (MyHC). Transcriptomic and proteomic analysis revealed oxidative phosphorylation as the most up-regulated pathway, and a significantly higher level of ATP and increased mitochondrial mass were also observed in TFC-treated hESC-SkMCs, suggesting enhanced energy metabolism is coupled with improved muscle differentiation. This cellular model will be a powerful tool for studying in vitro myogenesis and for drug discovery pertaining to further enhancing muscle development or treating muscle diseases.

### Keywords
Myokines, Human embryonic stem cell, Myotubes, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Travis Ruan

### Lab Head
Dr Greg Neely
The University of Sydney


