### Accession
PXD001222

### Title
Global phosphotyrosine survey reveals activation of multiple tyrosine kinase signaling pathways in triple negative breast cancer

### Description
About 15-20% of all breast cancers are triple negative breast cancers, which are often highly aggressive. We performed global quantitative phosphotyrosine profiling of a large panel of triple negative breast cancer cell lines using high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. Our study identified 1,903 tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides derived from 969 proteins. Heterogeneous activation of tyrosine kinases was observed in triple negative breast cancer derived cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution trypsin digestion MDA-MB-231 was grown in heavy SILAC medium containing Arginine 10 and lysine 8 and used as spiked-in standard at 1:5 ratio. Heavy SILAC spike-in was utilized for normalization across the cell line panel. Cell lysates were sonicated and cleared by centrifugation at 3,000 × g at 4ºC for 10 minutes. Protein estimation was carried out using BCA protein assay. 25mg protein from each cell line were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. The protein lysate was then diluted to less than 2 M urea final concentration using 20mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and in-solution digestion was carried out using TPCK-treated trypsin on an orbital shaker at 25ºC overnight. The reaction was quenched using 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the digest was cleared by centrifugation. The protein digest was desalted using SepPak C18 cartridge and eluted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment.  Immunoaffinity purification of phosphotyrosine peptides The lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 1.4 ml of immuno-affinity purification (IP) buffer containing 50mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10mM sodium phosphate, 50mM NaCl. Peptides were dissolved using a water bath sonicator. Anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (pY100, Cell Signaling Technology) was washed once with the IP buffer and peptide solution was transferred to the microfuge containing anti-phosphotyrosine antibody and incubated on a rotator at 4’C for 30 minutes. Post-incubation, the microfuge was centrifuged at 1,500 x g for 1 minute and supernatant was removed, washed twice with IP buffer and twice with water. Remaining water was carefully removed using gel loading tip and phosphopeptides were eluted using 0.1% TFA. The eluted phosphopeptide samples were desalted using C18 STAGE tips, vacuum dried and kept at -80ºC before LC-MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS analysis of enriched phosphopeptides was carried out using a reversed-phase liquid chromatography system interfaced with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) essentially as previously described (13). The peptides were loaded onto an enrichment column (2 cm × 75 µm, Magic C18 AQ 5 µm, 120 Å) with a flow rate of 3 µl/min using 0.1% formic acid in water. The peptides were separated on an analytical column (10 cm × 75 µm, Magic C18 AQ 5 µm, 120 Å) by 0.1% formic acid and eluted with a linear gradient from 5 to 60% MeCN in 90 minutes. Precursor scans (FTMS) from 350-1,700 m/z at 60,000 resolution followed by MS2 scan (FTMS) of HCD fragmentation of the 10 most abundant ions (isolation width: 1.90 m/z; normalized collision energy: 35%; activation time=0.1 ms, default charge state: 2) at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectrometry data were searched using MASCOT (Version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms against a Human RefSeq database (version 59 containing 33,249 protein entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants through the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). For both algorithms, the search parameters included a maximum of one missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine and SILAC labeling 13C6, 15N2-lysine; 13C6, 15N4-arginine as variable modifications. The MS tolerance was set at 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.05 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 at the peptide

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide. About 15-20% of all breast cancers are triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and are often highly aggressive when compared to other subtypes of breast cancers. To better characterize the biology that underlies the TNBC phenotype, we profiled the phosphotyrosine proteome of a panel of twenty-six TNBC cell lines using quantitative high resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. A heterogeneous pattern of tyrosine kinase activation was observed based on 1,789 tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides identified from 969 proteins. One of the tyrosine kinases, AXL, was found to be activated in a majority of aggressive TNBC cell lines and was accompanied by a higher level of AXL expression. High levels of AXL expression are correlated with a significant decrease in patient survival. Treatment of cells bearing activated AXL with a humanized AXL antibody inhibited cell proliferation and migration in vitro, and tumor growth in mice. Overall, our global phosphoproteomic analysis provided new insights into the heterogeneity in the activation status of tyrosine kinase pathways in TNBCs. Our approach presents an effective means of identifying important novel biomarkers and targets for therapy such as AXL in TNBC.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Proteome, Triple negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205


