### Accession
PXD038495

### Title
Proteome-wide mapping of early events connected to oxidative stress in Arabidopsis

### Description
Changes in environmental conditions are associated with the fast accumulation of reactive oxygen species, which may rapidly generate an oxidative environment. For efficient survival, plants respond by rapid changes in protein turnover, gene expression and posttranslational protein modifications. For this reason, the regulation of ROS levels requires rapid protective mechanisms including of antioxidant defense. Here, we aimed to delineate the early events associated with the response of Arabidopsis to methyl viologen on proteome level.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis wild-type plants and fsd1-1 and fsd1-2 mutants were subjected to 30min long oxidative stress induced by methyl viologen in liquid media. Proteins were extracted using phenol extraction and digested in solution by trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system and LTQ-Ortbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein identification and label-free quantification was performed by the Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and an in-house script based on precursor ion intensities, as described before (Takac et al., 2021). Statistically significant results were filtered with ANOVA P˂0.05, applied to proteins exhibiting the fold change ˃1.5.

### Publication Abstract
The photosynthesis-induced accumulation of reactive oxygen species in chloroplasts can lead to oxidative stress, triggering changes in protein synthesis, degradation, and the assembly/disassembly of protein complexes. Using shot-gun proteomics, we identified methyl viologen-induced changes in protein abundance in wild-type Arabidopsis and oxidative stress-hypersensitive fsd1-1 and fsd1-2 knockout mutants, which are deficient in IRON SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE 1 (FSD1). The levels of proteins that are localized in chloroplasts and the cytoplasm were modified in all lines treated with methyl viologen. Compared with the wild-type, fsd1 mutants showed significant changes in metabolic protein and chloroplast chaperone levels, together with increased ratio of cytoplasmic, peroxisomal, and mitochondrial proteins. Different responses in proteins involved in the disassembly of photosystem II-light harvesting chlorophyll a/b binding proteins were observed. Moreover, the abundance of PATELLIN 4, a phospholipid-binding protein enriched in stomatal lineage, was decreased in response to methyl viologen. Reverse genetic studies using patl4 knockout mutants and a PATELLIN 4 complemented line indicate that PATELLIN 4 affects plant responses to oxidative stress by effects on stomatal closure.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Arabidsopsis, Orbitrap, Fsd1 mutants

### Affiliations
IGBB, Mississippi State University
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology,Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Tibor Pechan

### Lab Head
Dr Tibor Pechan
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology,Mississippi State University


