### Accession
PXD030785

### Title
Protective immune trajectories in early viral containment of non-pneumonic SARS-CoV-2 infection

### Description
The antiviral immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection can limit viral spread and prevent development of pneumonic COVID-19. However, the protective immunological response associated with successful viral containment in the upper airways remain unclear. Here, we combine a multiomics approach with longitudinal sampling to reveal temporally resolved protective immune signatures in non-pneumonic and ambulatory SARS-CoV-2 infected patients and associate specific immune trajectories with upper airway viral containment. We see a distinct systemic rather than local immune state associated with viral containment, characterized by interferon stimulated gene (ISG) upregulation across circulating immune cell subsets in non-pneumonic SARS-CoV2 infection. We report reduced cytotoxic potential of Natural Killer (NK) and T cells, and an immune-modulatory monocyte phenotype with protective immunity in COVID-19. Together, we show protective immune trajectories in SARS-CoV2 infection, which have important implications for patient prognosis and the development of immunomodulatory therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were boiled in SDS-buffer and subjected to SP3-based cleanup and tryptic digest using an AssayMAP Bravo Protein Sample Prep Platform (Agilent). A spectral library was generated by  analyzing 52 high-pH fractions from a combine sample wich was measured on a Q Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer. For data-independent acquisition, each individual sample  was injected as technical duplicates and measured in DIA mode with variable isolation window sizes on a Q Exactive HF-X. Spectral library generation as well as DIA analysis was performed in Spectronaut (version 14.3) using the Qvalue sparse  setting with a q-value of 0.01 in at least one raw-file using the top3 precursors for  quantitation without applying imputation.

### Data Protocol
Technical replicates were collapsed into samples by using the average Quantity value. For significance calling on protein level, ratios to the  average no-COVID control were calculated, scaled by median-MAD normalization and a one-sample moderated t-test (limma) was applied among  experimental groups. Proteins with a Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value of 0.05  (5% FDR) were considered as significant. Top abundant proteins were subjected to  STRING analysis using experiments and databases as interaction sources. For  single-sample gene-set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA), median-MAD scaled log-fold change values of group-wise comparisons were calculated using the mean protein intensity values among each group. Significance calling of pathways was  applied on the adjusted p-values from the ssGSEA results. Due to one time-point missing from patient 11, this patient was not included in the proteomic analysis for volcano plots and pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The antiviral immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection can limit viral spread and prevent development of pneumonic COVID-19. However, the protective immunological response associated with successful viral containment in the upper airways remains unclear. Here, we combine a multi-omics approach with longitudinal sampling to reveal temporally resolved protective immune signatures in non-pneumonic and ambulatory SARS-CoV-2 infected patients and associate specific immune trajectories with upper airway viral containment. We see a distinct systemic rather than local immune state associated with viral containment, characterized by interferon stimulated gene (ISG) upregulation across circulating immune cell subsets in non-pneumonic SARS-CoV2 infection. We report reduced cytotoxic potential of Natural Killer (NK) and T cells, and an immune-modulatory monocyte phenotype associated with protective immunity in COVID-19. Together, we show protective immune trajectories in SARS-CoV2 infection, which have important implications for patient prognosis and the development of immunomodulatory therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Plasma, Covid-19, Proteomics

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin
Proteomics Platform Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Proteomics Platform Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin, Germany


