### Accession
PXD036321

### Title
The proteins that PHGDH interact with in mitchondria

### Description
To determine the proteins that interact with PHGDH in mitchondria, we overexpressed Flag-PHGDH in cells and immunoprecipitation of PHGDH with Flag antibody. Mass spectrometry analysis of the PHGDH immunoprecipitation mixture and determined the mitochondrial proteins that interact with PHGDH.

### Sample Protocol
Culture cells overexpressed PHGDH or not to harvest at least 100µg of mitochondrial proteins per condition. Determine the protein concentration of the supernatant using established methods such as the Bradford Protein Assay Kit. Immunoprecipitation of PHGDH with Flag antibody in mitochondrial proteins, respectively. Electrophoresis of immunoprecipitation protein samples in gels. Cut the gels into particle and Then the proteins were reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 45min and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 30min. The alkylation was quenched by DTT at the final concentration of 20mM at room temperature. Then the proteins were resuspended in 100μL 50mM HEPES (pH 8.0) in the filter and digested by trypsin at a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1 (w/w) (overnight, 37 °C). Then the digested peptides were filtered with 10kD molecular weight cut-off filter, desalted using Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were vacuum dried for HPLC−MS/MS analysis. For the HPLC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were analyzed on an QE-plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with an EASY-nLC 1200 nano liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were dissolved in mobile phase buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water) and loaded onto Precolumn (Nano Trap 100µm i.d. x 20mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5µm, 100Å) and Analytical column (PepMap C18 2μm 50μm x 150mm NV FS 1200bar) by an autosampler. Then the peptides were separated and eluted with a linear gradient of 3%–8% of mobile phase buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile) for 3min, 8%-28% buffer B for 70min, 28%-45% buffer B for 35min, 45%-90% buffer B for 2min, and 90% buffer B for 10min at the flow rate of 300nL/min on HPLC system. The eluted peptides were ionized under high voltage (2.2 KV) and detected by QE-plus using nano-spray ion source (NSI). For full MS scan, peptides with 350–1700 m/z were detected at the resolution 70000. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1 x 106, and maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms. The ions with intensity above 2 × 104 were subjected to fragmentation via high energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with 27% normalized collision energy (NCE). The fragmented ions were analyzed in Orbitrap. The AGC target in the ion trap was set to 1 x 105, and the isolation window was 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched with Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The reviewed human proteins in uniprot database was downloaded as target protein database. Enzyme specificity with trypsin was used, and maximum missing cleavages was set as two. The mass error tolerance for precursor ions was 20 p.p.m. and fragment ions was 0.5Da. The fixed modification was set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term). False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein and peptide were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phgdh, Mitochondrial proteins

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China

### Submitter
Ting Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Huafeng Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China


