### Accession
PXD026657

### Title
Target deconvolution of HDAC pharmacopoeia highlights MBLAC2 as common off-target

### Description
HDAC drugs have entered the pharmacopoeia in the 2000s. However, some enigmatic phenotypes suggest off-target engagement. Here, we developed a chemical proteomics assay using three promiscuous chemotypes and quantitative mass spectrometry that we deployed to establish the target landscape of 56 HDAC drugs. The results highlight 14 direct targets, including 9 out of the 11 human zinc-dependent HDACs, question the reported selectivity of widely-used molecules, notably for HDAC6, and identified novel interactome-dependent binding of drugs to HDAC1/2 epigenetic complexes. Unexpectedly, metallo-beta-lactamase domain-containing protein 2 (MBLAC2) featured as a frequent target of hydroxamate drugs. This ill-annotated palmitoyl-CoA hydrolase is inhibited by 24 HDAC inhibitors at low nM potency. Both enzymatic inhibition and knocking down the protein led to the accumulation of extracellular vesicles. Given the importance of exosome biology in neurological diseases or cancer, this HDAC-independent drug effect creates the incentive for considering MBLAC2 as a target for drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown assays: Proteins of native cancer cell lysates were pulled down by affinity matrices based on HDAC-inhibitors. The pulled down proteins were denaturated by urea, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with chloroacetamide and digested with Trypsin, before analysis via label free DDA LC-MSMS on a Q Exactive HF (C18 column, 50 min gradient, Top 15 method).  Full Proteome: HEK293 cells were lysed by 4% SDS buffer, boiled at 95 °C, and mixed with trifluoroacetic acid (2% v/v). After neutralizing denatured protein lysates by N-methylmorpholine (4% v/v), an adapted SP3 protocol (PMID: 30464214) was applied for cleanup and digestion. In brief, proteins were precipitated on Sera-Mag beads by adding 80% ethanol, washed, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH = 8.5) and reduced with 10 mM DTT. After alkylation with 55 mM chloroacetamide, proteins were digested by Trypsin. The resulting peptide solution was then desalted using a STAGEtip protocol, labelled with TMT10-plex and fractionated by high-pH RP-HPLC (96 fractions pooled to 48 fractions). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed via a micro-flow LC-MS3 method (C18 column, 25 min gradient, Orbitrap-Iontrap-Orbitrap method) on a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification for label free DDA type of experiments was performed using MaxQuant (v 1.6.1.0). Orbitrap raw files were searched against the Swissprot database (v03.12.15, 20193 entries, downloaded 22.03.2016). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm.  For full proteome analysis (TMT labelled), peptide identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swissprot database (v03.12.15, 20193 entries, downloaded 22.03.2016).  Isotope impurities of the TMT lot were specified to allow MaxQuant the automated correction of TMT intensities. TMT-labelling modification was set for Lysine and N-terminal aminogroups and ITMS was set to a match tolerance of 0.4. For all searches, carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Drugs that target histone deacetylase (HDAC) entered the pharmacopoeia in the 2000s. However, some enigmatic phenotypes suggest off-target engagement. Here, we developed a quantitative chemical proteomics assay using immobilized HDAC inhibitors and mass spectrometry that we deployed to establish the target landscape of 53 drugs. The assay covers 9 of the 11 human zinc-dependent HDACs, questions the reported selectivity of some widely-used molecules (notably for HDAC6) and delineates how the composition of HDAC complexes influences drug potency. Unexpectedly, metallo-&#x3b2;-lactamase domain-containing protein&#x2009;2 (MBLAC2) featured as a frequent off-target of hydroxamate drugs. This poorly characterized palmitoyl-CoA hydrolase is inhibited by 24 HDAC inhibitors at low nanomolar potency. MBLAC2 enzymatic inhibition and knockdown led to the accumulation of extracellular vesicles. Given the importance of extracellular vesicle biology in neurological diseases and cancer, this HDAC-independent drug effect may qualify MBLAC2 as a target for drug discovery.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Lc-msms, Affinity pulldown, Cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), 85354 Freising, Germany
Chair of proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical Univerity Munich

### Submitter
Severin Lechner

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), 85354 Freising, Germany


