### Accession
PXD026677

### Title
The attenuating effect of low-intensity pulsed ultrasound on hypoxia-induced chondrocyte damage in TMJ osteoarthritis based on TMT labeling quantitative proteomic analysis

### Description
Temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis (TMJOA) is a common group of clinical diseases and is an important subtype of temporomandibular joint disorder (TMD). Increased intrajoint pressure or weakened penetration can exacerbate the hypoxic state of the condylar cartilage microenvironment. In this study, TMT labeling quantitative proteomic technology was used to comprehensively explore the impacts of and pathways affected by LIPUS on the biological functions of chondrocytes under hypoxic conditions. Bioinformatic analysis revealed differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the N group versus the L group and the L group versus the LP group. Considering the results of gene ontology (GO) enrichment, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses, we hypothesized that LIPUS can activate the FAK signaling pathway. This study identified a new molecular marker to determine the efficacy of LIPUS in TMJOA, providing a theoretical basis for the clinical application of LIPUS in the treatment of TMJOA.

### Sample Protocol
Chondrocytes were inoculated in 6-well plates and incubated under conditions of 5% oxygen concentration, 1% oxygen concentration, and 1% oxygen concentration + LIPUS stimulation starting the next day. The collected chondrocytes were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, China) in lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g and 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was measured with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions. Proteins were denatured with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark and then diluted to a urea concentration of less than 2 M by the addition of 100 mM TEAB. Then, trypsin was added at a trypsin:protein mass ratio of 1:50 for the first digestion overnight and a trypsin:protein mass ratio of 1:100 for a second 4-hour digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted on a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and were then vacuum dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the TMT kit manufacturer's protocol. In this study, the labeling reagents 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C 129N, 129C, 130N and 131 were used to label three biological replicates of the N, L and LP groups. Tryptic peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase HPLC using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particle size, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient settings were as follows: 0-40 min, 7%~25% B; 40-52 min, 25%~35% B; 52-56 min, 35%~80% B; 56-60 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 500.00 nL/min. Peptides were exposed to a nanospray ionization (NSI) source and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) mass spectrometer coupled online to the UPLC system. The applied electrospray voltage was set to 2.1 kV. For the full scan, the primary MS scan range was set to 400-1500 m/z, and intact peptides were detected in an Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS with a normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 28, and the secondary scan resolution was set to 35,000. The MS/MS scan range was fixed at 100 m/z. The data acquisition mode used a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) program. The top 20 peptide parent ions with the highest signal intensity were selected to enter the higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) collision cell sequentially after the primary scan and were fragmented using a fragmentation energy of 28, 32%. The same sequential MS/MS procedure was performed. To improve the effective utilization of the mass spectrum, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 3.8E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to 50 ms, and the dynamic exclusion duration of the MS/MS scan was set to 30 s to prevent repeated scanning of the parent ions.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were retrieved using MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0). The search parameters were set as follows. The database used was Rattus norvegicus 10116 (29,951 sequences). A reverse decoy database was added to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) due to random matching. A common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the effect of contaminating proteins on the identification results. The cleavage enzyme was specified as trypsin/P, and the allowable number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. The mass tolerance of the primary parent ion was set to 20.0 ppm and 5 ppm in the first search and main search, respectively. The mass tolerance of secondary fragment ions was set to 20.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl modification on Cys was specified as the fixed modification, and oxidation modification on Met was specified as the variable modification. The quantification method was set to TMT-10plex. The FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to >40. GO functional annotation based on the DAVID bioinformatics database (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/gene2gene.jsp) was first performed. The identified proteins were divided into the following three categories: biological process (BP), cellular component (CC), and molecular function (MF). The DEPs were further divided into up- and downregulated groups and analyzed for significant functional enrichment. For each category, two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to evaluate the enrichment of a DEP with respect to all identified proteins. GO terms with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the KEGG database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html) for preformed network queries. Proteins were classified according to the KEGG website pathway hierarchical classification method and were then subjected to enrichment analysis. A two-tailed Fisher‘s exact test was used to determine the enrichment of each DEP with respect to all identified proteins. Pathways with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched. The PPI information for the DEPs was obtained with STRING online software (https://string-db.org/). Only interactions between proteins that belonged to the search dataset were selected, thus excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called the "confidence score" to define the confidence level of an interaction. We obtained all interactions with a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Cytoscape software (National Resource for Network Biology, USA) was used to generate network diagrams. Then, the MCODE plugin was used to mine the network for modules with high connectivity.

### Publication Abstract
Temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis (TMJOA) is a degenerative disease with a complex and multifactorial etiology. An increased intrajoint pressure or weakened penetration can exacerbate the hypoxic state of the condylar cartilage microenvironment. Our group previously simulated the hypoxic environment of TMJOA <i>in vitro</i>. Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) stimulation attenuates chondrocyte matrix degradation <i>via</i> a hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway-associated mechanism, but the mode of action of LIPUS is currently poorly understood. Moreover, most recent studies investigated the pathological mechanisms of osteoarthritis, but no biomarkers have been established for assessing the therapeutic effect of LIPUS on TMJOA with high specificity, which results in a lack of guidance regarding clinical application. Here, tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic technology was used to comprehensively screen the molecular targets and pathways affected by the action of LIPUS on chondrocytes under hypoxic conditions. A bioinformatic analysis identified 902 and 131 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the &lt;1% oxygen treatment group compared with the control group and in the &lt;1% oxygen + LIPUS stimulation group compared with the &lt;1% oxygen treatment group, respectively. The DEPs were analyzed by gene ontology (GO), KEGG pathway and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analyses. By acting on extracellular matrix (ECM)-associated proteins, LIPUS increases energy production and activates the FAK signaling pathway to regulate cell biological behaviors. DEPs of interest were selected to verify the reliability of the proteomic results. In addition, this experiment demonstrated that LIPUS could upregulate chondrogenic factors (such as Sox9, Collagen &#x2161; and Aggrecan) and increase the mucin sulfate content. Moreover, LIPUS reduced the hydrolytic degradation of the ECM by decreasing the MMP3/TIMP1 ratio and vascularization by downregulating VEGF. Interestingly, LIPUS improved the migration ability of chondrocytes. In summary, LIPUS can regulate complex biological processes in chondrocytes under hypoxic conditions and alter the expression of many functional proteins, which results in reductions in hypoxia-induced chondrocyte damage. ECM proteins such as thrombospondin4, thrombospondin1, IL1RL1, and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase 1 play a central role and can be used as specific biomarkers determining the efficacy of LIPUS and viable clinical therapeutic targets of TMJOA.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling proteomics, Tmjoa, Chondrocyte, Hypoxia, Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (lipus)

### Affiliations
Department of Dental Implant Center, Beijing Stomatological Hospital, School of Stomatology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Department of Dental Implant Center, Beijing Stomatological Hospital, School of Stomatology, Capital Medical University

### Submitter
Wei Geng

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Geng
Department of Dental Implant Center, Beijing Stomatological Hospital, School of Stomatology, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China


