### Accession
PXD003402

### Title
Vegemite Beer -  Vegemite Beer: yeast extract spreads as nutrient supplements to promote fermentation

### Description
The effect on yeast fermentation in media with glucose and various concentrations of Vegemite and Marmite was tested.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated, digested with trypsin, desalted, and detected with LC-MS/MS on a TripleTof 5600 (SCIEX)

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using ProteinPilot 4.1 with standard parameters searching the Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
Vegemite is an iconic Australian food spread made from spent brewers' yeast extract, which has been reported to be used as an ingredient in illegal home brewing. In this study, we tested the utility of Vegemite and the similar spread Marmite in promoting fermentation. We could not culture microorganisms from either Vegemite or Marmite, consistent with these food-grade spreads being essentially sterile. To test if the addition of Vegemite or Marmite could assist in fermentation when additional viable yeast was also present, solutions containing glucose and a range of concentrations of either Vegemite or Marmite were inoculated with brewers' yeast. No fermentation occurred in any condition without addition of extra brewer's yeast. Fermentation did not occur when yeast was inoculated into solutions containing only glucose, but progressed efficiently with when Vegemite or Marmite was also added. Gas Chromatography confirmed that ethanol was present at &#x223c;3% v/v post-fermentation in all samples which contained glucose, Vegemite or Marmite, and brewers' yeast. Trace amounts of methanol were also detected. Mass spectrometry proteomics identified abundant intracellular yeast proteins and barley proteins in Vegemite and Marmite, and abundant secreted yeast proteins from actively growing yeast in those samples to which extra brewers' yeast had been added. We estimate that the real-world cost of home brewed "Vegemite Beer" would be very low. Our results show that Vegemite or other yeast extract spreads could provide cheap and readily available sources of nutrient supplementation to increase the efficiency of fermentation in home brewing or other settings.

### Keywords
Yeast, Marmite, Vegemite, Fermentation

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Benjamin Schulz

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Luke Schulz
School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland


