### Accession
PXD011643

### Title
Secretome analysis of human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stromal cells

### Description
As an essential cellular component of the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) play a pivotal role for the physiological regulation of hematopoiesis, in particular through the secretion of cytokines and chemokines. Mass spectrometry (MS) facilitates the identification and quantification of a large amount of secreted proteins (secretome), but can be hampered by the false-positive identification of contaminating proteins released from dead cells or derived from cell medium. To reduce the likelihood of contaminations we applied an approach combining secretome and proteome analysis to characterize the physiological secretome of BM derived human MSC. Our analysis revealed a secretome consisting of 315 proteins. Pathway analyses of these proteins revealed a high abundance of proteins related to cell growth and/or maintenance, signal transduction and cell communication thereby representing key biological functions of BM derived MSC on protein level. Within the MSC secretome we identified several cytokines and growth factors such as VEGFC, TGF-β1, TGF-β2 and GDF6 which are known to be involved in the physiological regulation of hematopoiesis. By comparing the peptide patterns of secretomes and cell lysates 17 proteins were identified as candidates for proteolytic processing. Taken together, our combined MS work-flow reduced the likelihood of contaminations and enabled us to carve out a specific overview about the composition of the secretome from human BM derived MSC. This methodological approach and the specific secretome signature of BM derived MSC may serve as basis foffuture comparative analyses of the interplay of MSC and HSPC in patients with hematological malignancies.

### Sample Protocol
MSC were obtained from bone marrow of 8 healthy individuals (median age 63 years, range: 31–85 years). Signed informed consent was obtained from donors, and the study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by our local institutional review board (approval number: 4777). Isolation of MSC was implemented as described in Geyh et al. 2013. Briefly, mononuclear cells (2-3 x 107) were cultured and medium was changed weekly to remove non-adherent cells. After 14–21 days, colonies >50 cells (colony-forming unit fibroblast, CFU-F) were counted and passaged. All experiments were carried out using MSC derived from passage 3-4 and MSC fulfilled the definition criteria of the International Society for Cellular Therapy. After pre-incubation with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) low supplemented with 30 % FBS and 1 % PSG, MSC were cultivated in serum-free DMEM lowglucose supplemented with 1 % PSG for 48 hours prior to collection of supernatants (secretomes) and lysates (proteomes) to avoid serum derived contaminants like serum albumin. Afterwards supernatant (secretome) and cell lysate (proteome) were harvested. Altogether 8 secretomes and 4 proteomes of MSC from healthy donors were collected. Secretomes were sterile filtered and concentrated using 3 kDA cutoff Vivaspin 15R ultrafiltration spin columns (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An additional desalting step was performed with Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns (7K MWCO, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Concentrated, desalted secretomes were dried in a SpeedVacTM and resuspended in urea buffer (2 M thiourea, 7 M urea, 30 mM Tris-HCL, pH 8.0).  Proteomes were processed in lysis buffer in combination with a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) to extract proteins as described [23]. Homogenates were sonicated and supernatants were collected after centrifugation. Subsequently, total protein amount was determined using Pierce 660nm Protein Assay (Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany).  5 µg protein per sample was loaded onto a 4-12 % Bis-Tris sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel (Novex NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany). After complete entry into the gel, the electrophoresis was stopped and the gel was stained with silver as described elsewhere [24]. The silver-stained protein gel bands, one for each sample, were cut out and each gel slice was transferred into an Eppendorf tube. Bands were destained, washed and proteins were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Digestion of proteins was conducted with 0.1 µg trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate in water for 16 h at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 1:1 (v/v) solution of acetonitrile and 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid, and after acetonitrile removal resuspended in 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of peptides and proteins was proceed with MaxQuant environment (version 1.6.0.16 MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) with standard parameters. Database searches were performed using the human proteome database (Uniprot _human, downloaded October 6th 2017) using tryptic specificity (cleavage behind R and K) with a maximum of two missed cleavages sites. Furthermore methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation at cysteines was considered as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a false discovery rate set to 1 %. Unique and razor peptides were used for Label-free quantification. The minimal ratio count was set to two, peptides with variable modifications were included in the quantification; the matched between runs option was enabled.  Quantitative data were analyzed within the Perseus framework (version 1.5.2.6, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany). Only proteins with at least 2 identified peptides and a minimum of 3 valid values in at least one group were considered. Proteins which were identified only by site or marked as contaminant (from the MaxQuant contaminant list) were excluded. Missing data were imputed before statistical analysis by values from a normal distribution down-shifted 1.8 standard deviations (width 0.3 standard deviations). The significance volcano plot analysis was applied on log2 transformed values using a S0 constant of 0.8 and a 5 % false discovery rate based cutoff. Protein networks were generated using STRING 10.5. The analysis of proteolytic processing was implemented with the bioanalytical tool “Lysate and Secretome Peptide Feature Plotter (LSPFP 1.0.0)”.

### Publication Abstract
As an essential cellular component of the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) play a pivotal role for the physiological regulation of hematopoiesis, in particular through the secretion of cytokines and chemokines. Mass spectrometry (MS) facilitates the identification and quantification of a large amount of secreted proteins (secretome), but can be hampered by the false-positive identification of contaminating proteins released from dead cells or derived from cell medium. To reduce the likelihood of contaminations we applied an approach combining secretome and proteome analysis to characterize the physiological secretome of BM derived human MSC. Our analysis revealed a secretome consisting of 315 proteins. Pathway analyses of these proteins revealed a high abundance of proteins related to cell growth and/or maintenance, signal transduction and cell communication thereby representing key biological functions of BM derived MSC on protein level. Within the MSC secretome we identified several cytokines and growth factors such as VEGFC, TGF-&#x3b2;1, TGF-&#x3b2;2 and GDF6 which are known to be involved in the physiological regulation of hematopoiesis. By comparing the peptide patterns of secretomes and cell lysates 17 proteins were identified as candidates for proteolytic processing. Taken together, our combined MS work-flow reduced the likelihood of contaminations and enabled us to carve out a specific overview about the composition of the secretome from human BM derived MSC. This methodological approach and the specific secretome signature of BM derived MSC may serve as basis for future comparative analyses of the interplay of MSC and HSPC in patients with hematological malignancies.

### Keywords
Hematopoiesis, Bone marrow, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Secretome

### Affiliations
Heinrich-Heine Universität Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biomedical Research Center (BMFZ), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany

### Submitter
Falk Baberg

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Kai Stühler
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Biomedical Research Center (BMFZ), Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany


