### Accession
PXD013380

### Title
Cerebellum Proteomics -  Cell-type-specific profiling of brain mitochondria reveals functional and molecular diversity

### Description
A whole cerebellum proteome analysis was performed to compare the data to cell specific mitochondria proteomics in the same brain region.

### Sample Protocol
Cerebellum samples were lysed in a modified RIPA buffer (1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 8). Cell debris and undissolved material was removed by centrifugation (10 min, 16,000 g, 4°C). A protein amount of 20 µg was subjected used for proteolytic digestion. The lysate was dilute 1:2 with water and MgCl2 was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. Afterwards, 25 units Benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich) were added and the DNA digestion was performed for 30 min at 37°C. Protein digestion was performed using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with small modifications. Briefly, 30 kDa Vivacon filters (Sartorius) were used. Proteins were digested for 16 h with 0.4 µg of LysC (Promega) followed by 4 h incubation with 0.2 µg of trypsin (Promega). Peptides were eluted into collection tubes and desalted using C18 stop-and-go extraction. Samples were dried after elution by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were analyzed on an Easy nLC-1200 nano UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online via a Nanospray Flex electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides were separated on self-packed C18 columns (300 mm × 75 µm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm; Dr. Maisch) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% FA (0 min, 2% B; 5 min, 5% B; 185 min, 25% B; 230 min, 35% B; 250 min, 60% B).. For full MS spectra, a resolution of 120,000 was applied. The 15 most intense ions were chosen for fragmentation (resolution: 15 k, isolation width: 1.6 m:z, AGC target: 1E+5, NCE: 26%).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification, label free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) of proteins was performed with the software Maxquant (version 1.5.5.1) using default settings. In brief, a canonical database of the reviewed reference mouse proteome (UniProt, download: June 8, 2016; 16798 entries) was used for database search. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1% using a target and decoy approach (concatenated forward + reverse database). The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled using a time window of 2 min. Label-free quantification (LFQ) required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria vary in morphology and function in different tissues; however, little is known about their molecular diversity among cell types. Here we engineered MitoTag mice, which express a Cre recombinase-dependent green fluorescent protein targeted to the outer mitochondrial membrane, and developed an isolation approach to profile tagged mitochondria from defined cell types. We determined the mitochondrial proteome of the three major cerebellar cell types (Purkinje cells, granule cells and astrocytes) and identified hundreds of mitochondrial proteins that are differentially regulated. Thus, we provide markers of cell-type-specific mitochondria for the healthy and diseased mouse and human central nervous systems, including in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Alzheimer's disease. Based on proteomic predictions, we demonstrate that astrocytic mitochondria metabolize long-chain fatty acids more efficiently than neuronal mitochondria. We also characterize cell-type differences in mitochondrial calcium buffering via the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (Mcu) and identify regulator of microtubule dynamics protein 3 (Rmdn3) as a determinant of endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria proximity in Purkinje cells. Our approach enables exploring mitochondrial diversity in many in vivo contexts.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Brain, Mouse

### Affiliations
Institute of Neuronal Cell Biology Technical University of Munich Germany
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Misgeld
Institute of Neuronal Cell Biology Technical University of Munich Germany


