### Accession
PXD041256

### Title
Targeted delivery of tumor necrosis factor in combination with lomustine induces a T-cell dependent regression of glioblastoma

### Description
Glioblastoma is the most aggressive primary brain tumor with an unmet need for more effective therapies. Here we report that the combination of L19TNF, an antibody-cytokine fusion  protein based on tumor necrosis factor that selectively localizes on the tumor neo-vasculature,  with the alkylating agent lomustine, can induce tumor regression in orthotopic glioma-bearing  mice and patients with recurrent glioblastoma. Mechanistically, this striking synergy crucially depended on T cells and involved activation of the tumor endothelium, tumor DNA damage,  treatment-associated tumor necrosis, increased antigen presentation on MHC class I and tumor immune cell infiltration, as well as decreased tumor-associated immunosuppression. The clinical translation of this approach is ongoing, but already shows durable responses in the first recurrent glioblastoma patient cohort treated with L19TNF in combination with lomustine (NCT04573192).

### Sample Protocol
For affinity purification of MHC class I molecules, GL261 cells (6 x107cells per condition) were lysed and peptides presented in H-2 class I complexes were purified from lysates by incubation with M1/42 (BioX-cell) antibody-coupled resin. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched against the mouse reference proteome database. To this protein database, additional sequences were added corresponding to non-synonymous mutations identified by exome sequencing performed on GL-261 cells. Inaddition, the sequence of the gp70 envelope protein of the murine leukemia virus was added since gp70 has been previously reported to be a source of immunodominant antigens in mouse-derived tumor cells (35, 44). The following analysis settings were used with SEQUEST: i) No-Enzyme (Unspecific) (ii) precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, (iii) fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, (iv) one variable modification (oxidation of methionine). False discovery rates were calculated with Percolator. Unique peptide identifications with a length between 8 and 15 amino acids were subjected to MHC class I binding prediction analysis using MHC-flurry (45). Peptides were predicted to bind if their calculated binding affinity (KD) was below 500 nM for at least one of the H-2 alleles.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is the most aggressive primary brain tumor with an unmet need for more effective therapies. Here, we investigated combination therapies based on L19TNF, an antibody-cytokine fusion protein based on tumor necrosis factor that selectively localizes to cancer neovasculature. Using immunocompetent orthotopic glioma mouse models, we identified strong anti-glioma activity of L19TNF in combination with the alkylating agent CCNU, which cured the majority of tumor-bearing mice, whereas monotherapies only had limited efficacy. In situ and ex vivo immunophenotypic and molecular profiling in the mouse models revealed that L19TNF and CCNU induced tumor DNA damage and treatment-associated tumor necrosis. In addition, this combination also up-regulated tumor endothelial cell adhesion molecules, promoted the infiltration of immune cells into the tumor, induced immunostimulatory pathways, and decreased immunosuppression pathways. MHC immunopeptidomics demonstrated that L19TNF and CCNU increased antigen presentation on MHC class I molecules. The antitumor activity was T cell dependent and completely abrogated in immunodeficient mouse models. On the basis of these encouraging results, we translated this treatment combination to patients with glioblastoma. The clinical translation is ongoing but already shows objective responses in three of five patients in the first recurrent glioblastoma patient cohort treated with L19TNF in combination with CCNU (NCT04573192).

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Immunotherapy mhc-i

### Affiliations
Philochem AG
Philochem AG,Libernstrasse 3, 8112 Otelfingen, Switzerland

### Submitter
Domenico Ravazza

### Lab Head
Dr Ettore Gilardoni
Philochem AG,Libernstrasse 3, 8112 Otelfingen, Switzerland


