### Accession
PXD025914

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of root tubers of Rehmannia glutinosa at different growth stages

### Description
In this study, roots of Rehmannia glutinosa were used as experimental material, and three tuber roots of Rehmannia glutinosa in extension stage (I), expansion stage (E) and mature stage (M) were selected as samples, The iTRAQ quantitative proteomic technology combined with two-dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MSMS) technology was used to construct the root tuber proteome database of Rehmannia glutinosa, the genes related to the growth and development of Rehmannia glutinosa root tuber were found.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, roots of Rehmannia glutinosa were used as experimental material, and three tuber roots of Rehmannia glutinosa in extension stage (I), expansion stage (E) and mature stage (M) were selected as samples, The total protein was extracted by phenol extraction method of Isaacson t et.al. In short,Weigh 0.1g sample from each group,Add 1ml cold phenol extraction buffer and an equal volume of phenol saturated with Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and shake the mixture for 30 min at 4°C.Centrifuge at 5000g for 30 min at 4°C and collect the upper phenolic phase.Add 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol to the collected phenol phase, store at –20°C for 1 night.Centrifuge the sample for 10 min at 12000g at 4°C.Add 5 volumes (based on the volume of the last collected phenolic phase) ice-cold methanol to wash the pellet, mix gently.Centrifuge the sample for 30 min at 5000g at 4°C.Centrifuge the sample for 10 min at 12000g at 4°C, dry the deposit.The deposit was dissolved in lysis solution at 30°C for 3 hour. Centrifuge the solution by 12000g for 10min at room temperature, collect the supernatant and centrifuge again.The supernatant was the extracted protein solution. The concentrations of the protein extracts were determined by the BCA method,and store at -80°C for iTRAQ analysis. Subsequently, Lay 10μg samples to the 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Get 100μg protein for each sample and add five volume of cold acetone at -20°C for 1hour.Centrifuge by 12000rpm for 15mins at 4°C, Add 50μL dissolution buffer for the deposit and add 4μL reducing reagent. Incubate the solution at 60°C for 1 hour.Add 2μL cysteine-blocking reagents at room temperature for 10 min. Clean the protein solution by using 10kDa ultrafiltration tube to centrifuge by 12000rpm for 20 min.Add100μL dissolution buffer, centrifuge by 12000rpm for 1mins and repeat this step three times.Place column in a new tube, add 50μL sequencing-grade trypsin (50ng/μL) and incubate at 37°C for 12 hours. Centrifuge by 12000rpm for 20mins, collect the peptide. Transfer the filter units to new collection tube and add 50μL dissolution buffers to centrifuge the tube again. Combined the two filter solution. Finally, RPLC analysis and rplc-msms analysis are used to complete the mass spectrometry protocol. The online Nano-RPLC was employed on the Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra™ 2D System (AB SCIEX). The samples were loaded on C18 nanoLC trap column (100µm×3cm, C18, 3µm, 150Å) and washed by Nano-RPLC Buffer A(0.1%FA, 2%ACN) at 2μL/min for 10mins. An elution gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile (0.1%formic acid) in 70mins gradient was used on an analytical ChromXP C18 column (75μm x 15cm, C18, 3μm 120 Å) with spray tip.Data acquisition was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, USA) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, USA) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, USA). Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 PSI, nebulizer gas of 5 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 150°C. For information dependent acquisition (IDA), survey scans were acquired in 250ms and as many as 35 product ion scans were collected if they exceeded a threshold of 150 counts per second (counts/s) with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. The total cycle time was fixed to 2.5s. A rolling collision energy setting was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation (CID). Dynamic exclusion was set for ½ of peak width (18s). And the precursor was then refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
In this study, against transcriptomics of R. glutinosa database, raw data (.wiff, Sciex) was processed by Protein Pilot Software v. 5.0 (AB SCIEX, USA) using the Paragon algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007). Furthermore, the experimental data from tandem mass spectrometry (MS) was used to match the theory data to obtain results of protein identification, and protein identification was performed with the search option: emphasis on biological modifications. The identification number (ID) of reliable proteins was nonstandard protein ID, it was necessary to extract sequences from the transcriptome database of R. glutinosa (Sun et al., 2012). Based on sequence similarity and the sequence of retrieved transcriptome database of R. glutinosa, biological information functions of reliable proteins were analyzed using Arabidopsis thaliana as background population. Gene ontology (GO) analysis were performed by the mainstream database David6.7（http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/）and QuickGO（http://www.ebi.ac.uk/QuickGO/） to describe GO classification annotation and enrichment analysis of reliable proteins. KEGG Pathway analysis and enrichment analysis results were obtained by mapping proteins information to KEGG database. Furthermore, the analysis of protein-protein interaction (PPI) is based on string database (http://string.embl.de/) and cytoscape software (http://www.cytoscape.org/).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Rehmannia glutinosa</i> has important medicinal value; terpenoid is one of the main active components in <i>R. glutinosa</i>. In this study, iTRAQ technique was used to analyze the relative abundance of proteins in roots of <i>R. glutinosa</i>, and 6,752 reliable proteins were quantified. GO enrichment results indicated that most proteins were involved in metabolic process or cellular process, 57.63% proteins had catalytic activity, and 65.80% proteins were enriched in membrane-bounded organelle. In roots of <i>R. glutinosa</i>, there were 38 KEGG enrichments with significance, more DEPs were found in some pathways, especially the proteasome pathway and TCA cycle with 15.0% DEPs between elongation stage and expansion stage of roots. Furthermore, five KEGG pathways of terpenoid synthesis were found. Most prenyltransferases belong to FPP/GGPP synthase family, involved in terpenoid backbone biosynthesis, and all interacted with biotin carboxylase CAC2. Compared with that at the elongation stage, many prenyltransferases exhibited higher expression at the expansion stage or maturation stage of roots. In addition, eight FPP/GGPP synthase encoding genes were cloned from <i>R. glutinosa</i>, namely <i>FPPS, FPPS1, GGPS, GGPS3, GGPS4, GGPS5, GPPS</i> and <i>GPPS2</i>, introns were also found in <i>FPPS, FPPS1, GGPS5</i> and <i>GGPS2</i>, and FPP/GPP synthases were more conservative in organisms, especially in viridiplantae, in which the co-occurrence of GPPS or GPPS2 was significantly higher in plants. Further analysis found that FPP/GGPP synthases of <i>R. glutinosa</i> were divided into three kinds, GGPS, GPPS and FPPS, and their gene expression was significantly diverse in different varieties, growth periods, or tissues of <i>R. glutinosa</i>. Compared with that of <i>GGPS</i>, the expression of <i>GPPS</i> and <i>FPPS</i> was much higher in <i>R. glutinosa</i>, especially at the expansion stage and maturation stage. Thus, the synthesis of terpenoids in roots of <i>R. glutinosa</i> is intricately regulated and needs to be further studied.

### Keywords
, Root, Lc-msms, Rehmannia glutinosa, Three different growth stages

### Affiliations
Henan Normal University
Henan Normal University,China

### Submitter
XiaoYan Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Hongying Duan
Henan Normal University,China


