### Accession
PXD000863

### Title
Ion mobility tandem mass spectrometry enhances performance of bottom-up proteomics

### Description
We describe a novel method utilizing ion mobility-based concentration of peptide fragment ions on a qTOF mass spectrometer improving the sensitivity of bottom-up proteomics by up to 10-fold. This enabled the identification of 7,500 human proteins within one day and 8,600 phosphorylation sites within 5h of LC-MS/MS time. The method also proved powerful for multiplexed quantification experiments exemplified by the chemoproteomic interaction analysis of HDACs with Trichostatin A.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa S3 cells were cultured in DMEM and proteins were digested into peptides using FASP (Wisniewski et al., 2009). After overnight digestion, peptides were eluted from FASP filters with and purified on C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al, 2003). Human epidermoid A431 cells for the IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment were grown in IMDM medium and treated with 1 mM sodium orthovanadate for 10 min prior to lysis in 8 M urea buffer. Proteins were reduced and alkylated and digested in-solution using trypsin. Resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated using SepPack columns. Eluates were dried down and stored at -80°C. IMAC enrichment of phosphopeptides from human cell lines was performed as described (Villen et al., 2008). For tissue proteomes, 50 µg of lysate were reduced, alkylated, and separated via an LDS-PAGE gel and cut into 12 bands. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedure (Wilm et al., 1996). The chemoproteomic profiling of Trichostatin was performed according to Bantscheff et al. (2011). NanoLC-MS/MS was performed by coupling a nanaoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corp., Manchester, UK) to an qTOF SYNAPT G2Si instrument (Waters Corp., Manchester, UK). Unless otherwise described, one microgram of the HeLa digest was delivered to a trap column (180 µm x 20 mm nanoAcquity UPLC 2G-V/MTrap 5 µm Symmetry C18, Waters Corp, Manchester, UK) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min in 99.9% solvent A (0.1% FA, in HPLC grade water). After 3 min of loading and washing, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 µm x 250 mm nanoAcquity UPLC 1.8 µm HSST3, Waters Corp, Manchester, UK) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient from 1% to 40% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water, solvent B: 0.1% FA in acetonitrile) of varying length (15-360 min). The gradient time experiment of was performed in triplicate analysis. The gel cuts for the tissue proteomes were analyzed using a 90 min gradient with a total turnaround time of 2 hrs. The eluent was sprayed via PicoTip Emitters at a spray voltage of 2.6-3.0 kV at a sampling cone voltage of 25 V and a source offset of 30 V. The source temperature was set to 100°C. The cone gas was 20 l/h with a nano flow gas of 0.4 bar and the purge gas was turned off. The SYNAPT G2Si instrument was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. Full scan MS and MS2 spectra (m/z 50 – 5000) were acquired in the resolution mode 20,000 resolution (m/z 400). MS scans were acquired using a fixed acquisition time of 150 ms. Tandem mass spectra of up to 12 precursors were generated in the trapping region of the ion mobility cell by using a collisional energy ramp from 6/9 V (low mass, start/end) up to 147/183 (high mass, start/end). For the TMT samples the collision energy ramp was adjusted by +2 V resulting in more efficient fragmentation. The precursor ion isolation width of the quadrupole was set to 2.0 Th (low mass resolution 10, high mass resolution 15). The MS2 scan rate was set to 80 ms and the “TIC stop” was set to 500,000 intensity/s allowing a maximum scan time of 250 ms. Dynamic exclusion of fragmented precursor ions was enabled and the retention time window was set to 30 s. For HD-DDA methods using the IMS configuration a variable IMS wave velocity was used. Wave velocity was ramped from 2500 m/s to 400 m/s (start to end) and the ramp was applied over the full IMS cycle. A manual release of 500 µs was set for the mobility trapping and a trap height of 15 V with an extract height of 0 V. The IMS wave delay was set to 1000 µs for the mobility separation after trap release. LockSpray of Glufibrinopeptide-B (m/z 785.8427) was acquired every 60 s for 1 s and 3 scans to average but lock mass correction was applied post acquisition. For DDA experiments the basic settings were the same as for HD-DDA but with a reduced mass range of 50-2000 m/z and without fragment separation via ion mobility.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed by Mascot Distiller (version 2.4.3.1) for peak list generation. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (from 21.7.13 containing 88,354 sequences and including the PFAM domain identifiers for each entry) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1) with the following search parameters: full tryptic specificity, up to two missed cleavage sites; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. For phosphopeptide enriched samples also phosphorylation for Serine, Threonine and Tyrosin was selected as variable modification. In order to obtain the quantification result for the chemo proteomic profiling TMT 6-plex was selected as quantification method. Mass spectra were re-calibrated within Mascot Distiller searched with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. Search results FDR were adjusted to a FDR of 0.01 using the Percolator and loaded into Scaffold (v4.1.1) and filtered using a a posterior error probability of 0.05. The Mascot search results of the phsophopeptide enriched samples were loaded into RockberBox and analyzed after a Percolator based filtering using an FDR of 0.01 on PSM level and Mascot ion score cut off of 13.96, the latter corresponding to a global FDR of 0.05 (Marx et al., 2013). False localization rates for phospho-site assignments were estimated using the Mascot Delta Score as described previously. For TMT experiments, reporter ion intensities of different TMT channel were extracted from peaklist files using an in-house written Perl script.

### Publication Abstract
One of the limiting factors in determining the sensitivity of tandem mass spectrometry using hybrid quadrupole orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight instruments is the duty cycle of the orthogonal ion injection system. As a consequence, only a fraction of the generated fragment ion beam is collected by the time-of-flight analyzer. Here we describe a method utilizing postfragmentation ion mobility spectrometry of peptide fragment ions in conjunction with mobility time synchronized orthogonal ion injection leading to a substantially improved duty cycle and a concomitant improvement in sensitivity of up to 10-fold for bottom-up proteomic experiments. This enabled the identification of 7500 human proteins within 1 day and 8600 phosphorylation sites within 5 h of LC-MS/MS time. The method also proved powerful for multiplexed quantification experiments using tandem mass tags exemplified by the chemoproteomic interaction analysis of histone deacetylases with Trichostatin A.

### Keywords
Ion mobility mass spectrometry, Phosphoproteomics, Quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer, Proteomics, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen

### Submitter
Hannes Hahne

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Technische Universitaet Muenchen


