### Accession
PXD012109

### Title
pLink 2: A high-speed search engine with systematic evaluation for proteome-scale identification of cross-linked peptides

### Description
Crosslinking mass spectrometry (CXMS) is a powerful technique to study protein structures and interactions. However, software tools for CXMS data analysis suffer from poor speed and credibility, especially at a proteome scale. Here, we introduce pLink 2, a search engine with higher speed and credibility for proteome-scale identification of crosslinked peptides. With a novel two-stage open search strategy facilitated by fragment indexing, pLink 2 is ~40 times faster than pLink 1 and 3~10 times faster than Kojak. Furthermore, four new analysis methods, using simulated datasets, synthetic datasets, 15N metabolically labeled datasets, and entrapment databases, were designed to evaluate the credibility of ten state-of-the-art search engines, this systematic evaluation showed that pLink 2 achieved the highest precision and sensitivity. Finally, four whole-cell lysate datasets, previously analysed by pLink 1 in months, were reanalysed by pLink 2 only in days, with up to 27.4% more crosslinks identified. The new search engine pLink 2 and the new evaluation methods are well positioned to become new benchmarks in the CXMS research field.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of the E.coli-Leiker-15N dataset Leiker was used to crosslink the MG1655 proteome. The CXMS experiment was conducted as previously described22. MG1655 was cultured in unlabeled or 15N-labeled M9 medium and harvested at OD600 0.6-0.8. Pellet (40 OD*ml) was resuspended in 0.4 ml lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl). FastPrep (6.5 m/s, 20 s, repeat 5 times) was used to make cell lysate. After measuring protein concentration, equal amount (1 mg of each) of unlabeled or 15N-labeled lysate was mixed together and crosslinked with 0.33 mg [d0]-bAL2 for 0.5 hour at room temperature. Crosslinking reaction was quenched with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then precipitated by TCA and digested by Trypsin. After filtering with a 50-kD cutoff filter, the digested peptides were brought to a volume of 3 mL with 2% ACN, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.2; the pH was adjusted to 10.0 with ammonia. High-pH reverse phase separation was used for fractionation. The peptides were eluted with buffer B (80% ACN, 5 mM NH4COOH, pH 10) gradient. A total of 39 two-min fractions were collected, and then combined into five fractions of similar shades of color judging by naked eyes. These pooled samples were evaporated to 200–300 µl volumes before Leiker-linked peptides were enriched with 50 µl of high-capacity streptavidin beads from each sample. After desalting through a C18 column, the five fractions were sent to LC-MS/MS analysis with a nano LC an EASY-nLC 1,000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) interfaced with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursors of the +1, +2, +8 or above, or unassigned charge states were rejected and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s.  Preparation of the E.coli-SS-15N dataset The E. coli strain BL21 was cultured in unlabeled and 15N-labeled NH4Cl (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc.) M9 medium separately and harvested at OD600=0.75, well mixed 35 OD unlabeled and 35 OD N15-labeled cells. The periplasmic proteins were prepared using osmoticshock method as described before13. The pre-cooling solution of 5 mM MgSO4 supplemented with 2 mM NEM was used to release proteins from periplasm. The release protein (6ml) were precipitated on ice with 25% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) followed by cold acetone wash twice. Precipitated proteins were air dried, resuspended in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, 2 mM NEM, pH 6.5. The BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce) was used to quantify protein concentration, then dilute the solution to 1–2 mg/mL and digested sequentially with Lys-C, trypsin and Glu-C as described in our step-by-step protocol60. The SCX fractionation of digested peptides was performed as described in the protocol60, and elute sequentially with 35 μl of 50, 150, 250, 350, 500, 650, 800, 1M ammonium acetate, pH 2–3, at a flow rate of 1.0–2.0 μl/min. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Easy-nLC 1,000 II HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fractionation peptides were loaded on a pre-column (75 μm ID, 6 cm long, packed with ODS-AQ 120 Å–10 μm beads from YMC Co., Ltd.) and further separated on an analytical column (75 μm ID, 14 cm long, packed with C18 1.9 μm 100 Å resin from Welch Materials) with a linear reverse-phase gradient from 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 28% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 56 (or 71) min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The top-12 most intense precursor ions from each full scan (resolution 60,000) were isolated for HCD MS2 (resolution 15,000; normalized collision energy 27) with a dynamic exclusion time of 40 s. Precursors with 3+ to 6+ charge states were included. Each sample had another technical repeats using parameter charge states of precursors including 2 to 6+ to find more loop-linked disulfide peptides.

### Data Protocol
For the E.coli-Leiker-15N dataset: precursor mass tolerance 10 p.p.m., fragment mass tolerance 20 p.p.m., cross-linker Leiker, fixed modification C 57.02146, variable modification M 15.994915, peptide length mininum 6 amino acids and maximum 60 amino acids per chain, peptide mass minimum 600 and maximum 6,000 Da per chain, enzyme trypsin, two missed cleavage sites per chain (four per cross-link). The E. coli protein sequences were downloaded from Uniprot on 2017-10-23. For the E.coli-SS-15N dataset: precursor mass tolerance 10 p.p.m., fragment mass tolerance 20 p.p.m., cross-linker SS, variable modification C 125.047679, peptide length mininum 5 amino acids and maximum 60 amino acids per chain, peptide mass minimum 500 and maximum 6,000 Da per chain, enzyme trypsin and glu-c, four missed cleavage sites per chain (eight per cross-link). The E. coli protein sequences were downloaded from Uniprot on 2017-10-23.

### Publication Abstract
The coronavirus pandemic caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which humanity resisted using the latest advances in science, left behind, among other things, extensive genetic data. Every day since the end of 2019, samples of the virus genomes have been collected around the world, which makes it possible to trace its evolution in detail from its emergence to the present. The accumulated statistics of testing results showed that the number of confirmed cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection was at least 767.5 million (9.5 % of the current world population, excluding asymptomatic people), and the number of sequenced virus genomes is more than 15.7 million (which is over 2 % of the total number of infected people). These new data potentially contain information about the mechanisms of the variability and spread of the virus, its interaction with the human immune system, the main parameters characterizing the mechanisms of the development of a pandemic, and much more. In this article, we analyze the space of possible variants of SARS-CoV-2 genetic sequences both from a mathematical point of view and taking into account the biological limitations inherent in this system, known both from general biological knowledge and from the consideration of the characteristics of this particular virus. We have developed software capable of loading and analyzing SARS-CoV-2 nucleotide sequences in FASTA format, determining the 5' and 3' UTR positions, the number and location of unidentified nucleotides ("N"), performing alignment with the reference sequence by calling the program designed for this, determining mutations, deletions and insertions, as well as calculating various characteristics of virus genomes with a given time step (days, weeks, months, etc.). The data obtained indicate that, despite the apparent mathematical diversity of possible options for changing the virus over time, the corridor of the evolutionary trajectory that the coronavirus has passed through seems to be quite narrow. Thus it can be assumed that it is determined to some extent, which allows us to hope for a possibility of modeling the evolution of the coronavirus.

### Keywords
Qehf, E.coli

### Affiliations
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS

### Submitter
Zhenlin Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Si-Min He
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS


