### Accession
PXD037392

### Title
Peripheral proteomic changes after electroconvulsive seizures (ECS) in a rodent model of non-respons to chronic fluoxetine

### Description
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is the psychiatric disorder with the highest prevalence in the world. Pharmacological antidepressant treatment (AD), such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRI, i.e. fluoxetine (Flx)] is the first line of treatment for MDD. Despite its efficacy, lack of AD response occurs in numerous patients characterizing Difficult-to-treat Depression. ElectroConvulsive Therapy (ECT) is a highly effective treatment inducing rapid improvement in depressive symptoms and high remission rates of ~50–63% in patients with pharmaco-resistant depression. Nevertheless, the need to develop reliable treatment response predictors to guide personalized AD strategies and supplement clinical observation is becoming a pressing clinical objective. Here, we propose to establish a proteomic peripheral biomarkers signature of ECT response in an anxio/depressive animal model of non-response to AD. Using an emotionality score based on the analysis complementary behavioral tests of anxiety/depression (Elevated Plus Maze, Novelty Suppressed Feeding, Splash Test), we showed that a 4-week corticosterone treatment (35 μg/ml, Cort model) in C57BL/6JRj male mice induced an anxiety/depressive-like behavior. A 28-days chronic fluoxetine treatment (Flx, 18 mg/kg/day) reduced corticosterone-induced increase in emotional behavior. A 50% decrease in emotionality score threshold before and after Flx, was used to separate Flx-responding mice (Flx-R, n=18), or Flx non-responder mice (Flx-NR, n=7). Then, Flx-NR mice received 7 sessions of electroconvulsive seizure (ECS, equivalent to ECT in humans) and blood was collected before and after ECS treatment. Chronic ECS normalized the elevated emotionality observed in Flx-NR mice. Then, proteins were extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and isolated for proteomic analysis using a high-resolution MS Orbitrap. The proteomic analysis revealed a signature of 33 peripheral proteins associated with response to ECS (7 down- and 26 upregulated). These proteins were previously associated with mental disorders and involved in regulating pathways which participate to the depressive disorder etiology. remark for sample name : ECTR=Flx-NR-ES, C=cort/Veh, CFNR= Flx-NR

### Sample Protocol
Protein separation Protein extracts from PBMCs were homogenized in solution solubilization (Urea 7M, Thiourea 2M, CHAPS 3%, Nonidet P-40 1%, DTT 1%). Protein concentration was measured using 2D-Quant kit (GE Healthcare, France) and 15 µg of proteins were loaded and separated by 12 % SDS-PAGE. A short migration was then performed (7 min., 80 V, 25 W followed by 4 min, 200V, 25W) and gels were stained with Coomassie colloidal blue (EZblue, Sigma-Aldrich, France).  Protein in-gel digestion Portions of gel that contain all proteins were cut and digested as followed: pieces of gel were successively washed and de-stained with water, acetonitrile (ACN) and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). A reduction/alkylation step was performed with dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM and iodoacetamide 55 mM. Gels were dehydrated with acetonitrile and rehydrated at 4°C in 12 ng/μL sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, France) solubilized in 25 mM NH4HCO3 in 1h and then digested at 37°C overnight. After tryptic digestion, peptides were extracted by incubating gel pieces in extraction solvent (0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/50% ACN) for 15 min. and in ACN for 15 min. at room temperature. Supernatants were vacuum dried. The dried extract peptides were dissolved in 50 μl of loading buffer (0.08% TFA/2% ACN) just before mass spectrometry analysis.   Mass Spectrometry analysis Four microliters of sample were loaded on the nano-UPLC Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo). Sample was loaded at 20 µL/min on the pre-column cartridge (PepMap 100 C18, 5µm; 300µm i.d., 5mm, Thermo Scientific) and peptides were then separated with a gradient of acetonitrile on the reverse phase column PepMap 100 C18 (stationary phase: C18, 3 µm; column: 75 µm i.d., 500 mm; nanoViper, Thermo Scientific, France). Buffers were 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile (A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (B). The peptide separation was realized during 64 min at 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 0 to 45% B for 55 min followed by a gradient from 45% to 98% B for 5 min. Eluted peptides were analyzed on-line with a high resolution mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Scientific, France) using a nanoelectrospray interface in positive polarity mode, on PAPPSO platform (http://pappso.inra.fr). Peptide ions were analyzed using Xcalibur 3.0 (Thermo Scientific, France) with following data-dependent acquisition steps: (1) full MS scan in orbitrap (mass-to-charge ratio [m/z] = 400–1500; mass tolerance, +/- 10 ppm) and (2) MS/MS in Ion Trap with CID activation (collision energy, 35%; activation time, 30 ms; centroid mode). Dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and bioinformatics analysis Peak lists were generated as mzXML files using the converter MSConvert (ProteoWizard). A database search was performed using X!TandemPipeline software developed by PAPPSO facility (version 3.4.3; http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/) (Langella et al. 2017) with search parameters as followed: enzymatic cleavage by trypsin digestion with one possible miscleavage, fixed carbamido-methylation modification on cysteine and variable oxidation on methionine; precursor mass tolerance of +/- 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Several databases were used: the Uniprot KB/SwissProt Mus musculus database (24977 entries, version January 2017) and a homemade contaminant database (trypsin, keratine, etc.). The identified proteins were filtered with a minimum of two different peptides required with a peptide E-value <0.01, and a protein E-value (product of unique peptide E values) <10-4. Combine analysis mode with all samples was performed and results were grouping proteins: proteins which have at least one peptide in common. This allowed to group proteins with similar functions. Within each group, proteins with at least one specific peptide relatively to other members of the group were reported as subgroups. One subgroup represents one specific protein. Proteins are characterized with their spectral number. Label free quantification of proteins were achieved with spectral counting approach (SC), which is a strategy to determine a relative quantification of proteins from their number of spectra obtained with tryptic peptides in MS. This quantification relies on the more of a particular protein is present in a sample, the more MS spectra are detected for peptides of that protein. Statistical analysis was performed using MassChroqR package developed by PAPPSO team (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/masschroq/) (R version 3.3.2). A generalized linear mixed model (GLM) with a Poisson distribution was applied. This model suits in the case of a counting like SC. The principal component analysis was obtained by simulating the kernel densities from group’s means and variances assuming bivariate normal distributions. This distribution was generated using protein abundances as variables. Hierarchical bivariate clustering was performed using Euclidean distances and unweighted pair group averages as the aggregation method. All data analyses and graphical representations were performed using the R package MassChroq. Significant changes in protein abundance was determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA) using a Chi-square test. Treatment effect was considered with an adjusted p value for multiple testing by a Benjamini–Hochberg procedure (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). Student t tests were performed to identify proteins which showed significant differences expressed between groups with the following criteria: p-value was set at <0.05. The resulting exploratory list may carry a higher rate of false positives at the protein level but allowed investigation of cumulative effects over larger sets of proteins and pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is the psychiatric disorder with the highest prevalence in the world. Pharmacological antidepressant treatment (AD), such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors [SSRI, i.e., fluoxetine (Flx)] is the first line of treatment for MDD. Despite its efficacy, lack of AD response occurs in numerous patients characterizing Difficult-to-treat Depression. ElectroConvulsive Therapy (ECT) is a highly effective treatment inducing rapid improvement in depressive symptoms and high remission rates of &#x223c;50-63% in patients with pharmaco-resistant depression. Nevertheless, the need to develop reliable treatment response predictors to guide personalized AD strategies and supplement clinical observation is becoming a pressing clinical objective. Here, we propose to establish a proteomic peripheral biomarkers signature of ECT response in an anxio/depressive animal model of non-response to AD. Using an emotionality score based on the analysis complementary behavioral tests of anxiety/depression (Elevated Plus Maze, Novelty Suppressed Feeding, Splash Test), we showed that a 4-week corticosterone treatment (35&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/ml, Cort model) in C57BL/6JRj male mice induced an anxiety/depressive-like behavior. A 28-day chronic fluoxetine treatment (Flx, 18&#xa0;mg/kg/day) reduced corticosterone-induced increase in emotional behavior. A 50% decrease in emotionality score threshold before and after Flx, was used to separate Flx-responding mice (Flx-R, <i>n</i> = 18), or Flx non-responder mice (Flx-NR, <i>n</i> = 7). Then, Flx-NR mice received seven sessions of electroconvulsive seizure (ECS, equivalent to ECT in humans) and blood was collected before and after ECS treatment. Chronic ECS normalized the elevated emotionality observed in Flx-NR mice. Then, proteins were extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and isolated for proteomic analysis using a high-resolution MS Orbitrap. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD037392. The proteomic analysis revealed a signature of 33 peripheral proteins associated with response to ECS (7 down and 26 upregulated). These proteins were previously associated with mental disorders and involved in regulating pathways which participate to the depressive disorder etiology.

### Keywords
Antidepressant, Treatment resistant depression, Depression, Pbmc, Blood, Electrovonvulsive seizure

### Affiliations
INRAE
Inserm, CESP, Equipe « Moods »  Université Paris Saclay - Batiment Henri Moissan 19 avenue des Sciences 91400 Orsay France

### Submitter
Céline Henry

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jean-Philippe Guiloux
Inserm, CESP, Equipe « Moods »  Université Paris Saclay - Batiment Henri Moissan 19 avenue des Sciences 91400 Orsay France


