### Accession
PXD036534

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of near isogenic lines for qDSI.4B.1 QTL on short arm of chromosome 4B conferring drought tolerance in wheat

### Description
This study conducted isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) proteomic analysis on near-isogenic lines (NILs) to shed light on the drought tolerance conferring qDSI.4B.1 QTL on short arm of chromosome 4B.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from 100 mg of finely grounded leaf by chloroform/methanol method. Extraction buffer contained 125 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.0, 7% (w/v) SDS, 5% (w/v) PVP-40, 15 mM DTT, and Roche mini protease inhibitor cocktail. The protein pellet was washed twice in 80% (v/v) acetone and stored at -80 ºC. Protein pellet was suspended, trypsin digested (3 hour digest), reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested (24 h) before 100 μg from each sample was separated and labeled with iTRAQ 8-plex. All labelled samples were combined to make a pooled sample. Peptides were desalted on a Strata-X 33 μm polymeric reversed phase column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). The combined samples were dissolved in loading buffer and separated by high pH on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system using a Zorbax C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 5 μm, 95 Å, Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 20 mM ammonium formate, 2% ACN to 20 mM ammonium formate, 90% ACN at 0.2 ml/min. The 95 fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions and dried down. Fractions were analysed by electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry using a Thermo UltiMate 3000 nanoflow UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column, 2 μm particle size x 150 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and separated with a linear gradient of water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analysed with ProteinPilot software version 5.0.2 (AB Sciex) for protein identification and quantification using the Paragon algorithm. The raw data were searched against the bread wheat cv. Chinese Spring (CS) curated reference protein sequence on UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000019116) published by the International Wheat Genome Consortium (IWGSC RefSeq v1.0). The database consisted of 130,673 predicted proteins and search parameters were: iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labelled) sample type, cysteine alkylation (MMTS), trypsin digestion, and Triticum aestivum.fasta database thorough searching mode.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is a major constraint for wheat production that is receiving increased attention due to global climate change. This study conducted isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation proteomic analysis on near-isogenic lines to shed light on the underlying mechanism of qDSI.4B.1 quantitative trait loci (QTL) on the short arm of chromosome 4B conferring drought tolerance in wheat. Comparing tolerant with susceptible isolines, 41 differentially expressed proteins were identified to be responsible for drought tolerance with a p-value of &lt;&#x2009;0.05 and fold change &gt;1.3 or &lt;0.7. These proteins were mainly enriched in hydrogen peroxide metabolic activity, reactive oxygen species metabolic activity, photosynthetic activity, intracellular protein transport, cellular macromolecule localization, and response to oxidative stress. Prediction of protein interactions and pathways analysis revealed the interaction between transcription, translation, protein export, photosynthesis, and carbohydrate metabolism as the most important pathways responsible for drought tolerance. The five proteins, including 30S ribosomal protein S15, SRP54 domain-containing protein, auxin-repressed protein, serine hydroxymethyltransferase, and an uncharacterized protein with encoding genes on 4BS, were suggested as candidate proteins responsible for drought tolerance in qDSI.4B.1 QTL. The gene coding SRP54 protein was also one of the differentially expressed genes in our previous transcriptomic study.

### Keywords
Deps, Chromosome 4b, Nils, Qtl, Drought stress, Proteome, Itraq, Qrt-pcr

### Affiliations
The UWA Institute of Agriculture, The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 6009, Australia 
UWA School of Agriculture and Environment, The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 6009, Australia

### Submitter
Sina Nouraei

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Nouraei
UWA School of Agriculture and Environment, The University of Western Australia, Perth, WA, 6009, Australia


