### Accession
PXD045026

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of AAV-treated ARF6-KO vs WT and APOE-KO human induced endothelial cells (iECs) followed by label-free quantification (LFQ)

### Description
Age-related decline in brain endothelial cell (BEC) function critically contributes to cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative disease. Comprehensive atlases of the BEC transcriptome have become available but results from proteomic profiling are lacking. To gain insights into endothelial pathways affected by aging, we developed a magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS)-based mouse BEC enrichment protocol compatible with high-resolution mass-spectrometry and analysed the profiles of protein abundance changes across multiple time points between 3 and 18 months of age and identified Arf6 as one of the most prominently downregulated vesicle-mediated transport protein during BEC aging.  To understand the role of ARF6 in human ECs, first we compared GFP-AAV treated human iECs differentiated from ARF6-KO vs WT iPSCs, next we compared ARF6-GFP-AAV vs GFP-AAV treated iECs differentiated from WT iPSCs. During the ARF6-KO vs WT iEC comparison we found 983 vs 741 proteins significantly down- and upregulated, respectively. Enrichment analyses of significantly downregulated proteins revealed mRNA processing among the most significantly affected biological processes. During the ARF6-GFP-AAV vs GFP-AAV treated WT iEC comparison we found 1106 vs 1218 proteins significantly down- and upregulated, respectively. Enrichment analyses of significantly upregulated proteins revealed endocytic recycling, retrograde transport (endosome to Golgi), and ER-Golgi vesicle-mediated transport among the most significantly affected biological processes. Specifically, ARF6 and its binding-protein GGA2, DNM1L and several subunits of the Conserved oligomeric Golgi complex (COG) were upregulated. Our approach uncovered changes not picked up by transcriptomic studies such as accumulation of vesicle cargo and receptor ligands including Apoe, a major regulator of brain lipid metabolism. Proteomic analysis of BECs from Apoe deficient mice revealed a signature of accelerated aging. To explore the role of APOE in human endothelial cells, in this experiment we compared human iECs differentiated from APOE-KO and WT iPSCs and found 326 significantly altered proteins. Enrichment analyses of significantly downregulated proteins revealed vesicle-mediated transport and vesicle fusion to be among the most significantly affected biological processes. Specifically, among the 34 significantly altered vesicle-mediated transport proteins 26 were downregulated. Accordingly, we found reduced levels of endocytosis of FM1-43FX in newly formed vesicles in APOE-KO iECs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from iECs with RIPA buffer containing 150 mM NaCl (Roth, Cat# 3957.1), 1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (Roth, Cat# 9090.3), 1 % NP40 (Sigma Alrich Cat# 74385), 0.5 % Deoxycholate (Roth, Cat# 3484.3), and 0.1 % SDS (Serva, Cat# 20765.03) and protein inhibitors cocktail (Roche, Cat# 4693159001). Samples were incubated in RIPA buffer for 30min on ice followed by centrifugation at 18,000 g for another 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected and kept at -80 °C for further analysis. 20 µg of human iEC lysates according to a BCA assay were subjected to proteolytical digestion. After 1:2 dilution with water, a benzonase digestion with 12.5 units was performed to remove remaining DNA/RNA the single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) was used for protein digestion according to a previously published protocol (Hughes et al., Nat Prot, 2019) Samples were filtered with 0.22 µm spin filters (Costar Spin-x, Corning, USA) to remove remaining beads, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic. The peptide concentration after proteolytic digestion was estimated using the Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). Samples were analyzed on a nanoElute nanoHPLC which was coupled to a TimsTOF pro mass spectrometer with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker, Germany). An amount of 350 ng of peptides were separated on a on an in-house packed C18 analytical column (15 cm × 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at flow rate of 250 nL/min (0 min, 2 % B; 2 min, 5% B; 70 min, 24 % B; 85 min, 35 % B; 90 min, 60 % B) and a column temperature of 50°C. A Data Independent Acquisition Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation (DIA-PASEF) method was used for spectrum acquisition. Ion accumulation and separation using Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) was set to a ramp time of 100 ms. One scan cycle included one TIMS full MS scan and with 26 windows with a width of 27 m/z covering a m/z range of 350-1002 m/z. Two windows were recorded per PASEF scan. This resulted in a cycle time of 1.4 s.

### Data Protocol
The DIA-PASEF raw data was analyzed with the software DIA-NN version 1.8 (https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN) using a library-free search against a one protein per gene database from Homo Sapiens (download: 2023-03-01, 20603 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification. The precursor and fragment ion m/z ranges were limited from 350 to 1001 and 200 to 1700, respectively. Precursor charge states of 2-4 were considered. The optimal mass accuracy for peptides and peptide fragments as well as the ion mobility tolerances were automatically determined by DIA-NN. A FDR threshold of 1% was applied for peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ipsc, Arf6, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


