### Accession
PXD048460

### Title
Microtubule association of TRIM3 revealed by differential extraction proteomics

### Description
The microtubule network is formed from polymerised tubulin subunits and associating proteins, which govern microtubule dynamics and a diverse array of functions. To identify novel microtubule binding proteins, we have developed an unbiased biochemical assay which relies on the selective extraction of cytosolic proteins from cells, whilst leaving behind the microtubule network. Candidate proteins are linked to microtubules by their sensitivities to the depolymerising drug nocodazole or the microtubule stabilising drug, taxol, which are then quantitated in a triplex experiment. Our approach is first benchmarked by co-segregation of tubulin and previously established microtubule-binding proteins. We then identify several novel candidate microtubule binding proteins. Amongst these, we have selected the ubiquitin E3 ligase TRIM3 (Tripartite motif-containing protein 3) for further characterisation. TRIM3 binding to microtubules is mapped to its C-terminal NHL-repeat region. We show that TRIM3 is required for the rapid accumulation of acetylated tubulin, following treatment with the microtubule stabilising drug taxol. Furthermore, loss of TRIM3, partially recapitulates the reduction in nocodozole resistant microtubules characteristic of Alpha Tubulin Acetyltransferase 1 (ATAT1) depletion. These results can be explained by a decrease in ATAT1 that follows depletion of TRIM3 that is independent of transcription.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were cultured under standard conditions in DMEM for SILAC supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS and L-proline, Pro0 [200 μg/ml] to prevent conversion of arginine to proline. Differentially labelled amino acids were added to the media to generate SILAC media for 3 conditions: Light (L-lysine, Lys0; Larginine, Arg0), Medium (L-lysine-2H4, Lys4; L-arginine-13C6, Arg6) and Heavy (Llysine- 2H6-15N2, Lys8; L-arginine-13C5-15N4, Arg10). L-lysine was supplemented at a final concentration of 146 μg/ml whereas L-arginine was supplemented at a final concentration of 84 μg/ml. Cells were cultured for a minimum of 6 passages and tested to confirm amino acid incorporation before experiments proceeded. Extracted microtubules from each condition were combined in a 1:1:1 ratio and filtered through 15ml Amicon ultra centrifugal filters (10,000) at 4000g at RT until the minimum volume was retained. The flow through was discarded and the sample suspended in 5X sample buffer before being subjected to mass spectrometry. SDS-PAGE was performed as described until proteins migrated 1/3 through the gel, then Coomassie staining performed. The sample lane was cut into 12 equal slices, then into 1 mm2 cubes and destained using 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic) containing 50% Acetonitrile (CAN, v/v) at 37°C in an Eppendorf ThermoMixer Compact at 900rpm. Samples were dehydrated (ACN, 5min) and dried via 14 Speedvac rotary evaporation. Peptides were reduced in 10mM dithiothreitol (56°C, 1hr), alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (RT, 30min), washed in 100mM Ambic (15min) then repeated in 50 mM Ambic with 50% ACN. Samples were dehydrated in ACN, followed by Speedvac evaporation. Peptides were cleaved with 3 μg trypsin per sample lane in 40mM Ambic and 9% ACN (37°C, overnight) then extracted using ACN (30°C, 30 min), followed by 1% formic acid (RT, 20 min) and then ACN again. Retained supernatants were dried in the Speedvac overnight and froze at -20 until analysis. Samples were desalted using C18 tips [39]. Briefly, samples were resuspended in 50 μl 0.1% FA. C18 tips were first activated with Methanol, equilibrated twice with 0.1% FA, then samples were loaded, and peptides were washed with 0.1% FA. Samples were then eluted with 80% ACN / 0.1% FA and dried in the speed vac. Finally, they were reconstituted in 0.1% FA. Peptides were then fractionated on a QExactive HF column coupled to a nanoHPLC Ultimate 3000 using a preconcentration onto a nano-column configuration. An Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 μm, 2 cm) was used to do the pre-concentration and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC (Rapid separation liquid chromatography, 75 μm, 25 cm) was used for peptide separation. Total run time was of 100 minutes with a gradient from 4% to 40% Buffer B [Buffer B: 80% ACN / 0.1% FA], in the following steps: 2% for 8 minutes, 2% to 40% in 80 minutes, 90% for 5 minutes and an equilibration step with 2% for 15 minutes. The MS was operated in a data dependent manner using a loop count of 10. MS1 was acquired in a scan range from 375-1500 m/z, with a resolution of 120000, an AGC target of 3x106 and a maximum IT (injection time) of 90 ms. MS2 was acquired at a resolution of 15000, an AGC target of 1x105 and maximum IT time of 45 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s and ion with charge states of +1 and greater than +6 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed using MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0, against the human database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57Da) was used as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine (+16Da) and Acetylation of the N-terminal (+42Da) as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 3 and the labels were as follow: Medium labels - Arg6;Lys4, Heavy labels - Arg10;Lys8.

### Publication Abstract
The microtubule network is formed from polymerised tubulin subunits and associating proteins, which govern microtubule dynamics and a diverse array of functions. To identify novel microtubule-binding proteins, we have developed an unbiased biochemical assay, which relies on the selective extraction of cytosolic proteins from U2OS cells, while leaving behind the microtubule network. Candidate proteins are linked to microtubules by their sensitivities to the depolymerising drug nocodazole or the microtubule-stabilising drug taxol, which is quantitated by mass spectrometry. Our approach is benchmarked by co-segregation of tubulin and previously established microtubule-binding proteins. We then identify several novel candidate microtubule-binding proteins, from which we have selected the ubiquitin E3 ligase tripartite motif-containing protein 3 (TRIM3) for further characterisation. We map TRIM3 microtubule binding to its C-terminal NHL-repeat region. We show that TRIM3 is required for the accumulation of acetylated tubulin, following treatment with taxol. Furthermore, loss of TRIM3 partially recapitulates the reduction in nocodazole-resistant microtubules characteristic of &#x3b1;-tubulin acetyltransferase 1 (ATAT1) depletion. These results can be explained by a decrease in ATAT1 following depletion of TRIM3 that is independent of transcription.

### Keywords
Nocodazole, Taxol, Microtubules, Proteomics, Trim proteins

### Affiliations
1Dept. of Biochemistry Cell and Systems Biology, ISMIB University of Liverpool  Liverpool, L69 3BX  UK
Sciebtist

### Submitter
Marta Mendes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J
1Dept. of Biochemistry Cell and Systems Biology, ISMIB University of Liverpool  Liverpool, L69 3BX  UK


