### Accession
PXD037004

### Title
Effect of hypoxia and treatment with cyclosporine A on chemotaxis of RAMOS B cells

### Description
Background: Hypoxia is a potent molecular signal for cellular metabolism, mitochondrial function, and migration. Conditions of low oxygen tension trigger regulatory cascades mediated via the highly conserved HIF-1 α post-translational modification system. In the adaptive immune response, B cells (Bc) are activated and differentiate under hypoxic conditions within lymph node germinal centers, and subsequently migrate to other compartments. During migration, they traverse through changing oxygen levels, ranging from 1-5% in the lymph node to 5-13% in the peripheral blood. Interestingly, the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine A is known to stimulate prolyl hydroxylase activity, resulting in HIF-1 α destabilization and may alter Bc responses directly. Over 60% of patients taking calcineurin immunosuppressant medications have hypo-gammaglobulinemia and poor vaccine responses, putting them at high risk of infection with significantly increased morbidity and mortality. Results: We demonstrate that oxygen tension is a previously unrecognized Bc regulatory switch, altering CXCR4 and CXCR5 chemokine receptor signaling in activated Bc through HIF-1 α expression, and controlling critical aspects of Bc migration. Our data demonstrate that calcineurin inhibition hinders this oxygen regulatory switch in primary human Bc. Conclusion: This previously unrecognized effect of calcineurin inhibition directly on human Bc has significant and direct clinical implications.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: RAMOS cells were re-suspended in cR10 media at 5 x 105 cell/mL to a volume of 10 mL in T25 tissue culture flasks (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) and left untreated or with 1 μg/mL of cyclosporine A (CyA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Pairs of untreated or CyA treated cells were then incubated at either 19% or 1% O2 levels for 24 hours. Cells were then rapidly harvested into 50 mL conical tubes (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) containing 30 mL of ice cold PBS. Cells were pelleted and washed 3 x 10 mL ice cold PBS. Cells were re-suspended in 1 mL ice cold PBS, transferred to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and pelleted. Supernatants were removed and the cell pellets flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were stored at −80∘C until samples were lysed for analysis. Lysis buffer consisted of 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Cell lysis or each pellet was done by adding 100 μL of lysis buffer per 106 cells followed by vortexing and sonication using a QSonica sonicator. Sonication cycles were 5 X 10 second sonications with one minute incubations on ice between each cycle. Samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 16,000 x g, and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). 25 μg of protein from each sample was removed and brought up to 25 μL in lysis buffer. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of dithiothreitol to 2 mM followed by incubation at 55∘C for 1 hour. Alkylation was performed by adding iodoacetamide to 10 mM and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. 12% phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% followed by the addition of 6 volumes of 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB. The resulting solution was added to S-Trap micros (Protifi, Huntington NY) and centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 1 minute. The S-Traps were washed twice with 90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB. 20 μL of 100 mM TEAB containing 1 μg of trypsin was added to the S-Trap followed by an additional 20 μl of TEAB. Samples were placed in a humidity chamber at 37∘C and allowed to digest overnight. The S-Trap was centrifuged at 4000 x g for 1 minute to collect the digested peptides. 20 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in acetonitrile was added to the S-Trap and one more centrifugation step was done and the solutions were pooled, frozen and dried down in a Speed Vac (Labconco, Kansas City, MO). Tandem mass tag (TMT) ten-plex reagents (0.2 mg) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) were removed from 20∘C and allowed to reach room temperature prior to dissolving each tag in 20 μL of acetonitrile. Samples were re-constituted in 25 μL of TEAB, the TMT tags were added to the samples and incubated at room temperature for one hour. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 3 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. 20% (5 μg) of each sample was combined, frozen and dried in the Speed Vac. To increase coverage, samples were fractionated using C18 spin columns. Columns were conditioned with acetonitrile followed by equilibration with 100 mM ammonium formate (AF) pH 10. The samples were re-suspended in 50 μL of AF and added to the spin columns. After washing the columns with water and then the AF buffer, samples were eluted with 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, and then 50% acetonitrile in the AF buffer. These fractions were then frozen, dried down and re-suspended in 0.1% TFA in water, and placed into autosampler vials. Data acquisition: Peptides were injected onto a 30 cm C18 column packed with 1.8 μm beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 6% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 30% B over 85 minutes, increased to 50% B over 10 minutes, then ramped up to 70% B in 4 minutes and was held for 5 minutes, before returning to starting conditions in 4 minutes and re-equilibrating for 10 minutes, for a total run time of 120 minutes at a 300 nL/minute flow rate. The Q Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode with a full scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans. The full scan was performed over a range of 400-1700 m/z with a resolution of 70000 at m/z of 200, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 106, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were picked for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation using a collision energy of 35 and an isolation width of 1.0 m/z. MS2 scans were collected with a resolution of 35000, a maximum injection time of 120 ms, and an AGC setting of 1e5. The fixed first mass for the MS2 scans was set to 110 m/z to ensure collection of TMT reporter ions. Dynamic exclusion was set to 25s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using the SEQUEST search engine within the Proteome Discoverer software platform, version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), using the SwissProt human database. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with an MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and an MS2 mass tolerance of 0.025 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine, and TMT on lysine and peptide N-terminus were set as a fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Percolator was used as the false discovery rate (FDR) calculator, filtering out peptides which had a q-value greater than 0.01. Reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node, with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm, and the integration method being set to "most confident centroid". Protein abundances were calculated by summing the intensities of the reporter ions from each identified peptide, while excluding any peptides with an isolation interference of 30% or more. Low abundance proteins with less than one count per experiment/replicate were removed resulting in 5048 proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunosuppressant, Cxcl12, Hif1a, Hypoxia, Cyclosporine, B cells

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
Department of Microbiology and Immunology Department of Biomedical Genetics Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology University of Rochester, Rochester, NY

### Submitter
Mukta Palshikar

### Lab Head
Dr Juilee Thakar
Department of Microbiology and Immunology Department of Biomedical Genetics Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology University of Rochester, Rochester, NY


