### Accession
PXD005193

### Title
Proteomic analysis of protein profile of blood serum of patients with autism children

### Description
A comparative panoramic mass spectrometric analysis of serum samples from three families with children with autistic disorders was carried out. The total number of examined samples was nine, including four control samples from healthy parents, and five samples from autistic children.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples Four control samples of serum from healthy volunteers and five samples of blood serum of children with autistic disorders was provided by the Institute... Samples of blood serum were obtained from three families. The first family includes healthy mother (aged 48) – C1 sample, two sons with autistic disorder (aged 10 and 20) samples S2 and S3 samples, respectively. The second family includes: healthy mother (aged 34) and father (aged 38) – C4 and C6 samples, respectively, and son with autistic disorder (aged 6) – S5. The third family includes: healthy mother (aged 37) – C8, and children with autistic disorder (aged 7 and 8) — S7 and S9 samples, respectively. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients and their parents concerning participating in the study and use of their biological material.  The material under study consisted of serum samples from fresh venous blood obtained in the morning on an empty stomach. Blood was collected in pre-chilled tube with EDTA, quickly mixed and centrifuged at + 4oC and 1500 rpm for 10 min, the serum samples were immediately taken and frozen. After centrifugation, the supernatant in the tubes was carefully selected with automated pipette and placed in nine cryovials with a volume of 2 ml. The serum samples were stored in cryovials at -80oC until use (Kaisheva A. L., et al. 2010). The depletion of serum samples from major protein fractions was performed using affinity HPLC columns mark Hu-14 (Agilent, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Hydrolytic cleavage of proteins in serum samples was performed according to (Kopylov A. T., 2013). Mass spectrometric analysis of the peptide composition of serum samples was conducted for depleted serum samples: four control (designation C1, C4, C6, C8) and five patients with autistic disorder (marked S2, S3, S5, S7, S9).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric protein registration in the serum samples Hydrolyzed samples of serum (the original and enrichment) were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) in conjunction with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Separation of peptides was performed using Ultimate 3000 Nano-flow HPLC chromatographic system (Dionex, USA) coupled with Orbitrap Q Exactive high resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA).  Peptides were separated using Zobrax 300SB-C18 analytical column (Agilent, USA; column dimensions 150 mm×75 µm, particle size 3.5 µm) in a linear gradient from 95% buffer A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and 5% buffer B (water, 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 60% buffer B for 95 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min.  Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in three technical replicates for each sample with high-energy fragmentation induced by collision (HCD — higher energy collisional dissociation), and normalized collision energy was 35 eV. Singly charged ions and ions with undetermined charge state were excluded upon MS/MS scanning.  Analysis of mass spectrometric data MS/MS spectra in RAW format were processed using Mass Hunter (version B 2.0) software. To identify the peptides, used Mascot proteomic search engine (hereinafter – PSE Mascot, www.matrixscience.com) with the following search parameters: database (Database) – SwissProt "SwissProt 2012_11"; taxonomic group (Taxonomy filter) – human; fixed modifications (Fixed modifications) – none; non-fixed modifications (variable modifications – oxidation (M); enzyme – none; Peptide Mass Tolerance – 20 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance – 50 mmu; Use MUDPIT protein scoring – 1; Include Sub-Set Proteins – 1; Use Homology Threshold – 1; Group Protein Families – 1. Peptides identified with Mascot with index of reliability (score) of less than 30 and emPAI factor of less than 0.02, were considered unreliable (Ivanov Y. D., et al. 2015). To identify the peptides, another proteomic search engine — x!Tandem (http://human.thegpm.org/) — was used, with the following search options: Taxon – human (SwissProt), Fragment mass error – 0.05 Da, Potential modifications – oxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autism, Esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry

### Submitter
Anna Kaysheva

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Kaysheva
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry


