### Accession
PXD006268

### Title
Comparative proteomics of non-nodular and nodular skin tissues from a Hyaline Fibromatosis Syndrome patient.

### Description
Hyaline Fibromatosis Syndrome (HFS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations in the gene CMG2. Patients develop subcutaneous nodules and painful joint contracture. CMG2 is a transmembrane protein of poorly understood physiological function. To understand better the pathogenesis of HFS and the role of CMG2 in this disease, we compared by mass-spectrometry the composition of nodular and matching non-nodular tissues. Two tissue pairs were analyzed, both obtained after surgical resection of nodules from a HFS patient. Our shotgun proteomics analysis showed that nodules were enriched in serum protein, which correlated with previous descriptions of blood vessel leakage in these tissues. Importantly, we also observed a clear accumulation of collagen VI in nodules. Collagen VI accumulation was caused by CMG2 loss-of-function and is the main cause of the nodule formation.

### Sample Protocol
Non-nodular and nodular tissue samples were cut in small pieces with a scalpel in 200μl of lysis buffer (2% SDS in Tris-HCl 100 mM). Tissues were homogenized using Lysing Matrix tubes (MP Biomedicals) in a tissue lyser (Qiagen) 3x for 5 min, with 2 min resting period at 4°C between each round. Homogenates were then pelleted at 5000 rpm for 3 min at 4°C. Protein amount was quantified by BCA assay (Pierce). After protein concentration normalization, DTT was added to achieve a final concentration of 50 mM. 20μg of samples were then digested by Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP). Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips and dried down by vacuum centrifugation prior to Mass Spectromic Analysis. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using Mascot, MS-Amanda and SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 against a UniProt human database release 2014_06. All searches were performed with Trypsin cleavage specificity, up to 2 missed cleavages allowed and ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.05 Da for the fragments. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), phosphorylation (STY) were considered as variable modifications. Data were further processed and inspected in the Scaffold 4 software (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Loss-of-function mutations in capillary morphogenesis gene 2 (CMG2/ANTXR2), a transmembrane surface protein, cause hyaline fibromatosis syndrome (HFS), a severe genetic disorder that is characterized by large subcutaneous nodules, gingival hypertrophy and severe painful joint contracture. Here we show that CMG2 is an important regulator of collagen VI homoeostasis. CMG2 loss of function promotes accumulation of collagen VI in patients, leading in particular to nodule formation. Similarly, collagen VI accumulates massively in uteri of Antxr2<sup>-/-</sup> mice, which do not display changes in collagen gene expression, and leads to progressive fibrosis and sterility. Crossing Antxr2<sup>-/-</sup> with Col6a1<sup>-/-</sup> mice leads to restoration of uterine structure and reversion of female infertility. We also demonstrate that CMG2 may act as a signalling receptor for collagen VI and mediates its intracellular degradation.

### Keywords
Human, Hyaline fibromatosis syndrome, Collagen, Extracellular matrix, Skin

### Affiliations
EMBL
Faculty of life science, Global Health Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Jérôme Bürgi

### Lab Head
Dr Gisou van der Goot
Faculty of life science, Global Health Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.


