### Accession
PXD019585

### Title
Proteomics analysis with the Aurora-A PROTAC, JB170

### Description
The mitotic kinase Aurora-A is essential for cell cycle progression and considered a priority cancer target. Dozens of ongoing clinical trials are testing the anti-cancer potential of Aurora-A kinase inhibitors. While the catalytic activity of Aurora-A is essential for its function during mitosis, a growing body of evidence indicates an additional non-catalytic function, which is difficult to target by kinase inhibitors. We therefor developed a series of degrader molecules by connecting a kinase inhibitor of Aurora-A to the Cereblon-binding molecule thalidomide. One degrader, JB170, induced the rapid degradation of Aurora-A. We were able to show that JB170 mediated depletion is highly specific for Aurora-A, as degrader mediated complex formation is supported by cooperative binding between Cereblon and Aurora-A. Strikingly, JB-170 mediated depletion caused a strong S-phase arrest, which is not the cell cycle effect observed as a result of Aurora-A kinase inhibition, supporting an important non-catalytic role of Aurora-A during DNA replication. Finally, depletion of Aurora-A resulted in strong induction of apoptosis in various cancer cell lines. The tool compound JB170 presents a versatile starting point for developing new therapeutic drugs to counter Aurora-A function in cancer. In the presented datasets, we determined i) the binding selectivity profile of the Aurora-A PROTAC (JB170) using Kinobeads affinity matrix and ii) its intracellular degradation specificity. We therefore treated IMR5 cells with JB170, the inactive version JB211, or Alisertib and quantified the induced degradation using tandem mass tags.

### Sample Protocol
Intracellular degradation – IMR5 cells were lysed in 40 mM (Tris)-HCl pH 7.6, 2% SDS, sonicated, boiled (95 °C,10 min), 1% TFA (1 min), and 300 mM 2% N-MM was added. Per sample (50 µg), 10 µl magnetic SeraMag-A and 10 µl SeraMag-B beads were mixed 1:1, washed 3x with ddH2O and resuspended 10 µl ddH2O. Sample was processed using a sp3 protocol: add 70 % ACN (RT, 18 min, 800 rpm), wash 2x 200 µl 80% ethanol, resuspend in 50 ul of 8M Urea in 40 mM Tris pH 7.6, add 10 mM DTT (45 min, 37 °C, 800 rpm), add 55 mM CAA (RT, 30 min, darkness), add 70 % ACN (RT, 18 min, 800 rpm), wash 2x 200 µl 80% ethanol, wash 200 µl ACN, air-dry 30 sec, resuspend 100 µl 25 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Proteins were digested (1:100 trypsin/substrate weight, 37 °C, 1200 rpm) for 3 h and overnight. Labeling of 20 ug peptides per condition was performed with TMT11-plex as previously described (PMID 30967486), peptides were pooled. Samples were reconstituted in 0.1 % FA and desalted using tC18 RP solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters Corp.; wash solvent: 0.1% FA; elution solvent: 0.1% FA in 50% acetonitrile (ACN)). A Dionex Ultra 3000 HPLC system operating a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 µm 2.1 × 150 mm column was used to fractionate the pooled peptides (220ug, in buffer A): solvent A (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH = 8.0), solvent B (ddH2O), solvent C (ACN), linear gradient from 7-45 % C in 45 min and 45-85% C in 6 min (constant 10 % A), flow rate of 200 µl/min, 48 fractions. Peptide fractions were dried in a SpeedVac. For microflow LC-MSMS, a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described in detail in a previous publication (PMID 31919466). Peptides were dissolved in 0.1 % FA and directly injected onto the microflow LC system. Online chromatography was performed using a commercially available Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (2 µm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm; catalog number 164711). Peptides were delivered at a flow rate of 50 µl/min and separated using a 27 min linear gradient 4-32 % solvent B (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1 % FA, 3 % DMSO). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated as follows: positive polarity; spray voltage 3.5 kV, capillary temperature 325 °C; vaporizer temperature 125 °C. The flow rates of sheath gas, aux gas and sweep gas were set to 32, 5, and 0. Cycle time was set to 1.2 s. Full MS readout: orbitrap, resolution 60,000, mass range 360-1560, AGC target value 4E5, max IT 50 ms, RF lens value 50, MIPS properties peptide, default charge states 2-6, dynamic exclusion 50 s (after 1). Readout of MS2 spectra: ion trap (rapid scan function), isolation width 0.6 m/z, first mass 100 m/z, HCD with 32 % collision energy, AGC target value 1.2E4, max IT 40 ms, precursor selection range 400–2000, exclusion mass widths 20 m/z (low) and 5 m/z (high). Readout of MS3 spectra: orbitrap, resolution 50,000, scan range 100–1000, SPS enabled (number of notches: 8), MS2 isolation window 3 m/z, HCD with 55 % collision energy, AGC target 1E5, max IT 86 ms.  Kinobeads selectivity profiling -- Kinobeads pulldown experiments were performed as previously described (PMID: 25660469). Briefly, cells were lysed in NP40-based lysis buffer, ultracentrifuged and diluted to final concentration of 5 mg/ml. 2.5 mg proteins per pulldown were incubated with compounds (DMSO, 3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1000 nM, 3 µM and 30 µM), 45 , 4 °C, end-over-end shaker. Lysates were incubated with Kinobeads epsilon (17 µL settled beads, 30 min, 4 °C). Beads were washed and proteins eluted (40 µL 2x NuPAGE LDS buffer, 50 mM DTT, 30 min, 50 °C). Pulldown of pulldown was performed with fresh beads and the flow through of the DMSO control. Proteins were alkylated with 55 mM CAA, desalted by a short electrophoresis on a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen), and digested according to standard procedures. Peptides were measured on a Dionex Ultimate3000 nano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed, 10 min, μL/min in LC solvent A (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO), and then separated using a 70 min linear gradient 4-32% LC solvent B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A on an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated as follows: positive polarity; spray voltage 2.0 kV, capillary temperature 275 °C. Full MS readout: orbitrap, resolution 60,000, mass range 360–1300, AGC target value 4E5, max IT 50 ms, RF lens value 30, MIPS properties peptide, default charge states 2-6, dynamic exclusion 20 s (after 1). MS2 spectra readout: orbitrap, resolution 15,000, isolation of up to 10 peptide precursors, isolation window 1.3, first mass 100 m/z, HCD with 30% collision energy, AGC target value 5E4, max IT of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant [PMID 19029910] (version 1.6.2.10) by searching the mass spec data against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the UniProt reference database (human proteins only, 20205 swissprot entries, downloaded 03.12.2015, internally annotated with PFAM domains) using the search engine Andromeda [PMID 21254760]. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1 % peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and 1 % protein false discovery rate (FDR). For the intracellular degradation experiment, carbamidomethylated cysteine (due to low CAA labeling efficiency), oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modification, MS3-based TMT quantification was enabled, taking TMT correction factors as supplied by the manufacturer into account. For Kinobeads pulldowns, carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Label-free quantification (PMID: 24942700) and match between runs were enabled within MaxQuant.  Data analysis was performed using the Perseus software suite [PMID 27348712] (version 1.5.8.5) and Microsoft Excel on identified and quantified protein groups as provided in the proteinGroups.txt file. For intracellular degradation experiments, proteingroups.txt was filtered for contaminants and reverse hits, and total sum normalization and log2 transformation were performed. The JB170 replicate 4 showed high differences to the other conditions and was not considered for further analysis. Entries were filtered for at least three valid values in one condition, remaining missing values were replaced from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift: 1.8). A two-sample t-test was performed between JB170 and Alisertib or JB211 (S0:0, permutation-based FDR: 5%, number of randomizations: 250). For Kinobeads pulldowns, relative binding was calculated based on the LFQ intensity ratio to the DMSO control for every single inhibitor concentration. EC50 values were derived from a four-parameter log-logistic regression using an internal pipeline that utilizes the ‘drc’ package in R21. Multiplying the EC50 values with a correction factor (cf) results in an apparent binding constant (Kd app). The correction factor for a protein is defined as the ratio of the amount of protein captured from two consecutive pulldowns of the same DMSO control lysate (PMID: 25660469). Targets of the inhibitors were annotated manually. A protein was considered a target if the resulting binding curve showed a sigmoidal curve shape with a dose dependent decrease of binding to the beads. Additionally, the number of unique peptides and MSMS counts per condition were taken into account. Protein intensity in the DMSO control sample was also included in the target annotation process. A protein was considered as a direct binder if annotated in Uniprot.org as protein kinase, lipid kinase, nucleotide binder, helicase, ATPase and GTPase as well as FAD and heme containing proteins. Most other proteins that were annotated as targets are interaction partners and are termed indirect binders.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Jb170, Proteomics analysis with the aurora-a protac

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany
Technical University of Munich Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5 85354 Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernhard Kuster
Technical University of Munich Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics Emil-Erlenmeyer-Forum 5 85354 Freising, Germany


