### Accession
PXD001244

### Title
Functional proteomics identifies acinus L as a direct insulin- and amino acid-dependent mTORC1 substrate

### Description
The serine/threonine kinase mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) governs growth, metabolism, and aging in response to insulin and amino acids (aa), and is often activated in metabolic disorders and cancer. Much is known about the regulatory signaling network around mTOR, but surprisingly few direct mTOR substrates have been established to date. To tackle this gap in our knowledge, we took advantage of a combined quantitative phosphoproteomic and interactomic strategy. We analyzed the insulin- and aa-responsive phosphoproteome upon inhibition of the mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) component raptor, and analyzed in parallel the interactome of endogenous mTOR. By overlaying these two datasets, we identified acinus L as a potential novel mTORC1 target. We confirmed acinus L as a direct mTORC1 substrate by co-immunoprecipitation and MS-enhanced kinase assays. Our study delineates a triple proteomics strategy of combined phosphoproteomics, interactomics, and MS-enhanced kinase assays for the de novo-identification of mTOR network components, and provides a rich source of potential novel mTOR interactors and targets for future investigation.<br><br>Additional contact details:<br>
<a href="mailto:k.thedieck@umcg.nl">Prof. Dr. Kathrin Thedieck</a><br>
Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands.<br>
Faculty VI - School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany.<br>
<br>
Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid<br>
Faculty of Biology, Institute of Biology II, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.<br>
BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.<br>

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling: shRaptor HeLa cells were labeled for at least 11 days in SILAC DMEM (PAA) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FCS (PAA), 1.5% L-glutamine (PAA) and either with “heavy” lysine (146 mg/L; 13C6, 15N2 ) and arginine (84 mg/L; 13C6, 15N4), “medium” lysine (146 mg/L; 4,4,5,5-D4) and arginine (84 mg/L; 13C6) or “light” lysine (146 mg/L) and arginine (84 mg/L). All amino acids were from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA, USA. A minimal arginine-to-proline conversion (≤ 3%) and virtually full incorporation of SILAC amino acids into proteins (> 98.9%) were confirmed by LC/MS analysis (data not shown). Immunoprecipitation: Cells of 70 - 90% confluence were lysed in 40 mM HEPES, 120 mM NaCl, 0.3% CHAPS, pH 7.5, supplemented with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2+3 (Sigma Aldrich) and Complete protease inhibitor (Roche). Per IP approach, lysates corresponding to one half of a 15 cm plate were used. For each IP, 37 μL Dynal Protein G magnetic beads with 7.5 μg antibody [anti-mTOR clone 3G6, anti-rat clone 7H8, anti-raptor clone 20D12 (all Dr. Elisabeth Kremmer) and anti-FLAG M2 (Sigma-Aldrich)] were used. Magnetic beads were 3x shortly washed and 2x for 10 min with lysis buffer. Proteins were eluted by incubation at 95°C in 2x sample buffer. Coomassie staining and in-gel digestion: Samples from mTOR IPs were loaded onto NuPAGE® Novex® 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen, Life Technologies). After SDS-PAGE, proteins were stained by colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. For in-gel digestion, the bands were cut out and destained with 50% buffer A (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water) with 50% buffer B (100% ACN). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT in buffer A at 65°C for 30 min, alkylated with 55 mM iodacetamide in buffer A at RT for 30 min in the dark, and digested with trypsin (Promega) in buffer A at 37°C overnight or at 42°C for 4 h. The peptides were eluted twice in 50% Buffer C (0.1% TFA in water) with 50% buffer B for 10 min in an ultrasonic bath. The eluates were dried in vacuo and resuspended in 15 μL buffer C for LC/MS measurement. High-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry: mTOR interactome data were acquired on an LTQ Orbitrap XL system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and distal coated SilicaTips (FS360-20-10-D, New Objective, Woburn, USA). Chromatographic separations were performed as described above with slight modifications as follows. Peptides were washed on a C18 μ-precolumn with 0.1% TFA for 5 min and separated on an Acclaim® PepMapTM analytical column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min with a binary solvent gradient system consisting of solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B [30% ACN, 50% methanol (MeOH), 0.1 % FA]. For separation, the percentage of B was raised from 15% to 72% in 45 min followed by an increase from 72% to 100% B in 10 min. The column was washed with 100% B for 5 min and re-equilibrated with 15% B for 15 min. The software XCalibur 2.1.0 SP1.116 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used. Full scans (m/z 370 to 1,700) were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 400). AGC was set to 5 x 105 ions (max. fill time, 500 ms) in the orbitrap and to 30,000 ions (max. fill time, 100 ms) in the LTQ. A TOP5 method was applied for collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged peptides. For further details please refer to our manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics: For protein identification, peak lists were generated and searched against the Uniprot Human Proteome set (release 03.04.2013, 87,656 protein entries) and the contamination file supplied with MaxQuant using Andromeda/MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 (65, 66). The species was restricted to homo sapiens because only proteins from human cells were analyzed. MaxQuant was operated using default settings with slight modifications. Database searches were performed with trypsin as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was commonly set as variable modification and carbamidomethlyation was set as fixed modification for interactome analyses. Raw data were recalibrated using the “first search” option of Andromeda with the full database using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Mass spectra were searched with Andromeda using default settings. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. For automated quantification of protein groups, only “razor and unique” peptides and a minimum ratio count of two were considered. In addition, "re-quantify", "filter labeled amino acids" and “match between runs” with a 2 min time window were enabled. Low-scoring peptides were excluded. A false discovery rate of 1% was applied on both peptide-spectrum-matches (on modified peptides separately) and protein lists. Only peptides with at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven aa are reported in this work. If proteins were not distinguishable based on the set of peptides identified, they were combined by MaxQuant and listed as protein group.  For further analysis of interactome data, non-normalized ratios were used and only protein groups identified with at least two peptides and quantified in at least two out of three replicates were considered. Ratios were log-transformed (log10) and the mean log10 across all experiments as well as the respective p-values (interactome, one-sided t-test) were calculated. Potential interaction partners of mTOR were required to be identified with at least two peptides and quantified with a mean ratio ≥ 5 or higher and a p-value < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The serine/threonine kinase mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) governs growth, metabolism, and aging in response to insulin and amino acids (aa), and is often activated in metabolic disorders and cancer. Much is known about the regulatory signaling network that encompasses mTOR, but surprisingly few direct mTOR substrates have been established to date. To tackle this gap in our knowledge, we took advantage of a combined quantitative phosphoproteomic and interactomic strategy. We analyzed the insulin- and aa-responsive phosphoproteome upon inhibition of the mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) component raptor, and investigated in parallel the interactome of endogenous mTOR. By overlaying these two datasets, we identified acinus L as a potential novel mTORC1 target. We confirmed acinus L as a direct mTORC1 substrate by co-immunoprecipitation and MS-enhanced kinase assays. Our study delineates a triple proteomics strategy of combined phosphoproteomics, interactomics, and MS-enhanced kinase assays for the de novo-identification of mTOR network components, and provides a rich source of potential novel mTOR interactors and targets for future investigation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Ap-ms, Interactomics, Mtor

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Kathrin Thedieck
Department of Pediatrics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands


