### Accession
PXD018306

### Title
Cardiac organoids reveal mechanisms of human cardiogenesis

### Description
Self-organisation and coordinated morphogenesis of multiple cardiac lineages is essential for the development and function of the heart1-3. However, the absence of a human in vitro model that mimics the basic lineage architecture of the heart hinders research into developmental mechanisms and congenital defects4. Here, we describe the establishment of a reliable, lineage-controlled and high-throughput cardiac organoid platform. We show that cardiac mesoderm derived from human pluripotent stem cells robustly self-organises and differentiates into cardiomyocytes forming a cavity. Co-differentiation of cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells from cardiac mesoderm within these structures is required to form a separate endothelial layer. As in vivo, the epicardium engulfs these cardiac organoids, migrates into the cardiomyocyte layer and differentiates. We use this model to demonstrate that cardiac cavity formation is controlled by a mesodermal WNT-BMP signalling axis. Disruption of one of the key BMP targets in cardiac mesoderm, the transcription factor HAND1, interferes with cavity formation, which is consistent with its role in early heart tube and left chamber development5. Thus, the cardiac organoid platform represents a powerful resource for the quantitative and mechanistic analysis of early human cardiogenesis and defects that are otherwise inaccessible. Beyond understanding congenital heart disease, cardiac organoids provide a foundation for future translational research into human cardiac disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 8M urea 100mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid buffer (HEPES), reduced with 10 mM 1,4-dithioerythritol with 1U Benzonase (Merck KGaA) and alkylated with a final concentration of 20 mM 2-iodoacetamide. Digests were carried out in 4M urea 100mM HEPES with LysC (Wako, 1/100 (w/w) protease/substrates) for 3 h at 37C and subsequent trypsin digest (Promega 1/100 (w/w) protease/substrates) overnight at 37C. Peptides were desalted using reverse-phase solid phase extraction cartridges (Sep-Pak C-18, Waters), dried under vacuum, reconstituted in HEPES to a neutral pH and labeled with TMT10-plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturers instructions. TMT labeled peptides were pooled in equal amounts and fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography (UPLC Peptide CSH C18 column, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 1 mm x 150 mm, ACQUITY). Samples were fractionated into 30 fractions with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile, pooled to obtain 10 final fractions and dried under vacuum and 100ng acidified peptides per fraction were used for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. The 10 fractions of each multiplexed sample were individually analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The samples were separated by reversed phase chromatography (75 um x 250 mm PepMap C18, particle size 5 um, Thermo Fisher Scientific), developing a linear gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid within 60 minutes (RSLC nano, Dionex – Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed by MS/MS, using electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap QExactive HFX, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was operated with the following parameters: MS1 resolution 120,000; MS1 AGC target 3e6; MS1 maximum inject time 50ms; MS1 scan range 380 to 1650 m/z; MS2 resolution 45,000; MS2 AGC target 1e5; Maximum inject time 250; TopN 10; Isolation window 0.7 m/z; Fixed first mass 110 m/z; Normalized collision energy 35; Minimum AGC target 1e4; Peptide match preferred; Exclude isotope on; Dynamic exclusion 30s.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were processed and analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (PD 2.3.0.484, Thermo Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.14114 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84) against the Homo sapiens database (SwissProt TaxID=9606) (v2017-10-25). The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The following search parameters were used: Iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine and peptide N-terminal ten-plex tandem mass tag were set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine, ten-plex tandem mass tag on lysine were set as variable modifications. Monoisotopic masses were searched within unrestricted protein masses for tryptic enzymatic specificity. The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. The result was filtered to 1% FDR on protein and peptide level using Percolator algorithm integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer. Reporter ions were quantified using the in-house developed software IMP Hyperplex (Doblmann J. et al., J Proteome Res. 2018 Nov 2, https://ms.imp.ac.at/index.php?action=hyperplex).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiac in vitro differentiation, Human pluripotent stem cells, Cardiac organoids

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna, Austria
IMP

### Submitter
Claudia Ctortecka

### Lab Head
Dr Sasha Mendjan
Institute for Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Vienna, Austria


