### Accession
PXD022216

### Title
The Proteome Landscape of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

### Description
Many functional consequences of mutations on tumor phenotypes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) are only partially known. This is in part due to missing information on the proteome of CLL. We profiled the proteome of 49 diverse CLL samples with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) and related the results to genomic, functional and clinical differences. We found trisomy 12 and IGHV to be major determinants of proteome variation in CLL (1073 and 512 differential proteins). In contrast to reports in other biological systems, the disease driver trisomy 12 was associated with limited protein buffering, a finding that suggests the biological relevance of proteins encoded by chromosome 12 for CLL biology. Protein complex analyses detected functional units involved in BCR/PI3K/AKT signaling in CLL with trisomy 12. We identified the transcription factor complex of STAT1/STAT2 to be up-regulated in IGHV unmutated CLL. We tested the functional relevance of protein expression for associations with response to anticancer drugs, and STAT2 protein expression emerged as a biomarker for the prediction of response to kinase inhibitors including BTK and MEK inhibitors. This study highlights the emerging importance of protein abundance profiling in cancer research and identifies STAT2 protein levels as new key factor in CLL biology.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized cell pellets were resuspended in 20 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate and lysed, aided by sonication with a VialTweeter (Hielscher). Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then diluted and treated with 50 U Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich) per 1 mio cells for 30 min at 37 °C. Reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out by the addition of tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37 °C for 30 min with shaking. Alkylation of free thiol groups was performed by the addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 for overnight digestion at 37 °C. After adjusting to 2% formic acid, samples were desalted with SEP PAK VAC C18 50mg columns (Waters). Cleaned peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 13.5 μL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid with the addition of iRT peptides [Escher et al., 2012] (Biognosys) for the following MS analysis. Peptide concentration was determined using the quantitative fluorimetric peptide assay (Pierce/Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. MS analysis was performed on a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) coupled to a nanoElute (Bruker). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 1μL or 100ng of peptides were loaded on a Picofrit column (75 μm x 450 mm - New Objective, packed with Reprosil C18 Aq, 1.9um, 100 ̊A, Dr. Maisch) heated to 60° C. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 400 nL/min from 2 to 24% B in 100 min. The instrument was operated data independent acquisition (DIA) mode including trapped ion mobility separation. The DIA acquisition scheme was as described in [Meier et al., 2019] for the ‘standard diaPASEF’ method.

### Data Protocol
The diaPASEF files were imported into Spectronaut v.14.4 [Bruderer et al., 2015] (Biognosys) to create a direct library which was subsequently used to search the diaPASEF data against the Swissprot reviewed subset of the human UniProt database (version 2020-01-01, 20367 entries) using ‘mutation’. The Spectronaut report was exported and further processed in R (version 3.6.0). Processing of raw protein abundance data and quality control was done with the R/Bioconductor package DEP [Zhang et al., 2018]. One outlier was excluded from downstream analysis due to a singularly large proportion of missing values. Proteins were selected for further analysis if they showed fewer than 50% missing values across all remaining 49 samples, which resulted in a set of 4977 proteins. The protein abundance data were background corrected, scaled and transformed using the variance stabilizing transformation approach of [Huber et al., 2002] [Karp et al., 2010].

### Publication Abstract
Many functional consequences of mutations on tumor phenotypes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) are unknown. This may be in part due to a scarcity of information on the proteome of CLL. We profiled the proteome of 117 CLL patient samples with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry and integrated the results with genomic, transcriptomic, ex vivo drug response, and clinical outcome data. We found trisomy 12, IGHV mutational status, mutated SF3B1, trisomy 19, del(17)(p13), del(11)(q22.3), mutated DDX3X and MED12 to influence protein expression (false discovery rate [FDR] = 5%). Trisomy 12 and IGHV status were the major determinants of protein expression variation in CLL as shown by principal-component analysis (1055 and 542 differentially expressed proteins, FDR = 5%). Gene set enrichment analyses of CLL with trisomy 12 implicated B-cell receptor (BCR)/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling as a tumor driver. These findings were supported by analyses of protein abundance buffering and protein complex formation, which identified limited protein abundance buffering and an upregulated protein complex involved in BCR, AKT, MAPK, and PI3K signaling in trisomy 12 CLL. A survey of proteins associated with trisomy 12/IGHV-independent drug response linked STAT2 protein expression with response to kinase inhibitors, including Bruton tyrosine kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitors. STAT2 was upregulated in unmutated IGHV CLL and trisomy 12 CLL and required for chemokine/cytokine signaling (interferon response). This study highlights the importance of protein abundance data as a nonredundant layer of information in tumor biology and provides a protein expression reference map for CLL.

### Keywords
Cll, Leukemia, Diapasef

### Affiliations
Queen's University Belfast
Queen's University Belfast, UK

### Submitter
Ben Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Collins
Queen's University Belfast, UK


### SDRF

