### Accession
PXD005046

### Title
Reduction in photosynthetic capacity in a mutualistic algal-bacterial co-culture revealed by quantitative proteomics

### Description
Algae and bacteria are frequently observed to form mutualisms for the exchange of a range of nutrients. We have developed a stable co-culture in which the cobalamin (vitamin B12)-requiring unicellular green alga Lobomonas rostrata can grow stably in the absence of this organic micronutrient with the -proteobacterium Mesorhizobium loti, which supplies B12 in exchange for fixed carbon.  In this study, we report the results of a comparative quantitative proteomics experiment to evaluate the protein expression profile of L. rostrata grown in co-culture vs. axenic treatments. For this, we have successfully developed and applied an isobaric tagging proteomics platform (iTRAQ) comparing the proteome of L. rostrata (an organism without a sequenced genome) grown axenically with B12 supplementation or in co-culture with M. loti. A total of 588 proteins could be identified using the related Chlamydomonas reinhardtii as a reference genome, and there was little interference from bacterial proteins. Comparisons of relative protein abundance in the two growth conditions highlighted proteins that were higher in co-cultures, including a number of heat-shock proteins, suggesting that the alga was experiencing stress in the presence of the bacterium. Several enzymes of amino acid biosynthesis were elevated, but total cellular protein and free amino acids were substantially lower in cells in co-culture relative those grown axenically. The most striking observation was that many proteins of photosynthesis, both the light-dependent reactions and the Calvin cycle, and those of chloroplast protein synthesis, were significantly lower in L. rostrata cells in co-culture. These observations were confirmed by measurement of electron transfer rates in cells grown under the two conditions, and strongly suggest that the alga is experiencing nutrient limitation when B12 is supplied directly from a bacterial source.

### Sample Protocol
Lobomonas rostrata (SAG 45-1) was obtained from the Experimental Phycology and Culture Collection of Algae at the University of Goettingen (EPSAG), Germany. It was grown autotrophically on TP+ medium (Kazamia et al., 2012), a modified version of TAP media (Gorman and Levine, 1965) but without acetate, thus lacking a source of organic carbon. Cultures were maintained in 16h light: 8h dark cycle (16L:8D) with shaking (140 r.p.m.) at 25°C. When supplemented with vitamin B12, the vitamin was provided at a concentration of 100 ng/L in the form of cyanocobalamin (Sigma-Aldrich, UK). Previous work has shown that maximum carrying capacity of L. rostrata is achieved when supplemented with 100 ng/L of vitamin B12 (Kazamia et al., 2012). M. loti (MAFF 303099) was a gift from Prof Allan Downie, John Innes Centre, UK. It was maintained axenically in TP+ with glycerol at 0.1% v/v. For the L. rostrata-M. loti co-culture, we used an established co-culture previously established (Kazamia et al., 2012) that had been maintained growing over many generations without a source of organic carbon or vitamin B12.   Protein preparation and iTRAQ labelling Cultures were harvested at 3000 g for 10 mins at 4 °C. The resulting cell pellets were further washed in 0.5 M triethylammouium biocarbonate buffer (TEAB) prior to storage at -20 °C. Cells were defrosted and resuspended in 1 ml of 0.5 M TEAB incorporating a sonication bath step for 5 minutes with ice. The resulting cell mix was ground in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. The post grind sample was transferred to a low bind tube and the sonication bath treatment was repeated followed by two cycles of more intense sonication using a Micro tip Branson Sonifier® (Enerson, Danbury CT). Insoluble protein was removed by centrifugation at 18,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. The soluble protein fraction (supernatant) was quantified using RCDC manufacturers’ instructions (Bio Rad, Hercules, CA) and 100 g protein was precipitated for 6 hours using acetone at -20 °C. The dried pellet was resuspended in 30 µL 500 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) with 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulphate and reduced with 2 µL 50 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine at room temperature for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 1 µL 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in isopropanol for 20 min in the dark. Samples were digested with 2.5 g trypsin and 5 µL ACN at 37 °C for 16 h. The resulting peptides were either taken forward for mass spectrometry analysis for preliminary proteomics analysis or labelled with iTRAQ reagents following the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Famingham, MA). Labels 113, 114, 115 and 116 were used to label biological replicates of L. rostrata cells cultured with B12 supplemented in the media and labels 117, 118, 119 and 121 were used for L. rostrata cells cultured with M. loti.  HILIC chromatography and mass spectrometry All 8 labelled peptide samples were combined before being dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Stevenage(UK)). The sample was resuspended in 200 L of buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, 90% acetonitrile [ACN], pH 3 [adjusted with formic acid]) and 100 L was loaded onto a PolyHydroxyethyl A column (5 m particle size, 20 cm length, 2.1 mm diameter, 200 Å pore size (PolyLC, Colombia, MD) using an Agilent 1100-series HPLC (Agilent, Wokingham, U.K.). With a flow of 0.5 mL min-1 buffer A was exchanged with buffer B (10 mM ammonium formate, 10% acetonitrile [ACN], pH 4 [adjusted with formic acid]) to form a linear gradient as follows: 0% B (0-5 min), 0-15% B (5-7 min), 15% B (7-10 min), 15-60% B (10-50 min), 60-100%B (50-55 min), 100%B (55-65 min), 0%B (65-75 min). Beginning at 18 min, 22 fractions of 1 min length, followed by 3 fractions of 3 min length were collected and dried by vacuum centrifugation ready for reverse-phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  LC-MS/MS was conducted using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to a QStar XL Hybrid ESI Quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems (now ABSciex), Framingham, MA, USA). Samples were resuspended in 20 µL buffer A (3% ACN, 0.1% FA) before loading 9 µL onto a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column, 3 µm particle size, 15 cm length, 75 µm diameter, 100 Å pore size (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). With a flow of 300 µL min-1 buffer A was exchanged with buffer B (97% ACN, 0.1% FA) to form a linear gradient as follows. 3% B (05 min), 3-35% B (5-95 min), 35-90% B (95-97 min), 90% B (97-102 min), 3% B (102-130 min). The mass detector range was set to 350-1800 m/z and operated in positive ion mode. Peptides with +2, +3, and +4 were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Proteomic identifications were conducted using Mascot, Ommsa, X!Tandem, Peaks and ProteinPilot for searching against the Uniprot reference proteome for Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (Uniprot ID 3055) and Mesorhizobium loti (Uniprot ID 266835). Searches were restricted to a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 3% and peptide spectral matches from the five search engines were merged using an R based script that also removed peptide spectral matches (PSMs) showing disagreement in terms of peptide assignment or protein identification between the search engines. Separately, reporter ion intensities for each PSM were extracted and matched to the merged results. Variance stabilization normalization, isotopic correction and median correction were performed on the label intensities before averaging by protein and preforming a t-test between replicate conditions to determine significance and fold change. Transmembrane domains were identified using TMHMM server 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/). We identified all putative transmembrane domains in each of the proteins identified in the ITRAQ experiment. If a sequence had 1 or more transmembrane domains this was classified as likely to be membrane-associated rather than soluble.

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular green alga Lobomonas rostrata requires an external supply of vitamin B<sub>12</sub> (cobalamin) for growth, which it can obtain in stable laboratory cultures from the soil bacterium Mesorhizobium loti in exchange for photosynthate. We investigated changes in protein expression in the alga that allow it to engage in this mutualism. We used quantitative isobaric tagging (iTRAQ) proteomics to determine the L.&#xa0;rostrata proteome grown axenically with B<sub>12</sub> supplementation or in coculture with M.&#xa0;loti. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD005046). Using the related Chlamydomonas reinhardtii as a reference genome, 588 algal proteins could be identified. Enzymes of amino acid biosynthesis were higher in coculture than in axenic culture, and this was reflected in increased amounts of total cellular protein and several free amino acids. A number of heat shock proteins were also elevated. Conversely, photosynthetic proteins and those of chloroplast protein synthesis were significantly lower in L.&#xa0;rostrata cells in coculture. These observations were confirmed by measurement of electron transfer rates in cells grown under the two conditions. The results indicate that, despite the stability of the mutualism, L.&#xa0;rostrata experiences stress in coculture with M.&#xa0;loti, and must adjust its metabolism accordingly.

### Keywords
Mesorhizobium loti, Alga, Lobomonas rostrata, Vitamin b12, Itraq, Co-culture, Photosynthetic

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological engineering, The University of Sheffield
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Joseph Longworth

### Lab Head
Dr Jagroop Pandhal
Chemical and Biological engineering, The University of Sheffield


