### Accession
PXD017819

### Title
Esculetin inhibits cancer cell glycolysis by binding tumor PGK2, GPD2, and GPI

### Description
Glycolysis can improve the tolerance of tissue cells to hypoxia, and its intermediates provide raw materials for the synthesis and metabolism of the tumor cells. If it can inhibit the activity of glycolysis-related enzymes and control the energy metabolism of tumor, it can be targeted for the treatment of malignant tumor. The target proteins phosphoglycerate kinase 2 (PGK2), glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD2) and glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI) were screened by combining transcriptome, proteomics and reverse docking. We detected the binding constant of the active compound using microscale thermophoresis (MST). It was found that esculetin bound well with three potential target proteins. Esculetin significantly inhibited the rate of glycolysis, manifested by differences of cellular lactate production and glucose consumption in HepG2 cells with or without esculetin. It was found that GPD2 bound strongly to GPI, revealing the direct interaction between the two glycolysis-related proteins. Animal tests have further demonstrated that esculetin may have anticancer effects by affecting the activity of PGK2, GPD2 and GPI. The results of this study demonstrated that esculetin can affect the glucose metabolism by binding to glycolytic proteins, thus playing an anti-tumor role, and these proteins which have direct interactions are potential novel targets for tumor treatment by esculetin.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture The HepG2 cells were inoculated into 6-well plates at a concentration of 5 x 105/mL. There are two groups: HepG2 cells without esculetin and HepG2 cells containing esculetin (n=3). According to the relevant literature[14], esculetin was added at 50 µM to each well and incubated for 24 h at 37°C with 5% CO2.  RNA extraction According to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen), getting the total RNA from HepG2 cells. RNA quality was determined. Sequencing libraries were constructed using only high-quality RNA samples (OD260/280=1.8~2.2).

### Data Protocol
Library preparation, and Illumina HiSeq X Ten Sequencing According to the TruSeqTM RNA sample preparation Kit of Illumina, we prepared the RNA-seq transcriptome library by using 5 μg of total RNA. For a short period of time, we isolated mRNA by oligo(dT) beads and RNA was fragmented through a fragment buffer. The SuperScript double-stranded cDNA synthesis kit was used to synthesize Double-stranded cDNA. The 200–300 bp cDNA target fragments size on 2% Low Range Ultra Agarose were selected, and 15 PCR cycles were amplified using Phusion DNA polymerase (NEB). Illumina HiSeq X Ten (2 × 150bp read length) was sequenced using the paired-end RNA-seq sequencing library after quantification by TBS380.  Differential expression analysis and functional enrichment The expression level of each transcript was calculated by the number of segments per kilobase of exon per million mapped reads (FRKM) method, in order to identify differential expression genes (DEGs) between two different samples. RSEM (http://deweylab.biostat.wisc.edu/rsem/)(Li and Dewey 2011) was used for quantitative genetic abundances. “The R statistical software package EdgeR (Empirical analysis of Digital Gene Expression in R, http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/2.12/bioc/html/edgeR.html)” (Robinson et al. 2010) was used to assess differences. Functional enrichment was performed using GO and KEGG. “GO functional enrichment and KEGG pathway analysis were performed by Goatools (https://github.com/tanghaibao/Goatools) and KOBAS (http://kobas.cbi.pku.edu.cn/home.do)” (Xie et al. 2011).  Differentially expressed target gene prediction and analysis PharmMapper is a kind of free use of network tools, the pharmacophore mapping method is used to identify potential targets from the results of transcriptome. Using MalaCards and GeneCards for further screening. Uploaded all potential targets to the DAVID database. Using Gene Ontology and KEGG pathway to study the functions and pathways of enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
Glycolysis can improve the tolerance of tissue cells to hypoxia, and its intermediates provide raw materials for the synthesis and metabolism of the tumor cells. If it can inhibit the activity of glycolysis-related enzymes and control the energy metabolism of tumor, it can be targeted for the treatment of malignant tumor. The target proteins phosphoglycerate kinase 2 (PGK2), glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD2), and glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI) were screened by combining transcriptome, proteomics, and reverse docking. We detected the binding constant of the active compound using microscale thermophoresis (MST). It was found that esculetin bound well with three potential target proteins. Esculetin significantly inhibited the rate of glycolysis, manifested by differences of cellular lactate production and glucose consumption in HepG2 cells with or without esculetin. It was found that GPD2 bound strongly to GPI, revealing the direct interaction between the two glycolysis-related proteins. Animal tests have further demonstrated that esculetin may have anticancer effects by affecting the activity of PGK2, GPD2, and GPI. The results of this study demonstrated that esculetin can affect the glucose metabolism by binding to glycolytic proteins, thus playing an anti-tumor role, and these proteins which have direct interactions are potential novel targets for tumor treatment by esculetin.

### Keywords
Gpd2/gpi., Protein inhibitor, Transcriptome, Proteomics, Esculetin, Keywords: glycolysis, Microscale thermophoresis

### Affiliations
Faculty of Pharmacy, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Songtao Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Song-Tao Wu
Faculty of Pharmacy, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine


