### Accession
PXD011068

### Title
Proteome profiling in APP/PS1 mice brain and modulation by tocotrienol-rich fraction

### Description
This study examined the proteome profile in the hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, and striatum of APPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice (APP/PS1) model of Alzheimer’s disease compared to wild-type mice. The effect of tocotrienol-rich fraction (TRF), a mixture of vitamin E analogs derived from palm oil supplementation on the proteome profile of APP/PS1 mice hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, and striatum was also investigated. The analysis was performed using ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography coupled with Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometry. This study was in hoped to understand the mechanisms of Alzheimer’s disease at proteome level, and pre-emptive activity of TRF to combat the disease.

### Sample Protocol
APP/PS1 mice aged five-month-old were divided into three groups which received different treatments: water, palm oil stripped of vitamin E as a vehicle control, and tocotrienol-rich fraction (TRF) by oral administration. Meanwhile, wild-type mice group received water. All mice received daily supplementation from 5 to 15 months of age. After ten months of supplementation, the mice were sacrificed. Hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, and striatum were collected and homogenized. Proteins were extracted and separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Each protein band was excised and separated into six fractions, followed by in-gel digestion. Ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography coupled with Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometry was used for proteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 was used to process the mass spectra data. The mass spectra data were searched by Andromeda search engine against mouse UniProt sequence database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications during the spectra search. Peptides with the minimum of seven amino acid length were considered, while trypsin was set as a specific enzymatic digestion with the minimum of two missed cleavage. Label-free quantification was carried out, with Orbitrap as the instrument type. Peptide spectrum match and protein identification were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The identification of protein required at least one unique or razor peptide per group. The bioinformatics and statistical analysis were performed using the Perseus software version 1.5.4.1.

### Publication Abstract
Tocotrienol-rich fraction (TRF) is a mixture of vitamin E analogs derived from palm oil. We previously demonstrated that supplementation with TRF improved cognitive function and modulated amyloid pathology in A&#x3b2;PP/PS1 mice brains. The current study was designed to examine proteomic profiles underlying the therapeutic effect of TRF in the brain. Proteomic analyses were performed on samples of hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), and striatum using liquid chromatography coupled to Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometry. From these analyses, we profiled a total of 5,847 proteins of which 155 proteins were differentially expressed between A&#x3b2;PP/PS1 and wild-type mice. TRF supplementation of these mice altered the expression of 255 proteins in the hippocampus, mPFC, and striatum. TRF also negatively modulated the expression of amyloid beta A4 protein and receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase alpha protein in the hippocampus. The expression of proteins in metabolic pathways, oxidative phosphorylation, and those involved in Alzheimer's disease were altered in the brains of A&#x3b2;PP/PS1 mice that received TRF supplementation.

### Keywords
App/ps1 mice, Tocotrienol-rich fraction, Brain, Alzheimer’s disease, Vitamin e

### Affiliations
Molecular Neuroscience Research Center, 
Shiga University of Medical Science
Molecular Neuroscience Research Center,  Shiga University of Medical Science, Japan

### Submitter
Hamizah Shahirah Hamezah

### Lab Head
Dr Ikuo Tooyama
Molecular Neuroscience Research Center,  Shiga University of Medical Science, Japan


