### Accession
PXD028917

### Title
Mouse sperm protamine mass spectrometry

### Description
Conventional dogma presumes that protamine-mediated DNA compaction in sperm is achieved by passive electrostatics between DNA and the arginine-rich core of protamines. However, phylogenetic analysis reveals several non-arginine residues that are conserved within, but not across, species. The functional significance of these residues or post-translational modifications are poorly understood. In this experiment, we investigated the presence of post-translational modifications on mouse protamine 1 to begin to dissect their function in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 20 ug of acid-extracted protein was run in triplicate on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel (BioRad) and a single band corresponding to P1 and P2 was cut out for processing. Gel bands were washed once with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by three washes in 100% acetonitrile. Bands were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60 oC followed by alkylation with 50 mM light iodoacetamide at room temperature. Bands were then digested with either trypsin (Promega) at 37 oC for 4 hours, Chymotrypsin (Promega) at 37 oC for 12 hours, or Lys-C (Promega) at 37 oC for 12 hours. For all enzymes used, digests were quenched with formic acid and the supernatants were analyzed. Digests were analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 um analytical column at 350 nL/min. Both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Byonic with the following parameters: Enzyme: Semi-Trypsin or None (for Chymotrypsin and Lys-C), Database: Swissprot Mouse (forward and reverse appended with common), fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: oxidation (O), acetyl (protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), phosphor (STY), methyl (KR), dimethyl (KR), trimethyl (K), mass values: monoisotopic, peptide mass tolerance (10 ppm), fragment mass tolerance (0.02 Da), max missed cleavages: 2. Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using a minimum protein value of 95%, a minimum peptide value of 50% (Prophet scores) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein. Site localization probabilities were assigned using A-Score (Beausoleil et al., 2006).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Sperm, Protamine

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, USA

### Submitter
Lindsay Moritz

### Lab Head
Dr Sue Hammoud
Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, USA


