### Accession
PXD006803

### Title
OxSWATH applied to in-vitro the characterization of redox state of recombinant DJ-1 proteins

### Description
Most of the redox proteomics strategies are focused on the identification and relative quantification of cysteine oxidation changes without considering the variation in the total levels of the proteins. However, the regulation of protein synthesis and protein degradation are also associated with many of the regulatory mechanisms of the cells, being therefore important to consider the changes in total protein levels in the Post Translational Modifications (PTMs) focused analyses, such as cysteine redox characterization. This aspect was only address in the cysTMTRAQ method, which combines two types of isobaric tags in the same experiment leading to a considerable increase in the costs of the analysis. Therefore, a novel integrative approach combining the SWATH-MS method with differential alkylation using non-isotopically labeled alkylating reagents (oxSWATH) is presented, thus integrating the information regarding relative cysteine oxidation with the comparative analysis of the total protein levels in a cost effective highthrouput approach.  The proposed method was tested using a redox regulated protein and further applied to a comparative analysis of secretomes obtained under control or oxidative stress conditions to strengthen the importance of considering the changes in protein total levels. OxSWATH allowed to determine the relative proportion of reduced and reversible oxidized oxoforms of the proteins, and by considering total protein levels, to determine the total levels of each fraction, which are then used for comparative analysis.  In this project it is presented the results from the validation of the method using the recombinant protein DJ-1.

### Sample Protocol
In-vitro assay with the recombinant DJ-1 proteins: Ten micrograms of each recombinant protein ([WT]DJ-1 and [106DD]DJ-1) were used per reaction. The first alkylation steps were performed using iodoacetamide (IAM) at a final concentration of 66 mM (R1 and R2) and acrylamide (Acry) at 6 % (v/v) (R3), and their concentrations were triplicated in the second steps (R3 in the case of IAM, and R1 and R2 for Acry) to compensate for the excess of DTT. DTT was added to a final concentration of 11 mM and the reduction and the alkylation were performed using ultrasonication for 10 min. Ultrasonication was performed in a 750 W Ultrasonic processor with cuphorn using 20 % intensity and pulses ON/OFF of 1 second each. The reagents from the first alkylation were removed using cut-off filters of 5 kDa (Vivaspin500, Sartorius) followed by a washing step with 0.5 M TEAB, and this step was repeated before the protein digestion to remove the excess of reducing and alkylating reagent. To promote the in-vitro oxidation of the recombinant proteins prior to the differential alkylation, they were incubated with 1 mM of hydrogen peroxide for 30 min at room temperature. Each reaction was performed in a total of four replicates and all the samples were subjected to liquid digestion. In addition, four more reaction were performed using a single alkylating reagent (acrylamide in the case of R4 and R7 and IAM in the case of R5 and R6) with or without reduction of the samples (R4 and R5, and R6 and R7, respectively). These reactions were only used for peptide identification. Protein Digestion: Recombinant DJ-1 samples were subjected to liquid digestion as described in Anjo et al., [1] without the alkylation step. The digestions were performed with trypsin in a 1:50 ratio, overnight (o.n.) at 37 °C.  Mass spectrometry analysis by SWATH mode: Samples were analyzed on an AB Sciex® 5600 TripleTOF in two modes: information-dependent acquisition (IDA) for protein identification and library generation, and SWATH acquisition for quantitative analysis. Peptide separation was performed using liquid chromatography (nanoLC Ultra 2D, Eksigent®) on a MicroLC ChromXPTM C18CL reverse phase column (300 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, 120 Å, Eksigent®) at 5 µL/min with a multistep gradient: 0-2 min linear gradient from 5 to 10 %, 2-45 min linear gradient from 10 % to 30 %, and 45-46 min to 35 % of acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using an electrospray ionization source (DuoSpray™ Source, AB Sciex®) with a 50 μm internal diameter (ID) stainless steel emitter (AB Sciex®). Information dependent acquisition (IDA) experiments were performed for the alkylation reaction with a single alkylating agent The mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (350-1250 m/z) for 250ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (100–1500 m/z from a dynamic accumulation time – minimum 30 ms for precursor above the intensity threshold of 1000 – in order to maintain a cycle time of 3.3 s). Candidate ions with a charge state between +2 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectra was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 25 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.7, AB Sciex®). Rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH-MS based experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode with the same chromatographic conditions used as in the IDA run described above. The SWATH-MS setup was designed specifically for the samples to be analyzed (Supplementary Tables S1). A set of 45 windows of variable width (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A 70 ms survey scan (100-1500 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle for instrument calibration and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100–1500 m/z for 70 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.25 s, which is compatible with the acquisition of at least 8 points per chromatographic peak. The collision energy for each window was determined according to the calculation for a charge +2 ion centered upon the window with a collision energy spread of 15. 1. Anjo, S.I., C. Santa, and B. Manadas, Short GeLC-SWATH: a fast and reliable quantitative approach for proteomic screenings. Proteomics, 2015. 15(4): p. 757-62.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing: Protein Identification and Library Generation: Protein identification was obtained using ProteinPilotTM software (v5.0, AB Sciex®). Recombinant DJ-1 proteins were searched against the entire database from SwissProt (released at 2015). The searches were performed with the following parameters: trypsin digestion; and iodoacetamide or acrylamide as cysteine alkylating reagent, for R6 and R7 samples, respectively; and without alkylating agents for identification of the non-modified peptides (using all the R4 to R7 reactions). An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by ProteinPilotTM, was used to assess the quality of the identifications. Positive identifications were considered when identified proteins and peptides reached a 5 % local FDR. A specific library of precursor masses and fragment ions was obtained from each identification file using the SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, AB Sciex®). The libraries were exported as text files to be manually adapted to the redoxomics analysis. For each library, the peptides containing alkylated cysteines were isolated and further combined with tryptic peptides (for alignment of the retention time), this step generates cysteine specific libraries (one for the iodoacetamide alkylated peptides and one for acrylamide alkylated peptides). In addition, another library is created using only peptides without cysteines, to be used to determine the total levels of the proteins. In total, three libraries are used per redoxomics assay. SWATH data file processing: Peptides were selected automatically from the library using the criteria described in Anjo et al. [1]. Up to 15 peptides were chosen per protein for the determination of the protein total levels, and all the peptides containing cysteines were used in the case of the cysteine specific libraries. For each peptides, up to 5 target fragment ions (corresponding to a peak group) were automatically selected and scored [1]. Peak group confidence threshold was determined based on a FDR analysis using the target-decoy approach and the peptide that met the 1% FDR threshold in least three replicates were retained for posterior analysis. The peak areas of the target fragment ions of those peptides were extracted across the experiment using a 4 min extracted-ion chromatogram (XIC) window adjusted in order to accommodate the entire chromatographic peaks. The retention time was adjusted to each sample using the tryptic peptides.  Total protein levels were estimated by summing all the transitions from all the peptides [1] without cysteine, and for each protein the levels of its cysteine alkylated peptides were determined by summing all the transitions of that group of peptides. Peptides alkylated with iodoacetamide and acrylamide were analyzed in separate. Comparative analysis of the oxidative state of DJ-1: The reduced and oxidized fractions were compared between the experimental conditions ([WT]DJ-1 vs [C106DD]DJ-1 and Control vs Stress conditions) using student’s t-tests with statistical significance considered for p-values below 0.05. Parametric assumptions (data normality and homogeneity of variance) were tested using Shapiro-Wilk Test and Levene’s Test, respectively. All the tests were performed in IBM® SPSS® Statistics version 22. Outliers’ detection was performed in GraphPad Prism (version 6.01) using the ROUT method.   1. Anjo, S.I., C. Santa, and B. Manadas, Short GeLC-SWATH: a fast and reliable quantitative approach for proteomic screenings. Proteomics, 2015. 15(4): p. 757-62.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redoxomics; cysteine oxidation; swath-ms; differential alkylation; recombinant dj-1

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra


