### Accession
PXD041112

### Title
Human hepatocellular carcinoma Orbitrap-LC-MS-HZ

### Description
Human hepatocellular carcinoma cells were subcutaneously implanted into nude mice and treated with photodynamic nanoparticles (NP3) with laser, followed by tissue collection and proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Nine nude HCC patient-derived tumor-bearing mice were randomly separated into 3 groups, resulting in 3 mice for each group. The mice were intravenously injected in the tail vein with NP3 (6 mg BODIPY kg-1). After 24 h, the tumor was exposed to irradiation (650 nm, 0.1 W cm-2, 60 J cm-2, 10 min). The tumors were collected and incubated in the absence and the presence of 10 μM PDS, respectively, at 37°C for 24 h. The cells were then individually harvested, lysed on ice and extracted whole cell proteins by total protein extraction kit (BestBio). The concentration of raw protein extracts was measured by BCA Kit (Beyotime). The extracted proteins were digested and stable isotopic labeled. The labeled peptide mixtures were pre-fractionated by HPLC (Agilent Technologies 1260 infinity) with Agilent ZORBAX 300 Extend-C18 column.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric quantification was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 nanoUPLC system equipped with an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 pre-column (20 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm) and an Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column (150 mm × 75 μm, 2 μm). Raw MS/MS data were searched in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 2.3) database for peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor metastases are considered the leading cause of cancer-associated deaths. While clinically applied drugs have demonstrated to efficiently remove the primary tumor, metastases remain poorly accessible. To overcome this limitation, herein, the development of a theranostic nanomaterial by incorporating a chromophore for imaging and a photosensitizer for treatment of metastatic tumor sites is presented. The mechanism of action reveals that the nanoparticles are able to intervene by local generation of cellular damage through photodynamic therapy as well as by systemic induction of an immune response by immunotherapy upon inhibition of the mTOR signaling pathway which is of crucial importance for tumor onset, progression and metastatic spreading. The nanomaterial is able to strongly reduce the volume of the primary tumor as well as eradicates tumor metastases in a metastatic breast cancer and a multi-drug resistant patient-derived hepatocellular carcinoma models in female mice.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Affiliations
Insititute of chemistry chinese academy of sciences
Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Huiling Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Haihua Xiao
Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences


