### Accession
PXD043272

### Title
Homo sapiens expanded into the Northern European Plains by 45,000 years ago

### Description
1,322 morphologically unidentified fragmentary bone specimens were analyzed using MALDI-TOF and a subset of 341 bone specimens with LC-MS/MS in order to characterize their proteome for species identification and potential hominin specimens related to the LRJ transitional period derived from the site Ilsenhöhle Ranis, Germany (50°39.7563’N, 11°33.9139’E).

### Sample Protocol
All bone specimens were drilled into a fine powder using a dental drill. 20 mg of the fine powder were homogenized and equally divided into two different 5 mg Eppendorf tubes. We assessed the ammonium bicarbonate extraction method for collagen peptide mass fingerprinting (ZooMS). Additionally, a PAC extraction method (SPIN) was used for shotgun proteomics. MALDI–TOF MS analysis for the first 769 specimens was conducted at the IZI Fraunhofer in Leipzig, Germany, in an auto flex speed LRF MALDI-TOF (Bruker) with reflector mode, positive polarity, and collected in the mass-to-charge range 1000-3500 m/z. The remaining specimens were analyzed on a MALDI-TOF 5200 AB Sciex (Framingham, MA, 01701, USA) instrument at the Ecole Supérieure de Physique et Chimie Industrielle (ESPCI), Paris, France, in positive reflector mode, covering a mass-to-charge range of 1000 to 3500 Da. For shotgun proteomics, a subset of 341 bone specimens was analyzed separately via LC-MS/MS- an Evosep One (Evosep, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480TM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in HCD mode. Six specimens were analyzed in 60SPD-DDA mode and the remaining 335 were analyzed in 200SPD-DIA mode.

### Data Protocol
MALDI-TOF-MS replicates (.mzml; n = 3) were averaged for each sample and manually inspected for the presence of relevant peptide markers (COL1ɑ1 508-519, COL1ɑ1 586-618, COL1ɑ2 292-309, COL1ɑ2 454-483, COL1ɑ2 484-498, COL1ɑ2 502-519, COL1ɑ2 757-789, COL1ɑ2 793-816, COL1ɑ2 978-990) in mMass v. 5.5.0. MALDI–TOF MS spectra (.msd) were analyzed in comparison to a reference database containing collagen-peptide marker masses of all medium-to larger-sized genera. These separate .mzMl-type files and combined .msd-type files for all specimens included in the study can be found under the Zenodo online repository (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8063812). The corresponding file names of all replicates per bone specimen were included in the ProteomeXchange submission as .csv-type file (“Ranis_SampletoData”). All DIA .raw files were loaded into Biognosys Spectronaut v. 15.6.211220, and analyzed using either library-based or library-free DirectDIA search against the protein sequence database provided by Ruther et al. 2022, largely composed of 20 common skeletal proteins with entries across Mammalia and all parameters set as described in  Ruther et al. 2022.  The generated DDA .raw files were analyzed in MaxQuant version 2.1.1.0. Oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), Gln -> pyro-Glu, Glu -> pyro-Glu, and proline hydroxylation were included as variable modifications, whereas NEM-derivatization of Cys was configured as a fixed modification. Initial searches were run in specific Trypsin/P digestion mode and allowed for up to two miscleavages. Up to five variable modifications were allowed. The internal MaxQuant contaminant list was replaced with a custom database (Ruther et al. 2022). All other settings were left on default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lrj, Homo sapiens, Palaeoproteomics, Species identification, Mass-spectrometry, Ilsenhöhle ranis

### Affiliations
Chaire de Paléoanthropologie, CIRB (UMR 7241–U1050), Collège de France
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Dorothea Mylopotamitaki

### Lab Head
Dr Frido Welker
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


