### Accession
PXD031357

### Title
SAMHD1 deacetylation by SIRT1 promotes DNA end resection by facilitating DNA binding at double-strand breaks

### Description
Sterile alpha motif and HD domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1) has a dNTPase-independent function in promoting DNA end resection to facilitate DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair by homologous recombination (HR); however, it is not known if upstream signaling events govern this activity. Here, we show that SAMHD1 is deacetylated by the SIRT1 sirtuin deacetylase, facilitating its binding with ssDNA at DSBs, to promote DNA end resection and HR. SIRT1 complexes with and deacetylates SAMHD1 at conserved lysine 354 (K354) specifically in response to DSBs. K354 deacetylation by SIRT1 promotes DNA end resection and HR but not SAMHD1 tetramerization or dNTPase activity. Mechanistically, K354 deacetylation by SIRT1 promotes SAMHD1 recruitment to DSBs and binding to ssDNA at DSBs, which in turn facilitates CtIP ssDNA binding, leading to promotion of genome integrity. Our findings define a mechanism governing the dNTPase-independent resection function of SAMHD1 by SIRT1 deacetylation in promoting HR and genome stability.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion buffer (200ul of 50mM NH4HCO3) was added to the IP beads and the sample was treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Protein was digested with 1:50 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C overnight.  Samples are then diluted with 50mM NH4HCO3 to a urea concentration below 2M and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum.  LC-MS/MS analysis:  Derived peptides were resuspended in peptide 10 uL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile). Peptide mixtures (2 uL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 um Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 uM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific , San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 1200 minute gradient at a rate of 275 nl/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 40% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The MS scans (400-1600 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (1.5 m/z isolation width with 0.5 m/z offset, 30% collision enegy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 against human Uniprot database (90,300 target sequences).  Searching parameters included fully tryptic restriction and a parent ion mass tolerance (± 20 ppm).  Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), ubiquitination (+114.04293 Da), phosphorylation (+79.96633 Da), lysine acetylation (+42.01057 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.01057 Da) were variable modifications (up to 3 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.021465 Da). Percolator was used to filter the peptide spectrum matches to an false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Sterile alpha motif and HD domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1) has a dNTPase-independent function in promoting DNA end resection to facilitate DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair by homologous recombination (HR); however, it is not known if upstream signaling events govern this activity. Here, we show that SAMHD1 is deacetylated by the SIRT1 sirtuin deacetylase, facilitating its binding with ssDNA at DSBs, to promote DNA end resection and HR. SIRT1 complexes with and deacetylates SAMHD1 at conserved lysine 354 (K354) specifically in response to DSBs. K354 deacetylation by SIRT1 promotes DNA end resection and HR but not SAMHD1 tetramerization or dNTPase activity. Mechanistically, K354 deacetylation by SIRT1 promotes SAMHD1 recruitment to DSBs and binding to ssDNA at DSBs, which in turn facilitates CtIP ssDNA binding, leading to promotion of genome integrity. These findings define a mechanism governing the dNTPase-independent resection function of SAMHD1 by SIRT1 deacetylation in promoting HR and genome stability.

### Keywords
Acetylation, Ipms

### Affiliations
Department of Radiation Oncology Associate Professor
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr David Yu
Department of Radiation Oncology Associate Professor


