### Accession
PXD040331

### Title
Altered striatal actin - dynamics drives behavioral inflexibility in a mouse model of Fragile X syndrome

### Description
The proteome of glutamatergic synapses is diverse across the mammalian brain and involved in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Among those is Fragile X syndrome (FXS), an NDD caused by the dysfunctional RNA binding protein FMRP. Here we demonstrate how the brain region-specific composition of post-synaptic density (PSD) contributes to FXS. The FXS mouse model shows, in the striatum, an altered association of the PSD with the actin cytoskeleton, reflecting immature dendritic spine morphology and reduced synaptic actin dynamics. Enhancing actin turnover with constitutively active RAC1 ameliorates these deficits. At the behavioral level, the FXS model displays striatal-driven inflexibility, a typical feature of FXS individuals, that is rescued by exogenous RAC1. Striatal ablation of Fmr1 is sufficient to recapitulate behavioral impairments observed in the FXS model. These results indicate that dysregulation of synaptic actin dynamics in the striatum, a region largely unexplored in FXS, contributes to the manifestation of FXS behavioral phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
PSD95(FLAG) complexes were isolated as previously described (Fernandez et al., 2009) with minor modifications. Briefly, brain regions from P30 and P150 PSD95(FLAG/FLAG) x Fmr1(y/+), PSD95(FLAG/FLAG) x Fmr1(y/-) or PSD95(WT/WT) were homogenized on ice in 1% deoxycholate (DOC) buffer (50 mMTris [pH 8.0], 1% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM NaF, 20 µM ZnCl2 and 1 mM Na3VO4), in presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The homogenate was incubated 1h at 4°C in rotation and clarified at 25000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. A total of 12 mg of proteins was incubated with protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) coupled with FLAG-M2 antibody for 2 h, at 4°C. The beads bound with the extracts were resuspended in 150 mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteins digested O.N. with Trypsin. Resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS at the VIB Proteomics Research Center. Fernandez, E., Collins, M.O., Uren, R.T., Kopanitsa, M.V., Komiyama, N.H., Croning, M.D., Zografos, L., Armstrong, J.D., Choudhary, J.S., and Grant, S.G. (2009). Targeted tandem affinity purification of PSD-95 recovers core postsynaptic complexes and schizophrenia susceptibility proteins. Mol Syst Biol 5, 269. https://doi.org/10.1038/msb.2009.27.

### Data Protocol
Analyses were performed in R and the results were displayed using the R libraries ggplot2 and factoextra; the scripts will be available upon request. In brief, iBAQ values created by the Maxquant software were log2-transformed and filtered in two steps: First, proteins were removed, for which the average value of all FLAG precipitations were not at least 2.5 times higher than the average of all no-FLAG control precipitations. For this step only, missing values were imputed using random numbers centered on the minimal value of the respective sample. Next, proteins were removed that had missing values in any triplicate other than the no-FLAG control. Note that a different number of proteins passes the two filters depending on which dataset was analysed (the entire dataset or a subset, e.g., of a particular brain region). Statistically relevant differences in protein expression were identified by three-way ANOVA, using brain region, age, and genotype as parameters. P-values across all proteins were adjusted for multiple testing, and FDR values <0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The proteome of glutamatergic synapses is diverse across the mammalian brain and involved in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). Among those is fragile X syndrome (FXS), an NDD caused by the absence of the functional RNA-binding protein FMRP. Here, we demonstrate how the brain region-specific composition of postsynaptic density (PSD) contributes to FXS. In the striatum, the FXS mouse model shows an altered association of the PSD with the actin cytoskeleton, reflecting immature dendritic spine morphology and reduced synaptic actin dynamics. Enhancing actin turnover with constitutively active RAC1 ameliorates these deficits. At the behavioral level, the FXS model displays striatal-driven inflexibility, a typical feature of FXS individuals, which is rescued by exogenous RAC1. Striatal ablation of Fmr1 is sufficient to recapitulate behavioral impairments observed in the FXS model. These results indicate that dysregulation of synaptic actin dynamics in the striatum, a region largely unexplored in FXS, contributes to the manifestation of FXS behavioral phenotypes.

### Keywords
Striatum, Fmr1(y/ -), Post-synaptic density, Actin, Cortex, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, Université de Lausanne, 1005 Lausanne, Switzerland   &  Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Università degli studi di Roma "Tor Vergata", 00133 Rome, Italy
Dept. of Fundamental Neurosciences
University of Lausanne

### Submitter
Tilmann Achsel

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Bagni
Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, Université de Lausanne, 1005 Lausanne, Switzerland   &  Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, Università degli studi di Roma "Tor Vergata", 00133 Rome, Italy


