### Accession
PXD003541

### Title
Fungi contribute critical but spatially varying roles in nitrogen and carbon cycling in acidic environments

### Description
Proteins from acid mine drainage microbial communities were extracted, trypsine digested  and identified with LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
proteins were extracted from acid mine drainage microbial biofilms using SDS-boiling and then further processed with the FASP method.

### Data Protocol
database searching was performed with Sipros. peptides were filtered at 1% FDR. a minimum of 2 peptides per proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The ecosystem roles of fungi have been extensively studied by targeting one organism and/or biological process at a time, but the full metabolic potential of fungi has rarely been captured in an environmental context. We hypothesized that fungal genome sequences could be assembled directly from the environment using metagenomics and that transcriptomics and proteomics could simultaneously reveal metabolic differentiation across habitats. We reconstructed the near-complete 27 Mbp genome of a filamentous fungus, Acidomyces richmondensis, and evaluated transcript and protein expression in floating and streamer biofilms from an acid mine drainage (AMD) system. A. richmondensis transcripts involved in denitrification and in the degradation of complex carbon sources (including cellulose) were up-regulated in floating biofilms, whereas central carbon metabolism and stress-related transcripts were significantly up-regulated in streamer biofilms. These findings suggest that the biofilm niches are distinguished by distinct carbon and nitrogen resource utilization, oxygen availability, and environmental challenges. An isolated A. richmondensis strain from this environment was used to validate the metagenomics-derived genome and confirm nitrous oxide production at pH 1. Overall, our analyses defined mechanisms of fungal adaptation and identified a functional shift related to different roles in carbon and nitrogen turnover for the same species of fungi growing in closely located but distinct biofilm niches.

### Keywords
Fungi, Lc-ms/ms, Nitrogen and carbon cycling, Microbial community

### Affiliations
Oak Ridge National Lab

### Submitter
Zhou Li

### Lab Head
Dr Chongle Pan
Oak Ridge National Lab


