### Accession
PXD005028

### Title
SpaP and SpaR interaction partner identification

### Description
Bacterial type III protein secretion systems inject effector proteins into eukaryotic host cells in order to promote survival and colonization of Gram-negative pathogens and symbionts. Secretion across the bacterial cell envelope and injection into host cells is facilitated by a so-called needle complex. Its small hydrophobic export apparatus components SpaP and SpaR were shown to nucleate assembly of the needle complex and to form the central “cup” substructure of a Salmonella Typhimurium secretion system, however, the in vivo placement of these components in the needle complex and their function during the secretion process remained poorly defined. Here we show that a SpaP pentamer forms a 15 Å wide pore and present a detailed map of SpaP interactions with the export apparatus components SpaQ, SpaR, and SpaS. We further demonstrate the formation of a continuous conduit for substrate translocation and injection by intimate interactions of the periplasmic domains of SpaP and SpaR with the inner rod protein PrgJ, refine the current view of export apparatus assembly and consolidate transmembrane topology models for SpaP and SpaR.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of crosslinked proteins, the area of a Coomassie-stained gel corresponding the position of the crosslinked band detected by Western blotting were excised and in-gel digested with trypsin. Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite (v1.2.2.9, v1.5.2.8, v1.5.3.30). Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine, which is part of MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target decoy S. Typhimurium database. In database search, full tryptic specificity was required and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial type III protein secretion systems inject effector proteins into eukaryotic host cells in order to promote survival and colonization of Gram-negative pathogens and symbionts. Secretion across the bacterial cell envelope and injection into host cells is facilitated by a so-called injectisome. Its small hydrophobic export apparatus components SpaP and SpaR were shown to nucleate assembly of the needle complex and to form the central "cup" substructure of a Salmonella Typhimurium secretion system. However, the in vivo placement of these components in the needle complex and their function during the secretion process remained poorly defined. Here we present evidence that a SpaP pentamer forms a 15 &#xc5; wide pore and provide a detailed map of SpaP interactions with the export apparatus components SpaQ, SpaR, and SpaS. We further refine the current view of export apparatus assembly, consolidate transmembrane topology models for SpaP and SpaR, and present intimate interactions of the periplasmic domains of SpaP and SpaR with the inner rod protein PrgJ, indicating how export apparatus and needle filament are connected to create a continuous conduit for substrate translocation.

### Keywords
Photocrosslinking, Spar, T3ss, Spap

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Eberhard Karls University Tübingen Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine (IMIT)

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel Wagner
Eberhard Karls University Tübingen Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine (IMIT)


