### Accession
PXD040309

### Title
Proteomic profiling of centrosomes across multiple cell and tissue types by a new affinity capture method

### Description
Centrosomes are small cytoplasmic organelles that play fundamental roles in a range of cellular processes. Nearly all vertebrate cell types contain centrosomes, but whether centrosome composition and function differ between cell types, tissues and pathologies remains an outstanding question. Until now, probing centrosome composition has relied on proteomic profiling of centrosomes obtained by consecutive sucrose density gradient centrifugations, requiring up to one billion cells, thus rendering studies with multiple conditions cumbersome. Here we describe centrosome affinity capture (CAPture)-mass spectrometry (MS), a method that achieves high-coverage proteomes from 20-30 million cells. Utilising a biotin-labelled peptide derived from the CCDC61 protein, CAPture isolates intact centrosomes in a manner dependent on Ninein, a conserved centrosome component. CAPture-MS performs well across several untransformed and primary cell lines, thereby enabling comparisons of high-resolution centrosome proteomes. Using distal appendage proteins as an example, we demonstrate the utility of CAPture-MS for dissecting hierarchical interactions within the centrosome.  Overall CAPture-MS represents a powerful tool to unveil temporal, regulatory, cell type- and tissue-specific changes in centrosome proteomes in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Streptadividin beads with CAPture peptide and centrosomes or without (bead-only) were treated as in “On bead” tryptic digestion of proteins. Following elution with 60% acetonitrile/0.1% FA, peptides were labelled with the TMT-10plex plus reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturers' instructions for 1 hour. All the samples were mixed and dried with speed vac concentrator. The TMT-mix samples were fractionated with Reversed-Phase cartridges at high pH (Pierce #84868). Nine fractions were collected using different elution solutions in the range of 5–50 % ACN as per manufacturers protocol. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA, for further LC–MS/MS analysis. Peptide fractions were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the nano-ESI source Fusion Lumos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a 100 μm ID X 2 cm microcapillary C18 column (5 µm, 100 A) followed by 2-hour elution using 75 μm ID X 25 cm C18 RP column (3 µm, 100 A) with 5–45 % acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % FA at 300 nl/min flow rate. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (380–1,500 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (120K resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 3x105 and Maximum Injection Time (MIT) of 100 ms). The subsequent MS2 was conducted with a top speed approach using a 3 second duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35 %, an AGC setting of 1x104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a MIT of 35 ms. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds. During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and isolated using a 2.0 Da m/z window. MS2–MS3 was conducted using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology with the top10 settings. HCD was used for MS3, performed using 55 % collision energy and reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap (50K resolution, an AGC setting of 5x104 and MIT of 86 ms).

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 2.1 or 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific) was used for the processing of CID tandem mass spectra. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens FASTA database (taxon ID 9606) using SequestHT. All searches were performed using a static modification TMT6plex (+229.163 Da) at any N-terminus and on lysines and Methylthio at Cysteines (+45.988 Da). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and Deamidation on Asparagine and Glutamine (+0.984 Da) were included as dynamic modifications. Mass spectra were searched using precursor ion tolerance 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da. Decoy database search was employed to generate high peptide confidence (1% FDR) and for quantification, information calculated from reporter ion intensities of peptides uniquely matched to a protein were used. Data processing, normalization, and statistical analysis of all datasets were carried out using the workflow based on qPLEXanalyzer package from Bioconductor. The data for Jurkat and U251 cell line were first analyzed separately. In both the datasets, peptide intensities were normalized using within group median scaling treating bead-only and peptide pulldown as separate groups. Protein level quantification was then obtained by the summation of the normalized peptide intensities. Thereafter, a statistical analysis of differentially regulated proteins was carried out using the Limma method providing us with the list of proteins significantly enriched in each cell line compared to bead-only. The analysis was then performed on the combined dataset of Jurkat and U251 cell line using these selected proteins only. In addition, for each cell line only those peptides are selected that are found in at least half of the samples. The missing values were then imputed using knn algorithm. The datasets were then combined to select only those proteins identified in both cell lines.   Finally, a statistical analysis of differentially regulated proteins between two cell lines was carried out using the Limma method. Multiple testing correction of P-values was applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to control the FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Centrosomes are the major microtubule-organizing centers in animals and play fundamental roles in many cellular processes. Understanding how their composition varies across diverse cell types and how it is altered in disease are major unresolved questions, yet currently available centrosome isolation protocols are cumbersome and time-consuming, and they lack scalability. Here, we report the development of centrosome affinity capture (CAPture)-mass spectrometry (MS), a powerful one-step purification method to obtain high-resolution centrosome proteomes from mammalian cells. Utilizing a synthetic peptide derived from CCDC61 protein, CAPture specifically isolates intact centrosomes. Importantly, as a bead-based affinity method, it enables rapid sample processing and multiplexing unlike conventional approaches. Our study demonstrates the power of CAPture-MS to elucidate cell-type-dependent heterogeneity in centrosome composition, dissect hierarchical interactions, and identify previously unknown centrosome components. Overall, CAPture-MS represents a transformative tool to unveil temporal, regulatory, cell-type- and tissue-specific changes in centrosome proteomes in health and disease.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Centrosomes, Capture ms

### Affiliations
1. CRUK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 2. Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Fanni Gergely
1. CRUK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom 2. Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK


