### Accession
PXD035694

### Title
Identification of regenerating island-derived protein 3E in dogs

### Description
Our aim was to identify Regenerating islet-derived (REG proteins in dogs. We annotated REG-family members in the canine genome and proteome, and identified one member of the REG3 subfamily, consequently termed REG3E by the Vertebrate Gene Nomenclature Committee. We verified REG3E gene expression using publicly available RNA-seq data (www.barkbase.org). We investigated the presence of REG3E protein in canine pancreatic tissue and plasma with Western blot and immunohistochemistry, using anti-human REG3A antibodies. Protein identity was subsequently confirmed with mass spectrometry on canine pancreas homogenates and plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenates were prepared using snap-frozen pancreas tissue stored at -80°C. 25mg of tissue were homogenized in 500 μl homogenization buffer (50mM Tris/HCl pH 8, 10mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA) with addition of a proteinase inhibitor cocktail (cOmpleteTM Mini EDTA-free; Roche). Samples were sonicated, centrifuged, and the pellets discarded. Plasma sample was stored for 1.5 years at -80°C prior to use. Volume corresponding to 40ug protein for homogenates and 500ug protein for plasma were separated electrophoretically on an acrylamide gel and blotted onto a PVDF membrane. Membranes were stained with Coomassie, and the areas corresponding approximately to the calculated molecular weight of the canine REG3E protein (17 kDa)was cut out and stored in an Eppendorf tube without additives.    Plasma samples: the membrane pieces were blocked with 0.5% PVP-40, reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin 6 hours at 37°C. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography on a Dionex, Ultimate 3000, (Thermo Fischer) coupled to a LUMOS mass spectrometer, (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) with two injections of 5µL. The samples were loaded in random order onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 10µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto a homemade pack C18 CSH Waters column (1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm × 20 cm) by applying a 90-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.  Pancreas homogenates sample: the membrane pieces were prepared as described before. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with one injection of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, C18) by applying a 60-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 1.6 m/z, collision energy 27, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Following Ref [1], the mass spectrometry data was searched using the search engines Comet[2], Xtandem[3], MSGF+[4], Myrimatch[5], as well as MSFragger[6] for the pancreas homogeneates sample, and further processed by the Transproteomics Pipeline[7] tools PeptideProphet[8], iProphet[9] and ProteinProphet[10]. Allowed modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini. Cleavage rule was strict trypsin and a maximum of three missed cleavages. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm or 0.4 Da for plasma, respectively pancreas homogenates samples. The database used was the 2021_01 swissprot [11] release of Canis lupus (incl. isoforms), to which reversed-sequence decoys were added. Identifications had to be confirmed by at least two (plasma samples) or three (pancreas homogenates sample) search engines to be accepted; the false discovery rate was set at 0.01. As in Ref[1], a Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor [12] was calculated for each protein group, using the approach of Zhang et al [13] for the distribution of shared peptides.  [1]:Muller J, Heller M, Uldry AC, Braga S, Muller N. Nitroreductase Activites in Giardia lamblia: ORF 17150 Encodes a Quinone Reductase with Nitroreductase Activity. Pathogens. 2021;10(2). doi: 10.3390/pathogens10020129.  [2] J. K. Eng, M. R. Hoopmann, T. A. Jahan, J. D. Egertson, W. S. Noble and M. J. MacCoss, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 26 (2015), p1865-1874, A Deeper Look into Comet—Implementation and Features, doi.org/10.1007/s13361-015-1179-x  [3] R. Craig and R. C. Beavis, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 17 (2003), p2310-2316, A method for reducing the time required to match protein sequences with tandem mass spectra, doi: 10.1002/rcm.1198   [4] S. Kim and P. A. Pevzner, Nature Communications 31 (2014), 5:5277, MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics, doi: 10.1038/ncomms6277   [5] D. L. Tabb, C. G. Fernando and M. C. Chambers, Journal of Proteome Research 6 (2007), p654-661, MyriMatch:  Highly Accurate Tandem Mass Spectral Peptide Identification by Multivariate Hypergeometric Analysis, doi.org/10.1021/pr0604054  [6] Kong A. T., Leprevost F. V., Avtonomov D. M., Mellacheruvu D. and Nesvizhskii A. I, Nat Methods 14(5) (2017), 513-520, MSFragger: ultrafast and comprehensive peptide identification in mass spectrometry–based proteomics, doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4256  [7] E. W. Deutsch, L. Mendoza,D. Shteynberg, T. Farrah, H. Lam, N. Tasman, Z. Sun, E. Nilsson, B. Pratt, B. Prazen, J. K. Eng, D. B. Martin, A. Nesvizhskii and R. Aebersold, Proteomics 10 (2010), p1150–1159,  A guided tour of the Trans‐Proteomic Pipeline, doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200900375  [8] H. Choi, D. Ghosh and A. I. Nesvizhskii, Journal of Proteome Research 7 (2008), p286-292, Statistical Validation of Peptide Identifications in Large-Scale Proteomics Using the Target-Decoy Database Search Strategy and Flexible Mixture Modeling, doi:10.1021/pr7006818  [9] D. Shteynberg, E. W. Deutsch, H. Lam, J. K. Eng, Z. Sun, N. Tasman, L. Mendoza, R. L. Moritz and R. Aebersold, and Alexey I. Nesvizhskii, Mol Cell Proteomics 10 (2011), M111.007690, iProphet: multi-level integrative analysis of shotgun proteomic data improves peptide and protein identification rates and error estimates, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.007690  [10]A. I. Nesvizhskii and R. Aebersold, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 4.10 (2005), p. 1419-1440, Interpretation of shotgun proteomic data: the protein inference problem, doi: 10.1074/mcp.R500012-MCP200     [11] The uniprot consortium, Nucleic Acids Res. 47: D506-515 (2019), UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge, doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1049  [12] B. L. Zybailov, L. Florens and M. P. Washburn, Mol. BioSyst. 3 (2007), p354–360, Quantitative shotgun proteomics using a protease with broad specificity and normalized spectral abundance factors, doi: 10.1039/b701483j  [13] Y. Zhang, Z. Wen, M. Washburn and L. Florens, Anal. Chem. 82 (2010), p2272–2281, Refinements to label free proteome quantitation: how to deal with peptides shared by multiple proteins, doi: 10.1021/ac9023999

### Publication Abstract
Regenerating islet-derived protein (REG) 1A (aka pancreatic stone protein) and REG3A (aka pancreatitis-associated protein) are upregulated in humans with sepsis, pancreatitis, and gastrointestinal diseases, but little is known about this protein family in dogs. Our aim was to identify REG1 and REG3 family members in dogs. REG-family genes were computationally annotated in the canine genome and proteome, with verification of gene expression using publicly available RNA-seq data. The presence of the protein in canine pancreatic tissue and plasma was investigated with Western blot and immunohistochemistry, using anti-human REG1A and REG3A antibodies. Protein identity was confirmed with mass spectrometry. Two members of the <i>REG3</i> subfamily were found in the canine genome, <i>REG3E1</i> and <i>REG3E2</i>, both encoding for the same 176 AA protein, subsequently named REG3E. Anti-human REG3A antibodies demonstrated cross-reactivity with the canine REG3E protein in pancreas homogenates. In canine plasma, a protein band of approximately 17 kDa was apparent. Mass spectrometry confirmed this protein to be the product of the two annotated <i>REG3E</i> genes. Strong immunoreactivity to anti-human REG3A antibodies was found in sections of canine pancreas affected with acute pancreatitis, but it was weak in healthy pancreatic tissue. Recombinant canine REG3E protein underwent a selective trypsin digestion as described in other species. No evidence for the presence of a homolog of REG1A in dogs was found in any of the investigations. In conclusion, dogs express REG3E in the pancreas, whose role as biomarker merits further investigations. Homologs to human REG1A are not likely to exist in dogs.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Canis lupus familiaris, Pancreatitis, Sepsis, Gastrointestinal, Pancreas, Canine

### Affiliations
Clinical Diagnostic Laboratory Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine Vetsuisse Faculty University of Bern Bern Switzerland
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Laureen Peters
Clinical Diagnostic Laboratory Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine Vetsuisse Faculty University of Bern Bern Switzerland


