### Accession
PXD024898

### Title
R1441G but not G201S mutation enhances LRRK2 mediated Rab10 phosphorylation in human peripheral blood neutrophils

### Description
Gain-of kinase function variants in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) cause Parkinson’s disease (PD), albeit with incomplete and age-dependent penetrance, offering the prospect of disease-modifying treatment strategies via LRRK2 kinase inhibition. LRRK2 phosphorylates a subgroup of RabGTPases including Rab10 and pathogenic mutations enhance LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of Rab10 at Thr73. In this study we analyse LRRK2 dependent Rab10Thr73 phosphorylation in human peripheral blood neutrophils isolated from 101 individuals using quantitative immunoblotting and mass spectrometry. Our cohort includes 42 LRRK2 mutation carriers (21 with the G2019S mutation that resides in the kinase domain and 21 with the R1441G mutation that lies within the ROC-COR domain), 27 patients with idiopathic PD, and 32 controls. We show that LRRK2 dependent Rab10 Thr73 phosphorylation is significantly elevated in all R1441G LRRKR2 mutation carriers irrespective of disease status. PD manifesting and non-manifesting G2019S mutation carriers as well as idiopathic PD samples did not display elevated Rab10 Thr73 phosphorylation. Furthermore, we analysed brain samples of 10 G2019S and 1 R1441H mutation carriers as well as 10 individuals with idiopathic PD and 10 controls. We find high variability for pRab10Thr73 phosphorylation amongst donors irrespective of genetic and disease state. We conclude that in vivo LRRK2 dependent pRab10Thr73 analysis in human peripheral blood neutrophils is a specific and robust biomarker for LRRK2 kinase activation for individuals with mutations such as R1441G that enhance pRab10Thr73 phosphorylation over 2-fold. We provide the first evidence that the LRRK2 R1441G mutation enhances LRRK2 kinase activity in a primary human cell.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophil lysates were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 55 °C for 20 min. Samples were brought to room temperature and treated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark. 40 μg of total soluble protein extract of neutrophils were separated by SDS-PAGE and the gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie blue (Novex). Protein bands spanning 20 to 30 kDa region were excised, destained and redhydrated for In-gel digestion by adding 150 μl of 20 mM TEABC pH7.5 containing 500 ng sequencing grade modified trypsin and 0.1% sodium deoxycholate. Tryptic peptides were extracted by adding SDB-RP loading buffer (99% Isopropanol in 1% TFA) and directly loaded on to homemade SDB-RP Stage-tips for purification. Eluted peptides were vacuum dried and stored in -20 freezer.

### Data Protocol
Sample loading on Evo-tips was performed by reconstituting in 80 ul of 0.1% Formic acid in 3% acetonitrile (vol/vol) buffer and allowed to dissolve at room temperature for 10 minutes. To calculate absolute phosphorylated Rab10Thr73 occupancy, an equimolar mixture of 25 fmol of heavy stable isotope labelled (SIL) phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated Rab10 counterpart peptides and 25 fmol of PRTC retention time calibration mix were spiked in. Evotips were prepared by following manufacturer instructions. . All of the targeted LC-MS/MS (PRM) data was acquired on QE HF-X Mass spectrometer interfaced in line with an EvoSep liquid chromatography system and analysed using 21 min (60 samples per day) script. Mass spectrometer was operated in a targeted PRM mode by employing one Full MS scan followed by a PRM scan which is instructed to operate by following the imported inclusion list with a scheduled retention time. Dynamic on-the-fly retention time correction was enabled to correct the scheduled retention time. Full MS Scan was acquired within 300-800 m/z and acquired at 120,000 resolution m/z 200 using Orbitrap mass analyzer. Each of the targeted analyte was isolated using Quadrupole mass filter with a 0.7Da isolation window and fragmented using normalized 27% higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and measured at 30,000 resolution at 200 m/z and measured using Orbitrap mass analyzer. The loop cycle was maintained to 10 scan per duty cycle. The AGC targets for Full MS and PRM were at 3E6 and 1E5 ions respectively and a maximum of 50ms for MS1 and 300ms for PRM scan. Raw data was imported into Skyline software suite. In-house generated Spectral library was used to pick the precursor and top six fragment ions. Both doubly(z=2) and triple (z=3) charge states were used. Extracted ion chromatrograms of both MS1 and MS2 fragment transitions were manually examined and adjusted for any interfering ions. The light/heavy internal standard ratio values were exported to calculate the pRab10 stoichiometry.

### Publication Abstract
Heterozygous gain-of-kinase function variants in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) cause 1-2% of all cases of Parkinson's disease (PD) albeit with incomplete and age-dependent penetrance. All pathogenic LRRK2 mutations reside within the two catalytic domains of LRRK2-either in its kinase domain (e.g. G2019S) with modest effect or its ROC-COR GTPase domain (e.g. R1441G/H) with large effect on LRRK2 kinase activity. We have previously reported assays to interrogate LRRK2 kinase pathway activity in human bio-samples measuring phosphorylation of its endogenous substrate Rab10, that mirrors LRRK2 kinase activation status. Here, we isolated neutrophils from fresh peripheral blood from 101 participants including 42 LRRK2 mutation carriers (21 with the G2019S and 21 with the R1441G mutations), 27 patients with idiopathic PD, and 32 controls. Using a dual approach, LRRK2 dependent Rab10 phosphorylation at Threonine 73 (pRab10<sup>Thr73</sup>) was measured by quantitative multiplexed immunoblotting for pRab10<sup>Thr73</sup>/total Rab10 as well as targeted mass-spectrometry for absolute&#xa0;pRab10<sup>Thr73</sup> occupancy. We found a significant over fourfold increase in pRab10<sup>Thr73</sup> phosphorylation&#xa0;in carriers of the LRRK2 R1441G mutation irrespective of clinical disease status. The effect of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation did not reach statistical significance. Furthermore, we show that LRRK2 phosphorylation at Serine 935 is not a marker for LRRK2 kinase activity in human neutrophils. When analysing pRab10<sup>Thr73</sup> phosphorylation in post-mortem brain samples, we observed overall high variability irrespective of clinical and LRRK2 mutation status and attributed this mainly to the adverse effect of the peri- and post-mortem period on the stability of posttranslational modifications such as protein phosphorylation. Overall, in vivo LRRK2 dependent pRab10<sup>Thr73</sup> phosphorylation in human peripheral blood neutrophils is a specific, robust and promising biomarker for significant LRRK2 kinase hyperactivation, as with the LRRK2 R1441G mutation. Additional readouts and/or assays may be needed to increase sensitivity to detect modest LRRK2 kinase activation, as with the LRRK2 G2019S mutation. Our assays could be useful for patient stratification and target engagement studies for LRRK2 kinase inhibitors.

### Keywords
Rab-gtpase, Parkinsosn's disease, Lrrk2, Prm

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK.
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Esther Sammler
Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK.


