### Accession
PXD018313

### Title
Vigilin/HDLBP promotes translation of endoplasmic reticulum-targeted mRNAs

### Description
Nascent peptide chain targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane is required for correct localization and efficient translation of membrane-bound and secreted proteins. However, little is known about the contribution of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) to the recognition, localization and translation of ER-localized mRNAs. In this work we used biochemical, transcriptomic and proteomic approaches to delineate the role of human HDLBP. PAR-CLIP analysis revealed that HDLBP directly and specifically interacted with more than 80% of all expressed ER-localized mRNAs. Interestingly, the binding to the coding sequence was most prominent for ER-localized mRNAs, while cytosolic mRNAs showed higher binding in the 3’UTR. HDLBP crosslinked strongly to long CU-rich motifs that resided more frequently in coding sequences of ER-localized but not in cytosolic mRNAs. This indicated that the primary sequence composition determines the basis for HDLBP binding specificity and its multivalent interactions with ER-bound mRNAs. PAR-CLIP analysis also revealed direct interactions of HDLBP with the RNA components of the translational apparatus, while in vivo proximity proteomics detected proteins involved in translation and components of the signal recognition particle (SRP). Functional studies using CRISPR-Cas9 HDLBP knockout cell lines in combination with ribosome profiling, pSILAC, and luciferase assays showed decreased translation efficiency of HDLBP target mRNAs, impaired protein synthesis and secretion in the knockout conditions. Finally, HDLBP absence resulted in decrease of lung tumor formation capacity in vivo. These results highlight a general function for HDLBP in the translation of ER -localized mRNAs via the secretory pathway and discover its relevance for cell profileration and tumor progression.

### Sample Protocol
Beads were resuspended in 200 ul of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 2 ul trypsin (Promega V511A). The samples were incubated for 16 hours in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) at 37 degrees and 750 rpm shaking. After this time, one ug of trypsin was again added and sample incubated further for 2 hours. Samples were then centrifuged at 400 g for 2 minutes and the supernatant transferred to a new vial. To ensure complete beads removal, the samples were centrifuged again at 16000 g for 10 minutes and the supernatants were transferred to a new vial containing 5 ul of trifluoroacetic acid. Each sample was loaded on two StageTips for desalting. Eluates for each sample were pooled together prior to MS analysis. For all the samples of the time course experiment, 5 microliters were injected in duplicate on a LC-MS/MS system (Ekspert NanoLC 415 [Eksigent] coupled to Q Exactive HF [Thermo]), using a 240 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 45% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A= 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). For the chromatographic separation 30 cm long capillary (75 um inner diameter) was packed with 1.8 micron C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ, Dr. Maisch). On one end of the capillary nanospray tip was generated using a laser puller (P-2000 Laser Based Micropipette Puller, Sutter Instruments), allowing fretless packing. The nanospray source was operated with a spay voltage of 2.3 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 260 degrees. Data were acquired in data dependent mode, with a top10 method (one survey MS scan with resolution 60,000 at m/z 200, followed by up to 10 MS/MS scans on the most intense ions, resolution 15,000, intensity threshold 5,000). Once selected for fragmentation, ions were excluded from further selection for 30 seconds, in order to increase new sequencing events.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant proteomics pipeline ( v1.5.3.30) and the built in the Andromeda search engine with the Uniprot Human database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminus were chosen as variable modifications. The search engine peptide assignments were filtered at 1% FDR and the feature match between runs was not enabled; other parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
The biological role of RNA-binding proteins in the secretory pathway is not well established. Here, we describe that human HDLBP/Vigilin directly interacts with more than 80% of ER-localized mRNAs. PAR-CLIP analysis reveals that these transcripts represent high affinity HDLBP substrates and are specifically bound in their coding sequences (CDS), in contrast to CDS/3'UTR-bound cytosolic mRNAs. HDLBP crosslinks strongly to long CU-rich motifs, which frequently reside in CDS of ER-localized mRNAs and result in high affinity multivalent interactions. In addition to HDLBP-ncRNA interactome, quantification of HDLBP-proximal proteome confirms association with components of the translational apparatus and the signal recognition particle. Absence of HDLBP results in decreased translation efficiency of HDLBP target mRNAs, impaired protein synthesis and secretion in model cell lines, as well as decreased tumor growth in a lung cancer mouse model. These results highlight a general function for HDLBP in the translation of ER-localized mRNAs and its relevance for tumor progression.

### Keywords
Hdlbp; vigilin; rna-binding protein; kh-domain; endoplasmic reticulum; translation; homo sapiens; qexactive hf

### Affiliations
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max Delbrueck Centrum for Molecular Medicine
Integrative Proteomics and Metabolomics, Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Hannoversche Str. 28, 10115 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Guido Mastrobuoni

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kempa
Integrative Proteomics and Metabolomics, Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Hannoversche Str. 28, 10115 Berlin, Germany


