### Accession
PXD047464

### Title
Bioactive decellularized extracellular matrix-based hydrogel supports human adipose tissue-derived stem cell maintenance and fibrocartilage phenotype

### Description
Decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM)-based hydrogels combined with hASCs could serve as an interface for studying behavior and differentiation properties in a cartilage microenvironment. In the present study, we described the behavior of hASCs cultured in a commercial dECM MatriXpec™. The protein composition of MatriXpec™ was accessed by mass spectrometry and is mainly represented by collagen proteins, building an hydrogel fibrous ultrastructure.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the hydrogel were digested using high sequence grade modified trypsin at a concentration of 1:50 at 37˚C for approximately 20 h for mass spectrometry analysis. After sample digestion, all reaction products were acidified to stop proteolysis. The samples were centrifuged to remove insoluble materials. Peptides were desalted using a Pierce® C18 spin column (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, United States). The peptides were analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, United States). Each peptide mixture was suspended in 0.1% formic acid for data acquisition in Orbitrap. The peptide mixture was separated by chromatography using Ultimate 3000 HPLC equipment (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, United States). The spectrometer was set in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition with 20-sec dynamic exclusion. Survey scans (350-2000 m/z) were acquired on the Orbitrap system with a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. Mass spectrometer scan functions were controlled by the Xcalibur v4.1 data system (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, United States).

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra obtained was analyzed using the MaxQuant software (v. 2.0.3.0) set with default search parameters, and using the Sus scrofa protein database. The peptides identified only by site, reverse and potential contaminants were removed. We considered as protein identified in a sample when having at least 1 unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cartilage, Stem cells, Decellularization, Extracellular matrix, Hydrogel

### Affiliations
Fiocruz
Stem Cell Basic Biology Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Paraná, Brazil

### Submitter
Marco Augusto Stimamiglio

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Augusto Stimamiglio
Stem Cell Basic Biology Laboratory, Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Paraná, Brazil


