### Accession
PXD004467

### Title
Proteome analysis of the hemolymph, mushroom body, and antenna of honeybee resistance against Varroa infestation

### Description
As a matter of fact, honeybees are vital for the pollination of more than 80 crops of agricultural interest. However, population decline has become an important global issue causing significant concerns among agricultural experts and the broader public. For this, parasites are known to be the major culprits responsible for the losses of millions of honeybee colonies so far. Among these parasites, Varroa destructor has been identified as a major cause for global losses in Western honeybee (Apis mellifera) colonies. Hygienic behavior (HB), on the other hand, is a collective response by adult honeybees to defend against parasites and diseases that is known to involve in resistance towards Varroosis. Even with the efforts made to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying HB, it is still not understood.  In our study, we have studied the proteomic correlates to HB using a honeybee line (selected for Varroa-specific HB for over a decade in Germany). We sampled individual worker bees from this line that showed HB after closer infrared video observations and compared the proteomes of their mushroom bodies and antennae with those of workers that came from the same set of colonies but didn't show the behaviour. Furthermore, we compared the pupal hemolymph for worker bees of the selected HB line and a control line using state-of-the art techniques of proteomics. We identified a total of 8609 proteins (covered >55% of the honeybee proteome) from these three honeybee tissues. This is the most comprehensive proteomic study of the honeybee HB to date, and the first to focus on individual bees expressing Varroa-specific HB. These results have significantly advanced our knowledge on the biology underlining HB to a new level. The uniquely found functional classes and pathways by the proteins identified in each tissue suggest that hygienic bees have shaped distinct proteome settings to underpin the HB. Moreover, during analysis of pupal hemolymph proteome, the HB-line has adapted a unique strategy to boost an individual and social immunity and drove pupal organogenesis via energy metabolism and protein biosynthesis. Moreover, in the mushroom bodies of different HB phenotypic worker bees, the hygienic bees have enhanced their neuronal sensitivity to promote the execution of HB by activation of synaptic vesicles and calcium channel activities. Moreover, in the antennae of two HB phenotypic worker bees, the hygienic bees have demonstrated strengthening of their sensitivity associated with olfactory senses and signal transmissions, which is important to input a strong signal to the mushroom bodies and initiate HB. In conclusion, our novel findings have significantly extended our understandings of the molecular mechanisms that underline the HB to combat Varroa infestation. Furthermore, we identified a wide array of novel markers that are useful for accelerating marker associated selection of HB to aid in the natural resistance to a parasite blamed for a global decline in honeybee health.

### Sample Protocol
Honey bee colonies (Apis mellifera carnica) used in the sampling of adult workers which either did or did not show VSH were taken from a breeding line selected for the uncapping of Varroa-infested brood since 1997 by the Institute for Bee Research, Hohen Neuendorf e.V, in Berlin, Germany. The main selection criterion for this line was the initiation of artificially Varroa-infested brood, as measured by near-infrared video observations of individually number-tagged worker bees. This system was installed in the hives, and can observe and record the behaviors of bees on computer. VSH and non-VSH bees observed during 6-8 days post-emergence were identified by the number on their thorax during colony check, and then collected as samples. The bioassay used for the measurement of the hygienic trait is described in detail by Spötteret al. Several repetitions of the video experiment, involving at least 1,500 bees each time, were run every year, and the frequency of hygienic VSH individuals among the worker offspring was used as a selection criterion of mother queens. In addition, the breeding values for two auxiliary criteria, the removal of pin-killed brood, and the development of the Varroa-infestation rate within colonies were estimated by a software, described by Bienefeld et al. Individual bees (6-8 days post-emergence) in the colonies observed initiating the opening of varroa-infested cells in the video experiment were regarded as VSH bees, whereas bees moving around brood cells (Varroa-infested or not) and not observed to either participate in or initiate the opening of cells were regarded as non-VSH bees. TotallyGenerally, 20 of each VSH and non-VSH bees were sampled from five hygienic selected colonies, and then the MBs and antennae were dissected. To investigate the physiological stage of hygienic bees upon selection, we also sampled the hemolymph of pupae from the VSH-line and their control line. The control line is the normal A. m. carnica-breeding line of the institute, bred for gentleness, honey production, low swarming drive and calmness, but not Varroa resistance for many years. 50 pupae from 10 selected colonies (5 pupae per colony) and 50 pupae from 10 control colonies were sampled and the hemolymph was processed by inserting a disposable microcapillary glass pipet into one side (2/3 down from head) of the pupal body. Then, the hemolymph was drawn in by capillary action as previously described.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data in RAW were retrieved using Xcalibur (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched using the PEAKS search engine (version 7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) against the protein database of Apis mellifera (downloaded February, 2015) and incorporated with common contaminants, totaling 21,778 entries. The search was done with the following parameters: precursor ion and MS/MS tolerances: 15 ppm and 0.05 Da; enzyme specificity: trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C, +57.02); and variable modification: oxidation (M, +15.99). The fusion strategy of target and decoy sequence, an enhanced target-decoy approach that makes more conservative false discovery rate (FDR) estimations 41, was used to control at FDR ≤ 1% at both the peptide and protein level for protein identification. Only a protein identified by at least one unique peptide with the identification of at least two spectra was considered to be identified. To quantify the level change of protein abundance between the VSH and non-VSH samples, triplicates of each sample were analyzed by the quantitation module of the PEAKS software via a label-free strategy. Feature detection was performed separately on each sample by using the expectation-maximization algorithm. The features of the same peptide from different samples were reliably aligned using a high-performance retention time alignment algorithm 41. Peptide features and proteins were considered to have changed significantly between different samples when they contained both a P value of < 0.05 and a fold change of ≥ 1.5. The expressional profile of differentially expressed proteins between different samples was created by the PEAKS software using an uncentered Pearson correlation and average linkage.

### Publication Abstract
Varroa destructor has been identified as a major culprit responsible for the losses of millions of honeybee colonies. Varroa sensitive hygiene (VSH) is a suite of behaviors from adult bees to suppress mite reproduction by uncapping and/or removing mite infested pupae from a sealed brood. Despite the efforts to elucidate the molecular underpinnings of VSH, they remain largely unknown. We investigated the proteome of mushroom bodies (MBs) and antennae of adult bees with and without VSH from a stock selected for VSH based on their response to artificially Varroa-infected brood cells by near-infrared camera observation. The pupal hemolymph proteome was also compared between the VSH-line and the line that was not selected for VSH. The identified 8609 proteins in the hemolymph, MBs, and antennae represent the most depth coverage of the honeybee proteome (&gt;55%) to date. In the hemolymph, the VSH-line adapts a unique strategy to boost the social immunity and drive pupal organogenesis by enhancing energy metabolism and protein biosynthesis. In MBs, the up-regulated proteins implicated in neuronal sensitivity suggest their roles to promote the execution of VSH by activation of synaptic vesicles and calcium channel activities. In antennae, the highly expressed proteins associated with sensitivity of olfactory senses and signal transmissions signify their roles by inputting a strong signal to the MBs for initiating VSH. These observations illustrate that the enhanced social immunities and olfactory and neuronal sensitivity play key roles in the combat against Varroa infestation. The identified candidate markers may be useful for accelerating marker-associated selection for VSH to aid in resistance to a parasite responsible for decline in honeybee health.

### Keywords
Apis mellifera, Varroa sensitive hygiene, Mushroom body, Hemolymph, Varroa destructor, Antennae

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Apicultural Research
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Apiscultural Research

### Submitter
Han Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Jianke Li
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Institute of Apiscultural Research


