### Accession
PXD005915

### Title
The costa of trichomonads: A complex macromolecular cytoskeleton structure made of uncommon proteins

### Description
Background Information  The costa is a prominent striated fiber that is found in protozoa of the Trichomonadidae family that present an undulating membrane. It is composed primarily of proteins that have not yet been explored. In this study, we used cell fractionation to obtain a highly enriched costa fraction whose structure and composition was further analyzed by electron microscopy and mass spectrometry. Results  Electron microscopy of negatively stained samples revealed that the costa, which is a periodic structure with alternating electron-dense and electron-lucent bands, displays three distinct regions, named the head, neck and body. Fourier transform analysis showed that the electron-lucent bands present sub-bands with a regular pattern. An analysis of the costa fraction via one- and two-dimensional electrophoresis and liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) allowed the identification of 54 hypothetical proteins. Fourteen of those proteins were considered to be major components of the fraction.  Conclusions The costa of T. foetus is a complex and organized cytoskeleton structure made of a large number of proteins which is assembled into filamentous structures. Some of these proteins exhibit uncharacterized domains and no function related according to gene ontology, suggesting that the costa structure may be formed by a new class of proteins that differ from those previously described in other organisms. Seven of these proteins contain prefoldin domains displaying coiled-coil regions. This propriety is shared with proteins of the striated fibers of other protozoan as well as in intermediate filaments. Significance Our observations suggest the presence of a new class of the cytoskeleton filaments in T. foetus. We believe that our data could auxiliate in determine the specific locations of these proteins in the distinct regions that compose the costa, as well as to define the functional roles of each component. Therefore, our study will help in the better understanding of the organization and function of this structure in unicellular organisms.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion: Each 1D gel or 2D gel were excised and washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile overnight at room temperature. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperaturein the dark. The gel slices were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile for 10 min and dried completely in a lyophilization system, followed by digestion step, conducted by the addition of 10µl of trypsin at a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, overnight at 37°C. The generated peptides were extracted from the gel pieces, after two incubations of 15 minutes at the sonicator in the presence of 50 μL of 50% acetonitrilein 0.1% formic acid. The solutions containing the peptides were concentrated to near dryness in a Speed-Vac system. Each sample, obtained from unidimensional gel was then solubilized in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid to further analysis on Synapt G1 HDMS System and the samples obtained from bidimensional gel were solubilized in 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to further analysis on MALDI-TOF-TOF. Synapt G1 HDMS System (Nano LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry): MS analysis was carried out on a nano ultra-performance liquid chromatography system (nanoACQUITY) coupled to a mass spectrometer Quadrupole-Time of Flight SYNAPT G1 (Waters). The extracted peptides, from the 1D gel slices and from the complex mixture of the whole costa subproteome, were initially injected and desalted on line using a Trap Symmetry C18 column (5 μm particle size, Waters). The mixture of trapped peptides was then separated by high performance liquid chromatography in a HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å 1.8 μm, Waters) at a flow rate of 0.6µL/min with 45-100 min of run total time. Mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in deionized water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile. The separation gradient was 7-40% (B) during 86 min, 40-85% (B) for 4 min, 85% (B) for 4 min and 85-7% (B) during 2 min. Electrospray tandem mass spectra were performed in the positive detection ion mode, and instrument control and data acquisition were conducted by MassLynx data system. Typical LC and ESI conditions were a 1.8 µl per min flow, 3 kV nanoflow capillary voltages and 30 V cone voltages. Instrument control and data acquisition were performed by scanning from 200 to 2,000 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) using a scan time of 1 s applied during the whole chromatographic process. Mass spectra corresponding to each signal from the total ion current (TIC) chromatogram were averaged, allowing an accurate molecular mass determination. The exact mass was determined automatically using the Q-Tof LockSpray™ (Waters,Milford, MA). Data-dependent MS/MS acquisitions were performed on precursors with charge states of 2, 3 or 4, with a range of 50–2000 m/z and a 2 m/z window. A maximum of 3 ions were selected for MS/MS from a single MS survey. Adduct masses of Na+ and K+ were automatically excluded. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS spectra were obtained using argon as the collision gas at a pressure of 13 psi, and the collision voltage varied between 18 and 45 V depending on the mass of the precursor. The scan rate was 1 scan/s. All data were processed using the ProteinLynx Global server. The processing procedure consisted of an automatic lock mass correction of the m/z scales of both the MS and MS/MS data utilizing the lock spray reference ion. The MS/MS data were also charge-state deconvoluted and all the ions were converted to a monoisotopic state using a maximum entropy algorithm (MaxEnt 3, Waters). The in gel experiments were performed in two biological replicates, each one technically analyzed by MS at least twice. MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry: Approximately 0.3 μL of the solution containing the extracted peptides from 2D gel was mixed with an equal volume of a saturated matrix solution (10 mg/mL of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Aldrich, Milwaukee, WI) in 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) on the Opti-TOF 384-well plate and allowed to dry at room temperature. Raw data for protein identification were obtained using an ABSciex TOF/TOF 5800 mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Foster City, CA, USA) operated in the positive reflector mode. Both MS and MS/MS data were acquired using an Optibeam laser with a 1-kHz repetition rate. Up to 15 of the most intense ion signals with signal to noise ratio above 30 were selected as precursors for MS/MS acquisition. External calibration in MS mode was performed using a mixture of four peptides: des-Arg1-Bradykinin (m/z=904.468), angiotensin I (m/z=1296.685), Glu1-fibrinopeptide B (m/z =1570.677), ACTH (18–39) (m/z =2465.199) and ACTH (7–38 clip) (m/z 3,657.9294). The MS/MS spectra was calibrated externally using known fragment ion masses observed in the MS/MS spectrum of Glu1-fibrinopeptide B.

### Data Protocol
8. Data analysis The T. foetus genome was sequenced by our group and the data obtained can be assessed by NCBI accession number MLAK01000000.1.The proteins were identified by correlating the tandem mass spectra with the SABIA protein database (LNCC, Petropolis, Brazil) using the ProteinLynx Global Server v2.5 software (Water) or the MASCOT software (Matrix Science, version 2.1).  MASCOT search were performed for 2D gel samples with the following settings: one missed cleavage per peptide was allowed, peptide and MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da. Identifications of 1D gel digestion were assessed by Protein Lynx software following a set of parameters: a window tolerance of 20 and 40 ppm to product ions and peptide respectively in all searches. Cysteines were assumed to be carbamidomethylated, and variable modification of methionine (oxidation) and phosphorylation of serine (S), threonine (T), and tyrosine (Y) residues were allowed to both software. Identification was considered to be positive after MASCOT search when the score of the protein was above 35 and the protein possesses at least an unique peptide. In the Protein Lynx software, the identification was considered positive, if at least two fragments per peptides matched; one proteotypic peptide per protein; five fragments per protein; and a maximum value of 4 from false positive rate. In addition, we also verified if the MS/MS spectrum were of good quality, with fragmentations clearly above baseline noise and with continuity to the b or y ion series; and if the y ions that correspond to a proline residue and b2 ions should be intensive ions. Peptides were also analyzed for redundancy by performing a BLAST and conserved domain (CDD) searches in the SABIA platform. All the proteins identified were considered to generate a final table. The mass spectrometry and identification data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE (Vizcaino et al., 2013) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD005915.  9. Bioinformatic analysis To obtain the theoretical molecular masses of the proteins present in the costa fraction, the FASTA sequences of these molecules (input on SABIA platform) were submitted to the Expasy program using a tool to predict their molecular weights (http://web.expasy.org/compute_pi/). In another analysis, we used the Gene Ontology consortium (geneontology.org) to infer: molecular functions, cellular component and biological process of these proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Coiled-coils, Cytoskeleton, Mass spectrometry, Tritrichomonas foetus

### Affiliations
Universidade Estadual da Zona Oeste (UEZO), Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and UNIGRANRIO-Universidade do Grande Rio, Caxias, Rio de Janeiro-Brazil

### Submitter
Eidy Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Marlene Benchimol
Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and UNIGRANRIO-Universidade do Grande Rio, Caxias, Rio de Janeiro-Brazil


