### Accession
PXD022196

### Title
Chaperone-mediated autophagy sustains hematopoietic stem cell function

### Description
Activation of mostly quiescent hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) is a prerequisite for life-long blood production1, 2. This process requires major molecular adaptations to meet the regulatory and metabolic requirements for cell division3-8. The mechanisms governing cellular reprograming upon stem cell activation and their subsequent return to quiescence are still not fully characterized. Here, we describe a role for chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)9, a selective form of lysosomal protein degradation, in sustaining adult HSC function. CMA is required for stem cell protein quality control and upregulation of fatty acid metabolism upon HSC activation. We identify that CMA activity decreases with age in HSC and show that genetic or pharmacological activation of CMA can restore functionality of old HSC. Together, our findings provide mechanistic insights into a new role for CMA in sustaining quality control, appropriate energetics and overall long-term hematopoietic stem cell function. Our work supports that CMA may be a promising therapeutic target to enhance hematopoietic stem cell function in conditions such as aging or stem cell transplantation.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly sorted LSK cells (500,000) were pelleted and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen for shipment to the Biological Mass Spectrometry Core Facility at University of Colorado Denver. For analysis, cells were lysed with RIPA buffer (ThermoFisher) and subjected to GeLC-MS74. Excised gel pieces were destained in ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, trypsin digested upon reduction and alkylation of unmodified cysteine residues, and analyzed by nano-UHPLC-MS/MS (Easy-nLC1000, QExactive HF-positive ion mode (ThermoFisher)). The peptide mixture was desalted and concentrated in a Thermo Scientific Pierce C18 Tip. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher) through a nano-electrospray ion source according to manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw data files and converted into mgf files using a Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 2.1.0.62). The mgf files were then independently searched against the mouse database using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.6, Matrix Science). Mass tolerances were +/- 10 ppm for MS peaks, and +/- 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. Trypsin specificity was used allowing for 1 missed cleavage. Met oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and peptide N-terminal pyroglutamic acid formation were allowed as variable modifications while carbamidomethyl of Cys was set as a fixed modification. Scaffold (version 4.8, Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications

### Publication Abstract
The activation of mostly quiescent haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is a prerequisite for life-long production of blood cells<sup>1</sup>. This process requires major molecular adaptations to allow HSCs to meet the regulatory and metabolic requirements for cell division<sup>2-4</sup>. The mechanisms that govern cellular reprograming upon stem-cell activation, and the subsequent return of stem cells to quiescence, have not been fully characterized. Here we show that chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)<sup>5</sup>, a selective form of lysosomal protein degradation, is involved in sustaining HSC function in adult mice. CMA is required for protein quality control in stem cells and for the upregulation of fatty acid metabolism upon HSC activation. We find that CMA activity in HSCs decreases with age and show that genetic or pharmacological activation of CMA can restore the functionality of old mouse and human HSCs. Together, our findings provide mechanistic insights into a role for CMA in sustaining quality control, appropriate energetics and overall long-term HSC function. Our work suggests that CMA may be a promising therapeutic target for enhancing HSC function in conditions such as ageing or stem-cell transplantation.

### Keywords
Autophagy; chaperones; lipid metabolism; lysosomes; protein degradation; protein quality control; stem cells

### Affiliations
The Robert and Renee Belfer Chair for the Study of Neurodegenerative Diseases  Professor  Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology  Co-director Institute for Aging Research  Albert Einstein College of Medicine
UC Denver 

### Submitter
Monika Dzieciatkowska

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Maria Cuervo
The Robert and Renee Belfer Chair for the Study of Neurodegenerative Diseases  Professor  Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology  Co-director Institute for Aging Research  Albert Einstein College of Medicine


