### Accession
PXD015884

### Title
Molecular characterization of BRSK2 and BRSK1 kinases as negative regulators of the NRF2 transcription factor

### Description
NFE2L2/NRF2 is a transcription factor and master regulator of the cellular antioxidant response. Aberrantly high NRF2-dependent transcription is recurrent in human cancer, resulting in increased cellular fitness, chemo-radiation resistance, metabolic reprogramming and immune evasion. NRF2 protein levels and activity is governed primarily by the KEAP1/CUL3 ubiquitin ligase and subsequent proteasomal degradation. To what extent parallel signaling pathways and protein classes impact NRF2 activity remains to be fully explored. Also, because NRF2-directed therapies remain in the discovery and early development stages, continued identification and validation of NRF2 regulators is of potential clinical value. Here we used a gain-of-function genetic screen of the kinome to identify druggable activators and inhibitors of NRF2 signaling. We found that the understudied Brain Selective Kinase 1 and 2 (BRSK1/2) proteins suppress NRF2-dependent transcription and NRF2 protein levels in a kinase-dependent fashion. Integrative phospho-proteomic screens, RNAseq profiling and follow-up validation studies revealed BRSK1/2-driven activation of AMPK and suppression of MTOR signaling. BRSK2 over-expression suppressed global protein synthesis and decreased ribosome-RNA associations, which results in decreased NRF2 protein levels. Overall, our data establish the BRSK1 and BRSK2 kinases as negative regulators of NRF2 via the AMPK/MTOR signaling axis. Strategies which exploit these relationships may prove useful for therapeutically targeting NRF2 in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer, and supernatant was collected following centrifugation at 21000x9 for 10 min. 1.4mg of protein was precipitated in acetone overnight at -20C. The sample was pelleted and re-suspended in 7M urea, reduced with 5mM DTT (dithiothreitol) and alkylated with 15mM CAA (chloroacetamide). The sample volume was then adjusted with 50mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate) such that the urea concentration is 1M or less. A standard tryptic digest was performed overnight at 37C. Solid Phase Extraction (SPE) was then performed using C18 Prep Sep™ cartridges (Waters # WAT054960), followed by reconstitution in 0.5% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). The SPE cartridge was washed with conditioning solution (90% methanol with 0.1% TFA), then equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. The sample was passed slowly (1drop/sec) through the equilibrated cartridge, then the cartridge was desalted with equilibration solution. The sample was then slowly eluted (1drop/sec) with an elution solution (50% ACN (acetonitrile)) with 0.1% TFA. The sample was then TMT labeled according to kit specifications (ThermoFisher Scientific #90110), with the exception that labeling was performed for 6hrs instead of 1hr. Following labeling, another SPE was performed, as stated above. 10% of sample was saved for whole proteome input, and the remaining sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment using Titansphere Phos-TiO Kit (GL Sciences #5010-21312). Briefly, samples were reconstituted in 100µL of Buffer B (75% ACN, 1% TFA, 20% lactic acid – solution B in the kit). The tip was conditioned by centrifugation with 100µL of Buffer A (80% ACN, 1% TFA), followed by conditioning with Buffer B (3000xg, 2min). The sample was then loaded onto the tip and centrifuged twice (1000xg, 5min). The tip was then washed with 50µL of Buffer B, followed by 2 washes with 50µL of Buffer A (1000xg, 2min). The sample was eluted with 100µL of elution 1 (20% ACN, 5% NH4OH) then 100µL of elution 2 (20% ACN, 10% NH4OH) (1000xg, 5min). Following phosphopeptide enrichment, both whole proteome input and phosphopeptides were fractionated utilizing a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Pierce #84868), per manufacturers specifications. A final clean-up step was performed utilizing C18 Spin Columns (Pierce #89870).   Mass spectrometery analysis was carried out as follows: to separate peptides, reverse-phase nano-HPLC was performed by a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation). Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100, 3μM particle size, 100 Å pore size), and separated on a 25cm EASYspray analytical column (75μM ID, 2.0μm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size) at 45oC. The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Buffer B). A 180-minute gradient of 2-30% buffer B was used with a flow rate of 300nl/min. Mass spectral analysis was performed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion source was operated at 2.4kV and the ion transfer tube was set to 275C. Full MS scans (350-2000 m/z) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 and 4e5 AGC target.  The MS2 spectra were collected using a 0.7 m/z isolation width and analyzed by the linear ion trap using 1e4 AGC target after HCD fragmentation at 30% collision energy with 50ms maximum injection time. The MS3 scans (100-500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution, with a 1e5 AGC, 2 m/z MS2 isolation window, at 105ms maximum injection time after HCD fragmentation with a normalized energy of 65%. Precursor ions were selected in 400-2000 m/z mass range with mass exclusion width of 5 – 18 m/z. Polysiloxane 371.10124 was used as the lock mass.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data was searched with MaxQuant (1.6.6.0). Search parameters were as follows: specific tryptic digestion, up to 2 missed cleavages, a static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, variable protein N-term acetylation, and variable phospho(STY) as well as methionine oxidation using the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot sequence database (Downloaded Feb 1, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NFE2L2, also known as NRF2) is a transcription factor and master regulator of cellular antioxidant response. Aberrantly high NRF2-dependent transcription is recurrent in human cancer, but conversely NRF2 activity diminishes with age and in neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders. Although NRF2-activating drugs are clinically beneficial, NRF2 inhibitors do not yet exist. Here, we describe use of a gain-of-function genetic screen of the kinome to identify new druggable regulators of NRF2 signaling. We found that the under-studied protein kinase brain-specific kinase 2 (BRSK2) and the related BRSK1 kinases suppress NRF2-dependent transcription and NRF2 protein levels in an activity-dependent manner. Integrated phosphoproteomics and RNAseq studies revealed that BRSK2 drives 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase &#x3b1;2 (AMPK) signaling and suppresses the mTOR pathway. As a result, BRSK2 kinase activation suppresses ribosome-RNA complexes, global protein synthesis and NRF2 protein levels. Collectively, our data illuminate the BRSK2 and BRSK1 kinases, in part by functionally connecting them to NRF2 signaling and mTOR. This signaling axis might prove useful for therapeutically targeting NRF2 in human disease.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Antioxidant response, Sad-b, Phosphoproteomics, Sad-a, Nrf2, Ampk, Brsk2, Mtor signaling, Brsk1

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Cell Biology & Physiology Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Major
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Cell Biology & Physiology Washington University in St. Louis


