### Accession
PXD027387

### Title
Conserved exchange of paralog proteins during neuronal differentiation

### Description
Gene duplication enables the emergence of new functions by lowering the general evolutionary pressure. Previous studies have highlighted the role of specific paralog genes during cell differentiation, e.g., in chromatin remodeling complexes. It remains unexplored whether similar mechanisms extend to other biological functions and whether the regulation of paralog genes is conserved across species. Here, we analyze the expression of paralogs across human tissues, during development and neuronal differentiation in fish, rodents and humans. While ~80% of paralog genes are co-regulated, a subset of paralogs shows divergent expression profiles, contributing to variability of protein complexes. We identify 78 substitutions of paralog pairs that occur during neuronal differentiation and are conserved across species. Among these, we highlight a substitution between the paralogs Sec23a and Sec23b subunits of the COPII complex. Altering the ratio between these two genes via RNAi-mediated knockdown is sufficient to influence the differentiation of immature neuron. We propose that remodeling of the vesicular transport system via paralog substitutions is an evolutionary conserved mechanism enabling neuronal differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Neurons treated with Sec23a/b or control siRNA, cells (between 40,000 and 180,000 cells) were sorted directly into 2x Lysis Buffer. Samples were then sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium) for 10 cycles with 1 min ON and 30 s OFF with high intensity at 20 °C. Samples were then boiled for 10min at 95°C, and a second sonication cycle was performed as described above. The lysates were centrifuged at 18,407x g for 1 min. Subsequently, samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT for 15min at 45°C, and alkylated using freshly made 15 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated using acetone and digested using LysC (Wako sequencing grade) and trypsin (Promega sequencing grade), as described in (Buczak et al. 2020). The digested proteins were then acidified with 10 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. The eluates were dried down using a vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted samples in 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. For Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) based analysis (siRNA treated neurons), samples were transferred directly to an MS vial, diluted to a concentration of 1 µg/µl, and spiked with iRT kit peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Peptides were separated in trap/elute mode using the nanoAcquity MClass Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Waters, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA,USA) equipped with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm). Solvent A was water and 0.1%  formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 1 µl of the samples (∼1 μg on column) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0–40% in 120 min. Total run time was 145 min. including equilibration and conditioning. The LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using the Proxeon nanospray source. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360-μm outer diameter × 20-μm inner diameter, 10-μm tip (New Objective) heated at 300 °C, and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The radio frequency ion funnel was set to 30%. For DIA data acquisition, full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at a maximum of 60 ms with a limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25, 27.5, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 × 106 ions or after filling time of 35 ms (whichever occurred first). Datas were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.3 (Thermo) and Tune version 2.0 were used.

### Data Protocol
DIA libraries were created by searching the DIA runs using Spectronaut Pulsar (v13), Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland). The data were searched against species specific protein databases (Uniprot Mus musculus release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The library search was set to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide levels. Libraries contained a total of 101,659 precursors, corresponding to 5708 and 6003 protein groups respectively. DIA data were then uploaded and searched against this spectral library using Spectronaut Professional (v.14.10) and default settings. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition using default settings, except: Protein Quantification set to mean TOP3 peptide quantity, Minor Group quantity set to mean TOP3 precursor quantity, Data Filtering set to Qvalue sparse, and imputation to RunWise. Differential abundance testing was performed using a paired t-test between replicates.  The data (candidate tables) andprotein quantity data reports were then exported for further data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein complex, Development, Paralog, Neuronal differentiation, Proteome, Transport

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstraße 11 07745 Jena, Germany


