### Accession
PXD013704

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, DSSO-crosslinked soy (Glycine max)

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from size exclusion chromatography fractions that were subsequently crosslinked with DSSO.  The starting material was a native extract prepared from soy sprouts (Glycine max).  The mass spectrometry used a data-dependent MS2-MS3 method to identify crosslinks.

### Sample Protocol
7-day old soy sprouts (leaves and meristems)were ground in liquid nitrogen and a native extract prepared in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, w mM DTT, and phosphatase and protease inhibitors.  2.5 mg of the extract was fractionated on a BioSep SEC-s-4000 column (Phenomenex) with PBS pH 7.2 as the mobile phase and individual fractions were crosslinked by addition of DSSO to 0.5 mM for 1 hour.  Samples were not enriched for crosslinked peptides, but were prepared by our standard 96-well pipeline:  ultrafiltration for buffer exchange (Pall AcroPrep Advance Omega, 3k MWCO), reduction/alkylation, and overnight digestion with Trypsin.  Peptides were desalted using a C18 Lab-in-a-Plate (Glygen)and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer using a data dependent 135 minute MS2-MS3 method to identify crosslinks.  MS2 spectra were acquired after 25% CID and MS3 spectra after 30% HCD.  Data were collected from multiple runs for fractions number 2-35 which contained the most peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using Proteome Discovere 2.2 and the DSSO-specific parameters for the included work flows:  PWF_Fusion_Basic_SequestHT_Xlink_Cleavable_MS2_MS3, and CWF_Basic_XlinkX.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec, Xl-ms, Xlinkx, Cl-ms, Dsso, Soy, Glycine max, Cross link, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


