### Accession
PXD006286

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteome of HHD biopsies

### Description
the proteome of skin lesions from HHD patients was assembled and used for iTRAQ to analyze changes in skin lesions compared with unaffected individuals.

### Sample Protocol
Lesion skins from HHD patients and biopsies from three healthy volunteers without HHD and other similar skin disorders were isolated by routine biopsy procedure. Biopsies from three healthy volunteers were used as control materials. The whole skin tissues were flash-frozen using liquid nitrogen. After homogenizing by grinding and weighing, SDT was added to tissue powders. The mixture was boiled for 5 min and homogenized by ultrasonication. The samples were then centrifuged and the supernatant were collected and quantified. For digestion, each protein sample (300 μg) was diluted with 200 μL UA buffer. After centrifugation using a 10 kDa ultrafiltration filter, the filtrate was discarded. Then, the samples were washed again with UA buffer and the proteins were alkylated with 100 μL of IAA solution and mixed, followed by incubation at rt in the dark and centrifugation. This step was repeated twice. The reaction mixture was then diluted in 100 μL dissolution buffer and centrifuged, and this step was then repeated once. Finally, 40 μL of trypsin buffer was added and mixed. The mixture was allowed to digest at 37 °C for 16-18 h. The filter unit was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged. The resulting filtrates were collected and the peptide content was analyzed at OD280.  Peptide mixtures (27 μg) from each group were labeled using the iTRAQ Reagent-8 plex multiplex kit following the manufacturer’s protocol. The tryptic-digested peptides were labeled with iTRAQ tags.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system. We reconstituted the iTRAQ-labeled peptides in 2 mL of buffer A and fractionated them using a Polysulfoethyl 4.6 x 100 mm column at a flow rate of 1000 μL/min using our optimized laboratory protocol. The collected fractions  were finally combined into eight pools. After freeze-drying, the fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges.  LC−MS/MS analysis was performed on an Easy nLC using a Q Exactive MS. The chromatographic column was equilibrated with buffer A before each sample was injected into the mass spectrometer. The HPLC mobile phase system was prepared as buffer A and buffer B. Five micrograms of the samples were loaded with an auto-sampler onto a Thermo Scientific EASY column (2 cm * 100 μm 5 μm-C18), then separated in the Thermo Scientific EASY column (75 μm * 100 mm 3 μm-C18) with a gradient of acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Samples were separated using a 120 min gradient: 0−35% buffer B for 100 min, 35−100% buffer B for 8 min, and 100% buffer B for 12 min.  The mass spectrometer data were collected using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source. A precursor ion scan in the range of 300-1800 mass/charge (m/z, resolution at 70000 at m/z = 200) was followed by MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions upon fragmentation at 30 eV normalized collision energy (isolation window of Δm/z = 2, resolution 17500 at m/z = 200).

### Publication Abstract
Benign chronic familial pemphigus or Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD, OMIM 169600) is a rare, autosomal dominant blistering skin disorder characterized by suprabasal cell separation (acantholysis) of the epidermis. To date, the proteomic changes in skin lesions from HHD patients has not been reported yet. In this study, a sample of skin lesions from HHD patients was collected for isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation to analyze proteome changes compared with unaffected individuals. The 134 differentially expressed proteins were assigned to at least one Gene Ontology term, and 123 annotated proteins with significant matches were assigned to 187 known metabolic or signaling pathways listed in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Most of the altered proteins in skin lesions of HHD patients were enriched in pathways involved in the PI3K-Akt signaling, focal adhesion, extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor interaction, and protein digestion and absorption, such as collagen family members, microfibril-associated glycoprotein 4 and plakophilin. The changes of proteins related to cell adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, and protein folding and glycosylation suggested that strategy targeted to alter cell junction and extracellular microenvironment might provide a potential treatment for HHD.

### Keywords
Hailey-hailey disease, Go, Kegg, Proteome, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Dermatology, The Second Hospital, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No. 157 Xiwu Road, Xi’an 710004, Shaanxi Province, China
Xian Jiaotong University 

### Submitter
Xiaoli Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoli Li
Department of Dermatology, The Second Hospital, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No. 157 Xiwu Road, Xi’an 710004, Shaanxi Province, China


