### Accession
PXD000327

### Title
Quantitative proteomic profiling reveals novel region-specific markers in the adult mouse brain

### Description
Here we present the data obtained from a high precision 18O-labeling strategy used to quantitatively map membrane proteins isolated from myelin-enriched fractions purified from distinct brain regions of an adult mouse. To this end, we present an updated catalog of myelin-associated proteins found in the vertebrate CNS with relevance for investigations of myelin disorders. We also present a number of regiospecific protein markers of the brain, many of which remain unannotated in current online brain mapping databases. Data analysis: Tandem mass spectra were extracted from .RAW files and searched using the SEQUEST- PVM v.27 (rev.9) database program against a Mouse protein database downloaded as FASTA-formatted sequences from EBI-IPI (database version 3.72) which contains 56957 entries where priority was given to UniProt identifiers, as well as reverse decoy sequences to empirically assess the false identification rate. Mass tolerances for precursor (MS) and product ions (MS/MS) were set to 3 and 0 m/z, respectively. Two SEQUEST searches were performed per labeling experiment setting the enzyme selectivity to trypsin while allowing one missed cleavage. In both searches, protein modifications included fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation (57 Da) whilst the 18O-specific search included a static C-terminal modification mass of 4 Da (to account for tryptic peptides fully incorporating two 18O atoms). This improved the identification of unlabeled/labeled peptide pairs without exceeding the individual search mass tolerances. Following the database searches, the utility program DTASelect was invoked to assemble SEQUEST identifications and in each case, create an exhaustive list of the most significant peptide matches to the MS/MS spectra.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Despite major advances in neuroscience, a comprehensive understanding of the structural and functional components of the adult brain compartments remains to be fully elucidated at a quantitative molecular level. Indeed, over half of the soluble- and membrane-annotated proteins are currently unmapped within online digital brain atlases. In this study, two complementary approaches were used to assess the unique repertoire of proteins enriched within select regions of the adult mouse CNS, including the brain stem, cerebellum, and remaining brain hemispheres. Of the 1200 proteins visualized by 2D-DIGE, approximately 150 (including cytosolic and membrane proteins) were found to exhibit statistically significant changes in relative abundance thus representing putative region-specific brain markers. In addition to using a high-precision (18) O-labeling strategy for the quantitative LC-MS/MS mapping of membrane proteins isolated from myelin-enriched fractions, we have identified over 1000 proteins that have yet to be described in any other mammalian myelin proteome. A comparison of our myelin proteome was made to an existing transcriptome database containing mRNA abundance profiles during oligodendrocyte differentiation and has confirmed statistically significant abundance changes for &#x223c;500 of these newly mapped proteins, thus revealing new roles in oligodendrocyte and myelin biology. These data offer a resource for the neuroscience community studying the molecular basis for specialized neuronal activities in the CNS and myelin-related disorders. The MS proteomics data associated with this manuscript have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD000327 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000327).

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Myelin interactome, 18o-based stable isotope labeling, Mass spectrometry, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
L Dagley

### Lab Head


