### Accession
PXD002660

### Title
Apostichopus japonicus intestine LC-MS/MS

### Description
In this study, we applied iTRAQ techniques to investigate the global protein expression profile under an acute short-term (48 h) heat stress. A total of 3,432 proteins were identified, and 127 heat stress-response proteins were detected.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, digestion, and iTRAQ labeling; Fractionation by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data were converted to MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). The proteins were identified using Mascot search engine 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
The sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus is exploited as a commercial species owing to their high nutritive and medicinal value. Recent high summer temperatures have caused high mortality rates in A. japonicus. In this study, we applied the isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) technique to investigate the global protein expression profile under an acute short-term (48 h) heat stress. In total, 3432 proteins were identified, and 127 proteins showed significant heat stress responses, with 61 upregulated proteins and 66 downregulated proteins. Our results suggest that heat stress influenced the expression of proteins involved in various biological processes, such as tissue protection and detoxification, lipid and amino acid metabolism, energy production and usage, transcription and translation, cell apoptosis, and cell proliferation. These findings provide a better understanding about the response and thermo-tolerance mechanisms of A. japonicus under heat stress.

### Keywords
Intestine, Apostichopus japonicus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Oceanology,Chinese Academy of Sciences(IOCAS)
Qingdao Agricultural University

### Submitter
Dongxue Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Dongxue Xu
Institute of Oceanology,Chinese Academy of Sciences(IOCAS)


