### Accession
PXD000834

### Title
Positional proteomics identification of the natural substrates of cytosolic carboxypeptidases

### Description
Cytosolic carboxypeptidases (CCPs) constitute a new subfamily of M14 metallocarboxypeptidases associated to axonal regeneration and neuronal degeneration, amongst others. CCPs are deglutamylating enzymes, able to catalyze the shortening of polyglutamate side-chains and the gene-encoded C-termini of tubulin, telokin and myosin light chain kinase. The functions of these enzymes are not entirely understood, in part due to lack of information about C-terminal protein processing in the cell and its functional implications. By means of C-terminal COFRADIC, a positional proteomics approach, we searched for cellular substrates targets of CCP1, the most relevant member of this family. We here identified 7 new putative CCP1 protein substrates, including ribosomal proteins, translation factors and high mobility group proteins. 

### Sample Protocol
Guanidinium hydrochloride was added to the cell lysates to a final concentration of 4 M to denature proteins. Primary amines were acetylated for 2 h at 30°C using sulfo-N- hydroxysuccinimide D3-acetate to a final concentration of 10 mM. O-acetylation was reversed by adding hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubation for 10 min at 30°C. The acetylation reagent was further quenched by the addition of 20 mM glycine for 10 min at 30°C. Excess reagents were removed by buffer exchange to 1.5 mL of 10 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.9 using 1 ml Illustra NAP-10 columns. After heating the proteins for 5 min at 95°C followed by placing them on grade, modified trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1/100 (w/w). Subsequent steps of the C-terminal COFRADIC protocol were performed as described in PMID 20526345. As a result of the RP-HPLC separation, fractionation and pooling, a total of 96 samples were generated. Samples were dried and re-dissolved in 20 μL of 2 mM TCEP and 2% acetonitrile for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. 

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of 2 μL of the sample mixtures was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex) in-line connected to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60,000. The ten most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 1E4 ion counts. From the MS/MS data in each LC run, Mascot Generic Files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3.2.0, Matrix Science). The generated MS/MS peak lists were then searched (2011_05 UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database containing 20,286 human entries). The following search parameters were set: spectra were searched with semi-ArgC/P enzyme settings, allowing no missed cleavages. Mass tolerance on the precursor ion was set to 10 ppm and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. In addition, Mascot’s C13 setting was set to 1. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+ or 3+ and instrument setting was put on ESI-TRAP.. For the identification of butyrylated peptides, variable modifications were set to pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine and fixed modifications included D3-acetylation at lysines, methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide and butyrylation (12C4 or 13C4) of peptide N-termini. Only peptides that were ranked one and scored above the threshold score, set at 95% confidence, were withheld.

### Publication Abstract
Cytosolic carboxypeptidases (CCPs) constitute a new subfamily of M14 metallocarboxypeptidases associated to axonal regeneration and neuronal degeneration, among others. CCPs are deglutamylating enzymes, able to catalyze the shortening of polyglutamate side-chains and the gene-encoded C termini of tubulin, telokin, and myosin light chain kinase. The functions of these enzymes are not entirely understood, in part because of the lack of information about C-terminal protein processing in the cell and its functional implications. By means of C-terminal COFRADIC, a positional proteomics approach, we searched for cellular substrates targets of CCP1, the most relevant member of this family. We here identified seven new putative CCP1 protein substrates, including ribosomal proteins, translation factors, and high mobility group proteins. Furthermore, we showed for the first time that CCP1 processes both glutamates as well as C-terminal aspartates. The implication of these C termini in molecular interactions furthermore suggests that CCP1-mediated shortening of acidic protein tails might regulate protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions.

### Keywords
Degradomics c-terminomics carboxypeptidase

### Affiliations
VIB Department of Medical Protein Research, UGent Proteome Analysis and Bioinformatics Unit B9000 Gent, Belgium
Department of Medical Protein Research, VIB-Ghent University

### Submitter
Sebastian Tanco

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Department of Medical Protein Research, UGent Proteome Analysis and Bioinformatics Unit B9000 Gent, Belgium


