### Accession
PXD018234

### Title
Al-induced root proteomics changes in stress-acclimated tomato plants

### Description
Excess levels of Al3+ become highly harmful to plant roots as the toxic ions bind to the surface of root-tips. Plants can acquire tolerance to stress after multiple generations of exposure to stress conditions.  After four consecutive generations of Al treatments (G4Al+ seeds), tomato plants appeared more tolerant to the stress condition.  This project used laser capture microdissection (LCM) technology to isolate the Al-sensitive epidermal and outer cortical cells of root-tips.  Tandem mass tag (TMT) proteomics analysis was conducted to identify proteomics changes related to the physiological properties in root growth under Al treated conditions.

### Sample Protocol
The G4Al+  seeds were planted in hydroponic Magnavaca’s  solution supplemented with 100 µM AlK(SO4)2·12H2O at pH 4.5 (i.e., a 15 μM Al 3+ activity  as calculated using the GEOCHEM-EZ program) in Al-treated and Magnavaca’s  solution only in the non-treated control experiments.  One month after seedling emergence, root tips were harvested and placed in a prechilled fixative solution (75% ethanol + 25% acetic acid). Root-tips were infiltrated under vacuum each for 15 min in sequential order as: fixative solution, twice of PBS, pH 8.0 +10% sucrose + protease inhibitor, and twice of PBS, pH 8.0 +20% sucrose + protease inhibitor. Root tips were imbedded in OCT compounds, and cut into 10 μM thickness longitudinal sections using a LEICA CM 1950 cryostat. Cells comprising the outer two cellular layers within the root-tip transitional zone were harvested using laser capture microdissection (LCM) (PALM MicroBeam, ZEISS Microscopy, Jena, Germany).  Proteins were extracted  in a   PCT buffer  comprising of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 4 M urea, 2% SDS, 2 mM EDTA  on  a Barocycler (2320 EXT, Pressure Biosciences Inc, South Easton, MA 02375).  Proteins (50μg each sample) was  reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP ) and cysteines were blocked with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). After removal of sodium dodecyl sulfate  (SDS) and urea  using S-TRAP Micro kit (PROTIFI,Huntington, NY), on-column trypsin digestion was carried out using trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade modified trypsin,  #VS11A0) at  35 oC for 16 hr. Tryptic peptides were eluted subsequently by centrifugation  (10,000 rpm for 2 min) in 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, 40 μL  0.2% formic acid,  and finally  40 μL  50% acetonitrile in water, 0.2% formic acid (FA).The elutes were dried down under vacuum. The trypic peptides were labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex reagent set (ThermoFisher Scientfic, USA). The three replicates of Al-treated samples were labeled with tags of 127N,  129N, 130C; and the three replicates of non-Al treated control samples were labeled with 128N, 131,127C .  Labeled peptides were pooled and cleaned using the Oasis MCX 1cc 30mg Extraction Cartridges 9 (Waters, P/N 186000252). Peptides were eluted twice in 75% ACN/ 10% NH4OH and dried-down under vacuum.  HeatTreated1:127N, HeatTreated2:129N, HeatTreated3:130C, Control1:131; Control2:127C; Control3:128N. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Functional & Comparative Proteomics Center, USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) similar to previous reports. The Orbitrap is coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Each reconstituted fraction (8 L) was injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trap column (3 µm, 75 µm  20 mm, Dionex) with nanoViper Fittings at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% ACN in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 7-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run. The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the celebrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting precursor ions followed by Top 3 second data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with AGC =3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms, and MS/MS scans at 50,000 resolution with AGC=1e5, Max IT = 120ms and with Q isolation window (m/z) at 1.6 for the mass range m/z 105-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 50s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data was acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT 10-plex experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo) against tomato protein database version ITAG3.20. The default search settings used for 6-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD 2.2 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Carbamidomethyl of cysteine, fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues.

### Publication Abstract
Aluminum (Al) toxicity primarily targets the root tips, inhibiting root growth and function and leading to crop yield losses on acidic soils. Previously we reported using laser capture microdissection (LCM) proteomics to identify Al-induced proteins in the outer layer cells in the transitional zone of tomato root-tips. This study aims to further characterize Al-induced proteomic dynamics from the outer to interior tissues, thus providing a panoramic view reflecting Al resistance in the root tip as a whole in tomatoes. Three types of cells were isolated via LCM from the basal 350-400&#xa0;&#x3bc;m (below cell elongation regions) of root tips using tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) 'Micro-Tom' plants. Type I and Type II were from Al-treated plants. Type I included cells of the outer three layers, i.e., the epidermis and cortex initials and the quiescent center (QC) in root apical meristem (RAM), and Type II possessed the interior tissues of the same region. Type III contained cells from the non-Al-treated root tips collected in the same region as Type I. Two tandem mass tag (TMT) proteomics analyses with three biological replicates for each sample type were conducted. The TMTexp1 (comparing Type I and Type II) identified 6575 quantifiable proteins and 178 different abundance proteins (DAPs). The TMTexp2 (comparing Type I and Type III) identified 7197 quantifiable proteins and 162 DAPs. Among all quantified proteins (7685) from the two TMT experiments, 6088 (79%) proteins, including 313 DAPs (92% of the 340 total), were identified in all tissues. A model reflecting the tissue-specific Al-resistance mechanism was proposed, in which the level of the citrate transporter MATE protein, involved in Al exclusion, accumulated to the highest level in the outer-layer cells but decreased toward the interior of root-tips (which concurs with the tissue-specific importance in Al resistance). Proteins for biosynthesis of ethylene and jasmonic acid, proteolytic enzymes, stress-responsive proteins, and cell wall modeling were affected by Al treatment, some in a cell type-specific manner. The KEGG metabolite pathways enriched with these DAPs changed depending on the cell types. This study demonstrated the advantage of using the tissue/cell-specific analysis for identifying proteins and their dynamic changes directly associated with Al resistance in the root-tip region. The proteomics datasets have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) with the dataset identifier as PXD021994 under project title: Proteomics studies of outer and inner cellular layers of tomato root-tips for Al stress, Project DOI: 10.6019/ PXD021994; and PXD018234 under Project title: Al-induced root proteomics changes in stress-acclimated tomato plant, Project DOI: https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD018234. SIGNIFICANCE: This paper presents the method of using laser capture microdissection (LCM) to collect homogenous cell-type specific tissue samples from the outer layers and inner central regions of tomato root-tips. The tandem mass tag-proteomics analysis showed that the outer-layer cells expressed proteomes that were different from the inner tissues of Al-treated root-tips; proteins related to resistance/tolerance to Al toxicity were highly accumulated in the outer-layer cells. Furthermore, the Al-treated outer-layer cells expressed proteomes which were different from the non-Al treated counterpart cells. This study has provided the first dataset of proteins differentiating from the outer to inner layers of cells in Al-treated root-tips. It provided convincing experimental evidences demonstrating the single-cell type proteomics as a powerful analytical approach to identify Al tolerance mechanisms in plants. The analytical procedure of LCM-tandem mass tag-quantitative proteomics analysis has a broad application for proteomics analysis of spatially separated cells in complex tissues.

### Keywords
Stress-acclimated tomato plants, Aluminum toxicity, Outer cellular layers of root-tips, Laser capture microdissection, Tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


