### Accession
PXD016750

### Title
Identification of phosphosites that alter protein thermal stability

### Description
We developed a robust method termed Dali that identifies phosphorylation events that alter protein thermal stability as a proxy for function.

### Sample Protocol
Dali applies the Proteome Integral Stability Alteration (PISA) method, a simplified version of thermal proteome profiling, in which the soluble protein from the different temperature points are combined to provide an estimation of the area under the protein melting curve. To reliably compare phosphopeptides to proteins, we normalize each measurement to a 30oC treated proteome reference that is labeled with heavy lysine, obtaining a relative stability (Rs) measurement for phosphopeptides and proteins. This 30oC reference is mixed in with the temperature gradient treated samples prior to protein digestion, and it is present during phosphopeptide enrichment and mass spectrometry (MS) measurement of peptides and phosphopeptides. Label swap enables 3 samples that have light lysine 30C proteome control (1X) mixed with 2X heavy lysine temperature treated proteome.

### Data Protocol
MS data files for proteome samples were analyzed with MaxQuant2 (v.1.6.7.0) to obtain peptide identifications and quantifications, using the following parameters: protein sequence database S.cerevisiae downloaded from SGD in July 2014, LysC enzyme specificity (cleavage Ct to K), maximum of 2 missed cleavages, mass tolerance of 20ppm for MS1 and 20ppm for MS2, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl on cysteines, variable modifications of oxidation on methionines and acetylation on protein N-termini. Lysine residues were only allowed to be all light or all d4-Lys within the same peptide. Phosphoproteome samples were processed in MaxQuant similarly as above, with additional variable modification of phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. All searches were combined for MaxQuant filtering set to 1% FDR at the level of peptide spectral matches and protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Function, Phosphorylation, Proteomics, Dali, Thermal stability

### Affiliations
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences Seattle, WA
University of Washington

### Submitter
Ian Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences Seattle, WA


