### Accession
PXD024743

### Title
Parallel G-quadruplexes recruit the HSV-1 transcription factor ICP4 to promote viral transcription in herpes virus-infected human cells

### Description
G-quadruplexes (G4s) are four-stranded nucleic acid structures abundant at gene promoters. They can adopt several distinctive conformations. G4s have been shown to form in the herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) genome during its viral cycle. Here by cross-linking/pull-down assay we identified ICP4, the major HSV-1 transcription factor, as the protein that most efficiently interacts with viral G4s during infection. ICP4 specific and direct binding and unfolding of parallel G4s, including those present in HSV-1 immediate early gene promoters, induced transcription in vitro and in infected cells. This mechanism was also exploited by ICP4 to promote its own transcription. Proximity ligation assay allowed visualization of G4-protein interaction at the single selected G4 in cells. G4 ligands inhibited ICP4 binding to G4s. Our results indicate the existence of a well-defined G4-viral protein network that regulates the productive HSV-1 cycle. They also point to G4s as elements that recruit transcription factors to activate transcription in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down assay The pull-down assay was performed in order to identify HSV-1 G4-protein interactions. Dynabeads→ M-280 Streptavidin (Life Technologies, Monza, Italy) were used to immobilize the biotinylated oligonucleotides, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 50 μL of beads were incubated with 300 pmol of biotinylated oligonucleotides (15 min at room temperature, RT). Control samples without oligonucleotides were included in each experiment in order to monitor the nonspecific binding to the beads. After three washes (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl), nuclear proteins extracts (5 μg) were incubated with the immobilized DNA fragments and maintained at 4°C for 2 h. To wash out nonspecific binders, samples were rinsed three times in 20 mM phosphate buffer (PB) and 150 mM KCl. Two proteins elution were performed: the first in NaCl 2M (10 min) and the second in 2x Laemmli buffer (4% SDS, 80% glycerol, 120 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 200 mM DTT, 0.02% bromophenol blue, 10 min). Eluted proteins were denatured at 95°C and separated on SDS-PAGE. Gels were stained overnight in colloidal Coomassie staining (0.02% w/v CBB G-250, 5% w/v aluminum sulfate-(14-18)-hydrate, 10% v/v ethanol, 2% g/v orthophosphoric acid) and unstained in 10% ethanol and 2% orthophosphoric acid for at least 30 minutes. Destained gels (10% acetic acid in milliQ water) were cut into bands of approximately 0.5 cm per side. Each band was further fragmented and subjected to tryptic digestion.  Bands digestion and LC-MS protein identification Bands were treated according to established in-gel digestion protocols (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Briefly, they were first bleached with 50% CH3OH and 2.5% acetic acid and dehydrated with CH3CN. Peptides were then reduced with 50 μL of DTT (10 mM in 100 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at RT. After DTT removal, peptides were treated with 50 μL of iodoacetamide (50 mM in 100 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at RT in the dark in order to alkylate cysteine residues. Bands were washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with CH3CN twice. After that, 1 μg aliquot of MS-grade trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific, Monza, Italy) in 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to each dehydrated bands and incubated on ice for 30 min. The excess of trypsin was eliminated and substituted with 40 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were then incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted twice with 5% HCOOH and two more times with 50% CH3CN, 5% HCOOH. Samples were further concentrated in SpeedVac (Hetovac VR-1, Heto Lab Equipment, Denmark) to 1 µL and resuspended in 20 µL of 1% HCOOH. Peptides were then analysed by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using an Agilent 1290 Infinity HPLC (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) connected to a Xevo G2-XS QTof mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MS, USA) from Micromass (Manchester, UK). A full scan mode and a high energy MSe scan mode were used.

### Data Protocol
Parent ions having the charge state 4+, 3+ and 2+ and signals more intense than 200 counts and the related MSe fragments ion signals more intense than 50 counts were subjected to the Mascot Database Search to identify their parent protein.

### Publication Abstract
G-quadruplexes (G4s) are four-stranded nucleic acid structures abundant at gene promoters. They can adopt several distinctive conformations. G4s have been shown to form in the herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) genome during its viral cycle. Here by cross-linking/pull-down assay we identified ICP4, the major HSV-1 transcription factor, as the protein that most efficiently interacts with viral G4s during infection. ICP4 specific and direct binding and unfolding of parallel G4s, including those present in HSV-1 immediate early gene promoters, induced transcription in vitro and in infected cells. This mechanism was also exploited by ICP4 to promote its own transcription. Proximity ligation assay allowed visualization of G4-protein interaction at the single selected G4 in cells. G4 ligands inhibited ICP4 binding to G4s. Our results indicate the existence of a well-defined G4-viral protein network that regulates the productive HSV-1 cycle. They also point to G4s as elements that recruit transcription factors to activate transcription in cells.

### Keywords
Proteins, Hsv-1, G-quadruplex, Icp4

### Affiliations
Dept. Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, Italy
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, via A. Gabelli 63, 35121 Padua, Italy

### Submitter
Ilaria Frasson

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sara N. Richter
Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, via A. Gabelli 63, 35121 Padua, Italy


