### Accession
PXD010103

### Title
AP-4 vesicles contribute to spatial control of autophagy via RUSC-dependent peripheral delivery of ATG9A

### Description
Adaptor protein 4 (AP-4) is an ancient membrane trafficking complex, whose function has largely remained elusive. In humans, AP-4 deficiency causes a severe neurological disorder of unknown aetiology. We apply unbiased proteomic methods, including ‘Dynamic Organellar Maps’, to find proteins whose subcellular localisation depends on AP-4. We identify three transmembrane cargo proteins, ATG9A, SERINC1 and SERINC3, and two AP-4 accessory proteins, RUSC1 and RUSC2. We demonstrate that AP-4 deficiency causes missorting of ATG9A in diverse cell types, including patient-derived cells, as well as dysregulation of autophagy. RUSC2 facilitates the transport of AP-4-derived, ATG9A-positive vesicles from the TGN to the cell periphery. These vesicles cluster in close association with autophagosomes, suggesting they are the “ATG9A reservoir” required for autophagosome biogenesis. Our study uncovers ATG9A trafficking as a ubiquitous function of the AP-4 pathway. Furthermore, it provides a potential molecular pathomechanism of AP-4 deficiency, through dysregulated spatial control of autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was precipitated by the addition of 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone, incubated at -20°C for 30 minutes and pelleted by centrifugation at 4°C for 5 minutes at 10,000 g. Precipitated protein was rinsed in ice-cold 80% acetone and re-pelleted as above. All subsequent steps were performed at room temperature. Precipitated protein pellets were air-dried for 5 minutes, resuspended in digestion buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.1, 8 M Urea, 1 mM DTT) and incubated for 15 minutes. Protein was alkylated by addition of 5 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes and then enzymatically digested by addition of LysC (V1071, Promega; 1 mg per 50 mg of protein) for at least 3 hours. Digests were then diluted four-fold with 50 mM Tris pH 8.1 before addition of Trypsin (1 mg per 50 mg of protein) for an overnight incubation. The peptide mixtures were then acidified to 1% (v/v) TFA in preparation for peptide purification and fractionation. Several different peptide fractionation and clean-up strategies were used in this study. For most mass spectrometric experiments, peptides were purified and fractionated on SDB-RPS (#66886-U, Sigma) stage tips. Briefly, peptide mixtures in 1% TFA were loaded onto activated stage-tips and washed with Proteomics Wash Buffer (Preomics) and then 0.2% (v/v) TFA. For single shot analysis, peptides were eluted with 60 µL Buffer X (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide). For triple-fractionation, peptides were eluted successively using 20 µL SDB-RPSx1 (100 mM ammonium formate, 40% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid), then 20 µL SDB-RPSx2 (150 mM ammonium formate, 60% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid), then 30 µL Buffer X. For six-fold fractionation, peptides were processed by strong cation exchange (SCX) on stage tips as previously described. Alternatively, protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, gels were cut into 5-10 slices, and proteins were digested with trypsin in-gel as described. Cleaned peptides were dried almost to completion in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator, and then volumes were adjusted to 10 µL with Buffer A* (0.1% (v/v) TFA, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) and either immediately analysed by mass spectrometry, or first stored at -20C. The following techniques were applied for the various mass spectrometric analyses of this study: single shot SDB-RPS: BioID samples and sensitive IPs; triple-fractionation SDB-RPS: organellar maps analyses, membrane proteome analysis, vesicle prep analyses (AP-4 knockouts); six-fraction SCX: whole cell lysate full proteome analysis; in-gel digestion with multiple gel slice fractions: vesicle prep analyses (AP-4 knockdown, AP-4 knocksideways), conventional IPs.  Two different mass spectrometers were used for the analysis (Q-Exactive HF and Q-Exactive; Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed in MaxQuant version 1.5, using the human SwissProt canonical and isoform protein database, retrieved from UniProt (www.uniprot.org). For SILAC experiments (vesicle fractions; Dynamic Organellar Map subfractions; whole cell lysate analysis; TEPSIN-GFP immunoprecipitations) multiplicity was set to 2, with Lys8 and Arg10 selected as heavy labels; Re-quantify was enabled; minimum number of quantification events was set to 1. For label-free experiments (membrane fractions; BioID) multiplicity was set to 1; LFQ was enabled, with LFQ minimum ratio count set to 1. Membrane fractions were SILAC heavy labelled (Arg10, Lys8). Matching between runs was enabled. Default parameters were used for all other settings.

### Publication Abstract
Adaptor protein 4 (AP-4) is an ancient membrane trafficking complex, whose function has largely remained elusive. In humans, AP-4 deficiency causes a severe neurological disorder of unknown aetiology. We apply unbiased proteomic methods, including 'Dynamic Organellar Maps', to find proteins whose subcellular localisation depends on AP-4. We identify three transmembrane cargo proteins, ATG9A, SERINC1 and SERINC3, and two AP-4 accessory proteins, RUSC1 and RUSC2. We demonstrate that AP-4 deficiency causes missorting of ATG9A in diverse cell types, including patient-derived cells, as well as dysregulation of autophagy. RUSC2 facilitates the transport of AP-4-derived, ATG9A-positive vesicles from the trans-Golgi network to the cell periphery. These vesicles cluster in close association with autophagosomes, suggesting they are the "ATG9A reservoir" required for autophagosome biogenesis. Our study uncovers ATG9A trafficking as a ubiquitous function of the AP-4 pathway. Furthermore, it provides a potential molecular pathomechanism of AP-4 deficiency, through dysregulated spatial control of autophagy.

### Keywords
Dynamic organellar maps, Vesicles, Ap-4, Human cells, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Borner

### Lab Head
Dr Georg H H Borner
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany


