### Accession
PXD040338

### Title
A farnesyl-dependent structural role for CENP-E in expansion of the fibrous corona

### Description
Correct chromosome segregation during cell division depends on proper connections between spindle microtubules and kinetochores. During prometaphase, kinetochores are temporarily covered with a dense protein meshwork known as the fibrous corona. Formed by oligomerization of ROD/ZW10/ZWILCH-SPINDLY (RZZ-S) complexes, the fibrous corona promotes spindle assembly, chromosome orientation and spindle checkpoint signaling. The molecular requirements for formation of the fibrous corona are not fully understood. Here we show that the fibrous corona depends on the mitotic kinesin CENP-E, and that poorly expanded fibrous coronas after CENP-E depletion are functionally compromised. This previously unrecognized role for CENP-E does not require its motor activity but instead is driven by its C-terminal microtubule-binding region and farnesyl modification thereof. The ‘birth’ of a farnesylation motif in CENP-E orthologs during Obazoa evolution closely aligns with presence of the full RZZ-S module, and we show that in cells CENP-E interacts with RZZ-S complexes in a farnesyl-dependent manner. CENP-E is recruited to kinetochores following RZZ-S, and - while not required for RZZ-S oligomerization per se - promotes subsequent fibrous corona expansion. Our results show that proper spindle assembly has a non-motor contribution from the kinesin CENP-E through stabilization of the fibrous corona meshwork during its formation.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated proteins were denatured and alkylated in 50 µl 8 M Urea, 1 M ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) containing 10 mM TCEP (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and 40 mM 2-chloro-acetamide for 30 minutes. After 4-fold dilution with 1 M ABC and digestion with trypsin (20 µg/200 µl), peptides were separated from the beads and desalted with homemade C-18 stage tips (3 M, St Paul, MN), eluted with 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) and, after evaporation of the solvent in the speedvac, redissolved in buffer A (0,1% formic acid). After separation on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75 µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with C-18 material (1.9 µm aquapur gold, dr. Maisch) using a 140 minute gradient (7% to 80% ACN, 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), peptides were  electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent Top speed mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1500 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240000. Most intense ions (intensity threshold of 15000 ions) were isolated by the quadrupole where after they were fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 50 milliseconds with injection of ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with MaxQuant [version 1.6.3.4], using the Homo Sapiens (taxonomy ID: 9606) fasta file, extracted from UniprotKB. To determine proteins of interest, the protein groups output file was used to perform a differential enrichment analysis. Proteins with less than one unique peptide and proteins that have not been identified in at least two out of three of the replicates of one condition, were filtered out. Then, a background correction and normalization of the data was performed by variance stabilizing transformation; shifting and scaling the proteins intensities by sample group. A left-shifted Gaussian distribution randomization was used to impute since the data presented a pattern of missingness not at random (MNAR). Finally, a differential enrichment analysis was performed to identify those proteins that were differentially-enriched and selected those falling inside the threshold for log2 Fold Change and -log10 P-value higher than 2. The program used for the analyses was R [version 4.0.4] through RStudio [version 1.5.64].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Farnesylation, Kinetochores, Cenp-e, Chromosome segregation, Rod/zw10/zwilch-spindly (rzz-s) complex

### Affiliations
Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr J.P.L. Kops
Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), Uppsalalaan 8, 3584CT, Utrecht, the Netherlands.


