### Accession
PXD013601

### Title
Identification of MARCH2 E3 ligase-substrates using proximity-dependent biotin labeling method

### Description
MARCH2 is known to be involved in intracellular vesicular trafficking. To identify its substrates, we have recently developed a method based on proximity-dependent biotin labelling. In this protocol, the MARCH2 ubiquitin ligase of interest is  expressed as a fusion to Escherichia coli biotin ligase BirA together with a biotin acceptor peptide(AP)-tagged ubiquitin. The BirA-directed biotin labeling of AP depends on the proximity of the two fusion proteins in the cell, which leads to preferential labeling of ubiquitinated E3 substrates. In this study, we applied this procedure to MARCH2 and identified its substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of biotinylated proteins HeLa cells were transfected with plasmids encoding FLAG-BirA-MARCH2 and AP-HA-Ub; 24 h post-transfection, cells were lysed in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4), boiled at 95°C for 10 min and centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min. The obtained supernatant was diluted 10-fold in dilution buffer (250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4) and immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG M2 agarose (Sigma) overnight at 4°C. The beads were separated from the lysate by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 3 min. The lysates containing biotinylated proteins were incubated with Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 (Invitrogen) overnight at room temperature. Dynabeads were sequentially washed with Buffer 1 (2% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4), Buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholic acid, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4), Buffer 3 (0.5% deoxycholic acid, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0), and Buffer 4 (50 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4). Finally, the beads were washed with and resuspended in 200 μl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8).   Protein digestion and affinity purification of ubiquitinated peptides Purified proteins immobilized on Dynabeads were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was separated from Dynabeads by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 5 min. The collected supernatant was dried in a speed vacuum concentrator. The peptides were dissolved in immunoaffinity purification buffer (50 mM MOPS/NaOH, pH 7.2, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with Ubiquitin Branch Motif (K-ε-GG) Immunoaffinity Beads (Cell Signaling Technology) overnight at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with immunoaffinity purification buffer and three times with deionized water, and peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid and lyophilized. Protein identification and quantitation by mass spectrometry Lyophilized peptides were analyzed by nanoelectrospray LC–MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., San Jose, CA). The peptides were separated on a 75 μm × 15 cm reversed-phase column (EASY-Spray PepMap, C18, 3 μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. San Jose, CA) with a gradient of 5% to 50% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid over 120 min.

### Data Protocol
The 20 most intense peaks from each full MS scan acquired in the Orbitrap were selected for MS/MS in the linear ion trap. The MS-MS spectra were used to search the National Center for Biotechnology Information nonredundant and expressed-sequence-tag databases using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science). The MS/MS scan range was m/z 200–2000.

### Publication Abstract
The E3 ubiquitin ligase membrane-associated ring-CH-type finger 2 (MARCH2) is known to be involved in intracellular vesicular trafficking, but its role in the early secretory pathway between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi compartments is largely unknown. Human ER-Golgi intermediate compartment protein 2 (ERGIC2) and ERGIC3 are orthologs of Erv41 and Erv46 in yeast, proteins that form a heteromeric complex, cycle between the ER and Golgi, and function as cargo receptors in both anterograde and retrograde protein trafficking. Here, we report that MARCH2 directs ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of ERGIC3 and that MARCH2 depletion increases endogenous ERGIC3 levels. We provide evidence that the lysine residues at positions 6 and 8 of ERGIC3 are the major sites of MARCH2-mediated ubiquitination. Of note, MARCH2 did not significantly decrease the levels of an ERGIC3 variant with lysine-to-arginine substitutions at residues 6 and 8. We also show that ERGIC3 binds to itself or to ERGIC2, whereas ERGIC2 is unable to interact with itself. Our results indicate that &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-antitrypsin and haptoglobin are likely to be cargo proteins of ERGIC3. We further observed that &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-antitrypsin and haptoglobin specifically bind to ERGIC3 and that ERGIC3 depletion decreases their secretion. Moreover, MARCH2 reduced secretion of &#x3b1;<sub>1</sub>-antitrypsin and haptoglobin, and coexpression of the ubiquitination-resistant ERGIC3 variant largely restored their secretion, suggesting that MARCH2-mediated ERGIC3 ubiquitination is the major cause of the decrease in trafficking of ERGIC3-binding secretory proteins. Our findings provide detailed insights into the regulation of the early secretory pathway by MARCH2 and into ERGIC3 function.

### Keywords
E3 ligase, Secretory proteins, March2

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science & Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 262  Seongsanno, Seodaemun-Gu, Seoul 120-749, Korea. Tel.: +82-2-2123-2704; Fax: 82-2-362-9897.
Yonsei university

### Submitter
Wonjin Yoo

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Bok Yoon
Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science & Biotechnology, Yonsei University, 262  Seongsanno, Seodaemun-Gu, Seoul 120-749, Korea. Tel.: +82-2-2123-2704; Fax: 82-2-362-9897.


