### Accession
PXD023911

### Title
Integrated proteomics-based physical and functional mapping of AXL kinase signaling pathways and inhibitors define its role in cell migration: BioID

### Description
To better understand the signaling complexity of AXL, a member of the TAM family of receptor tyrosine kinases, we created a physical and functional map of AXL signaling interactions, phosphorylation events, and target-engagement of three AXL tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). We assessed AXL protein-complexes using BioID, effects of AXL TKI on global phosphoproteins using mass spectrometry, and target engagement of AXL TKI using activity-based protein profiling. BioID identifies AXL-interacting proteins that are mostly involved in cell adhesion/migration. Global phosphoproteomics reveal that AXL inhibition deregulates phosphorylation of peptides involved in phosphatidylinositol-mediated signaling and cell adhesion/migration. Comparison of three AXL inhibitors reveals that TKI RXDX-106 inhibits pAXL, pAKT and migration/invasion of these cells without reducing their viability, while Bemcentinib exerts AXL-independent phenotypic effects. Proteomic characterization of these TKIs reveals that they inhibit diverse targets in addition to AXL, with Bemcentinib having the most off-targets. AXL and EGFR TKI co-treatment did not reverse resistance in cell line models of Erlotinib resistance. However, a unique vulnerability was identified in one persister clone, wherein combination of Bemcentinib and Erlotinib inhibited cell viability and signaling. We also show that AXL is overexpressed in ~30-40% of NSCLC but rarely in SCLC. NSCLC cells have a wide range of AXL protein expression, with basal activation detected rarely. Overall, we evaluate the mechanisms of action of AXL in lung cancer which can be used to establish assays to measure drug targetable active AXL complexes in patient tissues and inform the strategy for targeting its signaling network as an anticancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
AXL variant 1 (from Meyer lab at UCLA) was cloned into the pEntr TOPO vector using pENTR D-TOPO cloning kit (Invitrogen) to create TOPO-AXL Gateway entry clone as per manufacturer’s protocol. AXL was then transferred from the entry clone to pSTV6-C-BirA*-FLAG Gateway destination vector (33) (a gift from Gingras lab, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute) using LR-Gateway cloning, creating pSTV6-C-BirA*-FLAG-AXL lentiviral vector. All vectors were validated through DNA sequencing of subcloned fragments. Lentivirus packaging was done as described before (33), where HEK293 FT cells were transfected with VSVG packaging vectors (PLP1 and PLP2) and pSTV6-C-BirA*-FLAG-AXL using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen). Virus was harvested 40-48 hours post-transfection, cleared by centrifugation (500g, 15 min, 4°C) filtered and concentrated (Lentivirus Concentration Solution (Origene)). H1299 cells were infected with the produced virus and then supplemented with 2 μg/ml puromycin for selection 48 hours post-transfection to generate H1299 cells stably expressing pSTV6-C-BirA*-FLAG-AXL. Cells were grown and expanded into one 15 cm petri dish per replicate for BioID proteomics experiments. Three biological replicates were used per sample. Samples for BioID proteomics analysis were prepared using methods described in (33) with a few modifications. H1299- pSTV6-C-BirA*-FLAG-AXL cells were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic and induced with 1μg/ml doxycycline (Dox) and 40 μM biotin for 24 hours once they reached ~75% confluence. Cells were washed and collected in cold PBS, pelleted and frozen until time of sample processing. Pellets were lysed in 1 ml of RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 1 mM PMSF and 1x Protease Inhibitor cocktail solution (GenDepot) and sonicated as described before (33). Samples were incubated with 250 U of Turbonuclease (Biovision Inc.) and 10 μg of RNase A (15 min at 4°C) and then 30 μl of 8 pre-washed NeutrAvidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to sample supernatants. After 4 hours of rotation at 4°C, the beads were washed once with SDS wash buffer (25 mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.4, 2% SDS), twice with RIPA buffer, once with TNNE buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40), and three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (ABC buffer). 20 μL of SDS-PAGE running buffer, 2 μL of reducing agent, and 10 μL of loading buffer were then added to the beads. The samples were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes to denature and elute the proteins. Sample supernatants were removed from beads and loaded onto a 10% Criterion SDS-PAGE gel. The SDS-PAGE was run for 5-7 minutes at 125 V to capture the proteins in the gel for buffer exchange and in-gel digestion. Gel was removed from cassette, rinsed, stained overnight with InstaBlue dye, de-stained in 10% methanol/5% acetic acid and imaged. All bands were cut and placed in microcentrifuge tubes, then diced into 1 mm squares. An in-gel digest was performed, including de-staining, reduction, alkylation, and digestion with 200 ng of trypsin. After overnight incubation at 37°C, another 200 ng trypsin was added and digestion continued for 2 more hours. After digestion, peptides were extracted from gel bands using 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in aqueous 1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile with Peptide Retention Time Calibrator or PRTC peptide standards (Thermo) added. Samples were desalted and cleaned using Millipore C18 ZipTips. The clean peptide elution was dried down, and samples were resuspended in 20 μL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and transferred to autosampler vials.  LC-MS/MS was carried out on the Thermo Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For this upload, Mascot searches were performed.  For the manuscript, raw files were analyzed, peptides identified using Proteome Discoverer (2.2.0.388) and summarized using Scaffold (4.8.7). Enzyme specificity was set to full trypsin digestion, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The m/z tolerance for MS/MS scans was set to 20 ppm for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. To identify proteins that were enriched above the background contaminants detected in the negative control samples and nominate proximity partners of AXL, Automated Processing of SAINT Templated Layouts (APOSTL) software was used as described (34). These proteins were then were queried for known functional and physical interactions using STRING (35) network analysis (medium confidence of 0.4). The resulting undirected network was imported into Cytoscape (v. 3.5.1) for visualization. KEGG and Gene Ontology enrichment analyses were also performed on selected proteins using APOSTL.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Axl tyrosine kinase, Targeted therapy, Lung cancer

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Haura, MD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


