### Accession
PXD023721

### Title
Cathepsin F and Fibulin-1 as novel diagnostic biomarkers for Brain Metastasis of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

### Description
Background: There is a paucity of non-invasive markers for early detection of brain metastasis (BM) in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Secretory proteomic approach based on quantitative tandem mass tag is believed to offer bright prospects for screening potential serum biomarkers for diseases.  Methods: We used the secretory proteomics to identify up-regulated proteins in the highly brain metastatic cell line compared to the parental lung cancer cell line. Enzyme linked immunoassay and immunohistochemistry were performed on non-small cell lung cancer patients with brain metastasis and control samples from each cohort to verify the expression levels of candidate proteins. A logistic regression model was used to develop a biomarker panel composed of Cathepsin F (CTSF) and Fibulin-1 (FBLN1), and then an independent validation data set was used for verification. The diagnostic accuracy was evaluated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Changes in serum CTSF levels of patients were tracked to monitor the effect of treatment, and progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were analyzed to assess their prognostic relevance. Results: CTSF and FBLN1 levels were specifically upregulated in sera and tissues of patients with NSCLC BM. Importantly, the combined diagnostic performance of CTSF and FBLN1 was superior to their individual diagnostic performance (sensitivity and specificity). CTSF serum changes were found to reflect the therapeutic response of patients with NSCLC BM and the trends of resistance and progression were detected earlier than the MRI changes. Elevated expression of CTSF in NSCLC BM tissues was associated with poor PFS. Moreover, CTSF tissue expression was found to be an independent prognostic factor.  Conclusions: CTSF and FBLN1 are potential novel and specific serum markers for early diagnosis of BM in patients with NSCLC. CTSF can also be used as a biomarker for monitoring therapeutic efficacy and prognostic assessment.

### Sample Protocol
1 Protein extraction  After 24 hours of serum-free culture, and when the cell density was > 80% of the culture dish, the supernatants of PC9 and BrM3 cell lines were collected by centrifugation. Solid impurities were removed by centrifugation at 12000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Then the supernatant was transferred to an ultrafiltration centrifuge tube (Millipore), and concentrated to 0.5 mL by centrifugation at 5000 g at 4°C. The protein was dissolved in buffer (8M urea), and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA kit. 2 Trypsin digestion The same amount of protein was taken from each sample for enzymatic hydrolysis. An appropriate amount of standard protein was added and the volume adjusted to the same level using the lysis buffer. 20% TCA was slowly added to the final concentration followed by vortex to mix, and precipitation at 4°C for 2 hours. After centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate washed 2–3 times with pre-cooled acetone. After drying the pellet, TEAB was added with a final concentration of 200 mM. The pellet was ultrasonically dispersed followed by addition of trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (protease:protein, m/m), and overnight hydrolysis. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM, and reduced at 56°C for 30 min. Subsequently, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to make the final concentration 11 mM, which was incubated for 15 min at room temperature in dark. 3 TMT labeling  After trypsinization, the peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum dried. The peptide was re-dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer's TMT kit operating procedures. In short, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixture was then incubated for 2 hours at room temperature, combined, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 4 HPLC fractionation The sample was then separated by high pH reversed phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). In brief, the peptide was first separated into 60 fractions with a gradient of 8%–32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) within 60 minutes. Then, the peptides were combined into 14 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 5 Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis The trypsin peptide was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile (solvent A), and the sample was directly loaded on a self-made reversed-phase analytical column. The gradient included: increasing from 8% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) to 22% in 20 minutes, increasing from 22% to 35% in 7 minutes, and increasing to 80% in 4 minutes, followed by maintenance at 80% on the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, and performed at a constant flow rate of 600 nL/min for the last 3 minutes. The peptide was subjected to an NSI source; the peptide was subjected to nanospray ionization and the applied electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. Then tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed in Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) connected online to UPLC. The m/z scan range was 400 to 1500 for full scan, and the complete peptide was detected in Orbitrap with resolution Is 70,000. The scan range of the secondary mass spectrum was set to a fixed starting point of 100 m/z, and the secondary scan resolution was set to 17,500. In the MS survey scan with dynamic exclusion of 30.0 s, for the first 20 precursor ions above the threshold ion count of 10,000, a data-dependent procedure was applied that alternated between one MS scan and the subsequent 20 MS/MS scans. In order to improve the utilization of the mass spectrometer, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, the signal threshold was set to 63000 ions/s, and the maximum injection time was set to 80 ms. The fixed first mass setting was 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS data was processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The database used was Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20191115 (20380 sequences), and an anti-database was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matches. In order to eliminate the protein contamination in the identification results, a common contamination library was added to the database. Trypsin/P was designated as a lyase, allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. For the main precursor ion of the first search, the mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm, for the main precursor ion of the main search, the mass error tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and for the second fragment ion, the mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The alkylation of cysteine was designated as a fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine, acetylation and deamidation (NQ) of the N-terminus of the protein were designated as variable modifications. For the protein quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected in Maxquant. For protein identification and PSM identification, FDR was adjusted to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsclc brain metastasis; proteomics; diagnosis; follow-up; prognosis.

### Affiliations
The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Qi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qi Wang
The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University


