### Accession
PXD009532

### Title
Physcomitrella patens protonema endogenous peptides

### Description
Peptides are small molecules that play important roles in numerous biological processes. We used mass spectrometry to comprehensively analyze the endogenous peptide pools generated from functionally active proteins inside the cell from the model plant Physcomitrella patens. The secretomeand cellular peptidomes did not show a significant overlap, and the respective protein precursors had different protein degradation patterns. Furthermore, treatment with the plant stress hormones methyl jasmonate and salicylic acid induced significant differential changes in the two peptide pools.

### Sample Protocol
For peptide extraction from moss tissues, the extraction buffer contained 1 М acetic acid in 10% acetonitrile and 10 μL/mL protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). All procedures were performed on ice. For peptide extraction, protonemata were harvested from the surface of the agar medium. The tissue was placed in a porcelain mortar pre-cooled to −70°C, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground to a fine powder with a pestle pre-cooled to −70°C. The ground material was placed into cooled extraction buffer containing proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, inhibits serine, cysteine, and aspartic proteases, metalloproteases and aminopeptidases) and homogenized using a Dismembrator S ball mill (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) at 2,600 rpm for 2 min with a mixture of glass balls 0.1, 0.3 and 1 mm in diameter (Sartorius). The suspension was centrifuged at 11,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a clean test tube and centrifuged again at 11,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, after which the pellet was discarded. The samples were immediately placed onto a gel filtration column to extract and fractionate the peptides. Gel filtration was carried out on a ХK 26/40 GE Healthcare Life Science column filled with sorbent Superdex 30 pg. Elution was performed with 25 mM Tris-HCl, 0.15 mM NaCl at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min. Proteins and peptides were detected on an AKTA pure 25 (GE Healthcare) device at a wavelength of 280 nm. The fraction containing peptides was lyophilized and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile-0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, followed by desalting in microcolumns with two С18 disks (Empore). Mass-spectrometry analysis was performed following the preparation of all samples.  Mass-spectrometry analysis was performed with three biological and three technical repeats. Peptide samples were separated by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System, Thermo Scientific, USA) in a 15-cm long C18 column with a diameter of 75 μm (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The peptides were eluted with a 5–35% gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 45 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The total run time, including 10 min to reach 99% buffer B, flushing 5 min with 99% buffer B and 10 min re-equilibration to buffer A (0.1% formic acid) amounted to 70 min. Further analysis was performed with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (MS) and 15,000 (MS/MS) in a range of 400–1,500 m/z (MS) and 200–2,000 m/z (MS/MS). An isolation threshold of 67,000 was determined for precursor selection and (up to) the top-10 precursors were subjected to fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 25 NCE and 100 ms activation time. Precursors with a charged state of +1 were rejected, and all measured precursors were excluded from measurement for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry data were searched with MaxQuant v1.5.8.3 against a database containing the protein sequences from Phytozome v12.0 merged with chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins and sequences from a database of common contaminant proteins (Tyanova et al., 2016). The MaxQuant protein FDR filter was disabled, while the peptide FDR remained at 1%. The parameter “Digestion Mode” was set to “unspecific”, and modifications were not allowed. All other parameters were left at default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Physcomitrella patens, Phytohormones, Lc-ms/ms, Endogenous peptides

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Vadim Govorun
IBCH RAS


