### Accession
PXD002927

### Title
Phosphoprotein network analysis of white adipose tissues unveils deregulated pathways in response to high-fat diet

### Description
Despite wide efforts in the last decade, signaling aberrations associated with obesity remain enigmatic. Here, we carried out phosphoproteomic analysis of mouse white adipose tissues (WAT) upon low-fat diet (LFD) and high-fat diet (HFD) to dissect underlying molecular mechanisms of obesity. Of the 7696 phosphopeptides quantified, 191 proteins including various insulin-responsive proteins and metabolic enzymes functioning in lipid homeostasis, exhibited differential phosphorylation with high-fat feeding. Kinase predictions and integrated network analysis identified several deregulated kinase signaling pathways, and suggested possibilities of HFD-induced transcriptional rewiring. Further, functional validation of a novel HFD-responsive site on cytoplasmic acetyl-coA forming ACSS2 (S263) suggested that the phosphorylation is important in regulating insulin signaling and maintaining triglyceride levels. This study represents one of the first comprehensive phosphoproteome data in mouse obesity models, and describes a systems-level approach for identifying deregulated molecular events and potential therapeutic targets in the context of high-fat feeding and adipocyte perturbation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture  3T3L1 pre-adipocytes cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% calf serum. 3T3L1 pre-adipocytes were differentiated into 3T3L1 adipocytes as previously described37. For induction of insulin resistant model in vitro, differentiated 3T3L1 adipocytes were treated with 10 nM insulin or 1 μM Dexamethasone (Dex) for 16hr.  Reduction, Alkylation and Digestion 1.3 mg protein obtained from epididymal white adipose tissues (WAT) of the HFD-fed or LFD-fed mice was lysed in 9 M urea buffer consisting of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate (activated if pY needs to be obtained), 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate.  The protein was reduced by the addition of 1/10 volume of 55 mM DTT to the cleared cell supernatant for 30 minutes at room temperature. Alkylation was carried out by the addition of 120 mM iodoacetamide at a volume equal to the DTT solution, and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were then diluted 1.5-fold using 20 mM Hepes (pH8) to a final concentration of 6 M urea. LysC (Wako 129-02451) was added with a LysC to protein ratio of 1:100 and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The samples were further diluted to a final concentration of ~1 M urea using 20 mM Hepes (pH8). Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added with a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). After 4 hours of digestion at 37 °C, the peptide solution was cleaned up using an EmporeTM C18-SD Cartridge (3M Empore). The amount of peptide obtained was measured using Nanodrop (ThermoScientific).   IMAC Beads Preparation  IMAC beads were prepared as described by Ficarro et al. with slight modifications66. Briefly, 200 uL Ni-NTA agarose conjugates (Qiagen) were rinsed 3 times with 800 µl MilliQ water. Nickel was then striped from the resin by incubation with 800 µl of 100 mM EDTA pH 8.0 for 30 minutes at room temperature with end-over-end rotation. Residual nickel was rinsed 3 times with 800 µl MilliQ water, followed by incubation with 800 µl of a 100 mM iron chloride solution for 30-45 minutes. The resin was washed 3 times with 800 µl MilliQ water, followed by rinsing 4 times with 800 µl 80%  acetonitrile / 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  Phosphopeptide Enrichment  Phosphopeptides were enriched from the tryptic peptides using IMAC beads. 650 μg tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 650 μL 50% acetonitrile/0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid, followed by 1:1 dilution with 100 % acetonitrile/0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid.  The peptides were then incubated with 10 μL IMAC beads for 30 minutes with end-over-end rotation. The beads were then loaded onto a self-packed C18 StageTip 67, which was conditioned with  200 uL methanol, washed with 100 uL 50 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and equilibrated with 200 uL 1% formic acid beforehand. After being loaded onto the stage tip, the IMAC beads were washed with 100 μL 80 % acetonitrile / 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 200 uL 1 % formic acid. The phosphopeptides were eluted from the IMAC beads onto C18 membranes on the stage tip using 4 x 70 uL 500 mM dibasic sodium phosphate (pH 7.0), followed by washing using 200 uL 1% formic acid. The phosphopeptides were stored on the stage tip until they were ready to be analysed on LC-MS. The phosphopeptides were eluted from the C18 membranes with 60 μL 50% acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid, dried using a speedvac and reconstituted in 24 µL of 0.1% formic acid.  LC/MS Analysis Reconstituted peptides were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Proxeon, Fisher Scientific) coupled a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped onto a C18 pre-column and separated on a 50 cm analytical column (EASY-Spray Columns, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 50 °C using a 245 min gradient ranging from 0 to 40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid, followed by a 10 min gradient ranging from 40 to 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and stayed at 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for 10 min. Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 310–2000) were acquired with a resolution of r =70000, an AGC target of 3 x 104, and a maximum injection time of 10 ms. The twenty most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with an intensity threshold of 10000, underfill ratio of 1 % and a charge state ≥2 were isolated sequentially with an isolation window of 2 Th to a target value of 50000, maximum injection time of 50 ms and fragmented in the high energy collision cell by high energy collision dissociation using a normalized collision energy of 25%. The MS/MS was acquired with a resolution of 17500 and a starting mass of m/z 100. A dynamic exclusion was applied using exclusion duration of 15s.

### Data Protocol
Database search and high-confidence peptide identification Database search was performed with X!Tandem against the Uniprot mouse database appended with reverse sequences (as of May 10th). The search parameters were: precursor mass tolerance (MS1) between -10ppm and 20ppm, and fragment tolerance (MS2) 0.02 Da; carbomidomethylation (C: 57.02146) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M: 15.99491) and phosphorylation (S/T/Y: 79.9663) as variable modifications; minimum parent m/z was 600-4000; spectra with 6 to 50 peaks with no noise suppression. The search results were further processed to select high-confidence phosphopeptide identifications using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP)14 with the default option -OpdAEwt –drev –PPM.   Phosphorylation site localization To perform semi-quantitation by spectral counting at individual phosphorylation sites, site localization algorithm LuciPHOr16 was applied to the results with the following options: high mass accuracy option for model fitting; TPP PeptideProphet probability 0.95 for feature learning in the positive set; MS2 tolerance 0.02 Da; neutral loss (forward and decoy) of H3PO4 (97.97690); decoy site localization mass 79.966331. Scoring was performed for all peptides with initial PeptideProphet probability 0.5 and above in charge state 2+ and 3+.  Spectral counting and differential phospho-peptide expression analysis by QSPEC With the peptides with false site localization error rate (FLR) below 1%, the number of MS/MS spectra supporting phosphorylation on each candidate residue (S/T/Y) was counted to represent the “spectral counts” of each site. Spectral count-based tool QSPEC was used to perform differential expression analysis for each phospho-site, controlling the FDR at 10%.

### Publication Abstract
Despite efforts in the last decade, signaling aberrations associated with obesity remain poorly understood. To dissect molecular mechanisms that define this complex metabolic disorder, we carried out global phosphoproteomic analysis of white adipose tissue (WAT) from mice fed on low-fat diet (LFD) and high-fat diet (HFD). We quantified phosphorylation levels on 7696 peptides, and found significant differential phosphorylation levels in 282 phosphosites from 191 proteins, including various insulin-responsive proteins and metabolic enzymes involved in lipid homeostasis in response to high-fat feeding. Kinase-substrate prediction and integrated network analysis of the altered phosphoproteins revealed underlying signaling modulations during HFD-induced obesity, and suggested deregulation of lipogenic and lipolytic pathways. Mutation of the differentially-regulated novel phosphosite on cytoplasmic acetyl-coA forming enzyme ACSS2 (S263A) upon HFD-induced obesity led to accumulation of serum triglycerides and reduced insulin-responsive AKT phosphorylation as compared to wild type ACSS2, thus highlighting its role in obesity. Altogether, our study presents a comprehensive map of adipose tissue phosphoproteome in obesity and reveals many previously unknown candidate phosphorylation sites for future functional investigation.

### Keywords
Diet, Mouse phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, ASTAR

### Submitter
Hyungwon  Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, ASTAR


