### Accession
PXD031963

### Title
PIEZO1-related Hereditary Xerocytosis Red Blood Cell proteomics

### Description
Proteome of purified erythrocytes from blood samples from patients diagnosed with a PIEZO1-HX based on familial history, non-spherocytic chronic hemolysis, typical osmotic gradient ektacytometry and molecular testing and from healthy donors were analyzed by a label free quantification approach.

### Sample Protocol
Erythrocytes from 5 PIEZO1-HX hereditary xerocytosis (DHST) and from 5 healthy donors (HD) were purified using ficoll and thiazole orange cell sorting to eliminate reticulocytes as already described with minor differences (Gautier et al. , Blood Advances, 2018). Cells were lyzed in lysis buffer (Tris HCl 200 mM, pH8.5, 2% SDS) and boiled 5 minutes at 95°C. Protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA kit, Pierce). After reduction and alkylation in 20 mM TCEP [(tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine] and 50 mM Chloroacetamide, 50 µg of proteins were digested using FASP method. Eluted peptides were then fractionated using strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips in 5 fractions as previously described (Kulak NA et al., Nat Methods, 2014) and vacuum-dried while centrifuge in a Speed Vac (Eppendorf). Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC system coupled to an Orbitrap velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides from each SCX fraction were solubilized in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid containing 10% acetonitrile and separated on a C18 column (2-mm particle size, 75-mm inner diameter, 25-cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 3-hour gradient starting from 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and ending with 55% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid). The mass spectrometers acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the LTQ-Orbitrap, followed by up to 20 MS/MS CID spectra in the Velos linear trap on the most abundant ions detected. Settings for Orbitrap Velos were: full MS automatic gain control (AGC): 1.10 6 , maximum ion injection time (MIIT): 500 ms, resolution: 6.104 , m/z range 400-2000 and for MS/MS, AGC: 5.10 3, MIIT: 200 ms, minimum signal threshold: 500, isolation width: 2 Th, peptides with undefined charge state or charge state of 1 were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s and spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2009). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (release 2017-05) and the list of contaminant sequences adapted from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ ratio. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 30 min. Absolute quantification values were determined using Perseus as described above.

### Publication Abstract
Hereditary xerocytosis is a dominant red cell membrane disorder characterized by an increased leak of potassium from the inside to outside the red blood cell membrane, associated with loss of water leading to red cell dehydration and chronic hemolysis. 90% of cases are related to heterozygous gain of function mutations in PIEZO1, encoding a mechanotransductor that translates a mechanical stimulus into a biological signaling. Data are still required to understand better PIEZO1-HX pathophysiology. Recent studies identified proteomics as an accurate and high-input tool to study erythroid progenitors and circulating red cell physiology. Here, we isolated red blood cells from 5 controls and 5 HX patients carrying an identified and pathogenic PIEZO1 mutation and performed a comparative deep proteomic analysis. A total of 603 proteins were identified among which 56 were differentially expressed (40 over expressed and 16 under expressed) between controls and HX with a homogenous expression profile within each group. We observed relevant modifications in the protein expression profile related to PIEZO1 mutations, identifying two main "knots". The first contained both proteins of the chaperonin containing TCP1 complex involved in the assembly of unfolded proteins, and proteins involved in translation. The second contained proteins involved in ubiquitination. Deregulation of proteins involved in protein biosynthesis was also observed in <i>in vitro</i>-produced reticulocytes after Yoda1 exposure. Thus, our work identifies significant changes in the protein content of PIEZO1-HX erythrocytes, revealing a "PIEZO1 signature" and identifying potentially targetable pathways in this disease characterized by a heterogeneous clinical expression and contra-indication of splenectomy.

### Keywords
Erythrocytes ; red blood cells ; piezo1 ; xerocytosis ; label free ; orbitrap velos ; human

### Affiliations
UR4666 HEMATIM, Université Picardie Jules Verne, France
Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104,  France

### Submitter
Emilie-Fleur GAUTIER

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Garçon
UR4666 HEMATIM, Université Picardie Jules Verne, France


