### Accession
PXD037038

### Title
Profiling of pancreatic adenocarcinoma using artificial intelligence-based integration of multi-omic and computational pathology features

### Description
Contemporary analyses focused on a limited number of clinical and molecular features have been unable to accurately predict clinical outcomes in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Here we describe a novel, conceptual approach and use it to analyze clinical, computational pathology, and molecular (DNA, RNA, protein, and lipid) analyte data from 74 patients with resectable PDAC. Multiple, independent, machine learning models were developed and tested on curated singleand multi-omic feature/analyte panels to determine their ability to predict clinical outcomes in patients. The multi-omic models predicted recurrence with an accuracy and positive predictive value (PPV) of 0.90, 0.91, and survival of 0.85, 0.87, respectively, outperforming every singleomic model. In predicting survival, we defined a parsimonious model with only 589 multi-omic analytes that had an accuracy and PPV of 0.85. Our approach enables discovery of parsimonious biomarker panels with similar predictive performance to that of larger and resource consuming panels and thereby has a significant potential to democratize precision cancer medicine worldwide.

### Sample Protocol
Patients were selected based on the samples that were available in the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Biorepository. All patients were consented prior to specimen collection and all specimens were collected as part of standard of care. Tissues were removed as part of the standard of care, which are not needed for diagnosis purposes and would otherwise be discarded. Blood samples were collected as part of routine blood work. The time period in which these samples were collected ranged from March 2015 to April 2019. Follow ups were completed based on standard of care. All cases are pancreatic cancer with the diagnosis of ductal adenocarcinoma. This was chosen based on the availability of FFPE, frozen tissue, buffy coat, and plasma. FFPE and frozen tissue were collected following tumor resection and were stored in the biobank for future research use. The process of collection and storage was done on site at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. The Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Biobank and Pathology Shared Resource reviewed in-house cases and histologically confirmed PDAC from this list. Specifically, fresh frozen tissue (tumor and adjacent normal) and formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue (tumor and adjacent normal) were identified. The biobank cut each sample for genomic analysis (10 unstained slides per sample + 1 H&E). These slides were de-identified and sent to Tempus Labs (Santa Monica, CA) via overnight shipping. The following set of samples were shipped to Tempus: • 93 FFPE tumor samples (10 unstained slides +1 H&E) • 93 FFPE normal samples (10 unstained slides +1 H&E) • 93 blood samples (buffy coat at 500uL aliquots)  Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Proteomics and Metabolomic Proteomics Core: • 60 Frozen Tissue normal • 60 Frozen Tissue Tumor • 61 Tumor serum samples with 81 unpaired normal samples We excluded stage 3 and 4 patients since this cohort had very few samples to train for prediction models.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics analyses were performed on 58 patients with paired tumor-normal tissue samples, via resection of tumor and normal samples from the same frozen tissue block and on 61 tumor serum samples with 81 unpaired normal samples. Proteomics data was generated using DIA-MS technology, with post-processing bioinformatics pipelines performing QC, peak picking, retention time alignment, scoring and false discovery rate identification, normalization, and quantitation. MS2 peak areas at both protein and peptide levels were computed as proteomics features, using a 3777 protein panel for paired tumor-normal tissue samples and a 1052 protein panel for unpaired serum samples. Further pre-processing steps for all proteomics data included filtering out proteins and lipids with more than 25% missing data not meeting quality control criteria, removing proteins with low variance < 0.1 threshold, followed by imputation of remaining missing values using MEDIAN / 2 value for each column and univariate normalization of each column. Alternate strategies for imputation of missing proteomics values, specifically column mean and kNN (k nearest neighbor) imputation, however both were deemed too sensitive to outliers due to small sample size. Differential expression analysis was performed on the 58 paired tumor-normal tissue samples. Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test was performed between the dependent tumor - normal proteomics samples, with two-tailed p-value < 0.05 threshold applied to further remove tumor tissue protein distributions similar to their respective paired normals. Differential expression analysis was performed on the 61 tumor serum samples with unpaired 81 normal serum samples. Mann-Whitney U-test was performed between unpaired tumor - normal protein distributions, with two-tailed p-value < 0.05 threshold applied to remove serum tumor protein distributions similar to the unpaired normals.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer, Parsimonious models, Biomarker models, : precision medicine, Global public health

### Affiliations
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center
Cedars Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Niveda Sundararaman

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center


