### Accession
PXD034470

### Title
lncRNA HOTAIRM1 Coordinates with RNA Processing Factors in DNA Damage Repair

### Description
The eukaryotic RNA processing factor Y14 participates in double-strand break (DSB) repair via its RNA-dependent interaction with the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) complex. We identified the long non-coding RNA HOTAIRM1 as a candidate that mediates this interaction. HOTAIRM1 localized to DNA damage sites induced by ionizing radiation. Depletion of HOTAIRM1 delayed the recruitment of DNA damage response and repair factors to DNA lesions and reduced DNA repair efficiency. Identification of the HOTAIRM1 interactome revealed a large set of RNA processing factors including mRNA surveillance factors. The surveillance factors Upf1 and SMG6 localized to DNA damage sites in a HOTAIRM1-dependent manner. Depletion of Upf1 or SMG6 increased the level of DSB-induced non-coding transcripts at damaged sites, indicating a pivotal role for Upf1/SMG6-mediated RNA degradation in DNA repair. We conclude that HOTAIRM1 serves as an assembly scaffold for both DNA repair and RNA processing factors that act in concert to repair DSBs.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293 cells are grown as attachment cultures in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle’s Medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum. Cells were UV-crosslinked and cell lysates were prepared using NET-2 buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl). Biotinylated antisense DNA oligonucleotide probes (100 pmol) and magnetic streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to the extracts. After incubation at room temperature for 4 hrs, beads were washed with NET-2 buffer and 0.05% NP-40, and bound RNAs and associated proteins were collected. For mass spectrometry, samples were fractionated on SDS-polyacrylamide gels and stained with Coomassie blue. The bands of interest were excised, trypsinized and subjected to nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled with the Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, peptide mixtures were separated on BEH C18 column (130Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) using a gradient in 30 min from 5% to 35% solvent B (solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile; Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Full MS resolutions were set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and MS2 resolutions were set to 15,000. Isolation width was set at 1.3 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set at 30%.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched against an in silico tryptic digest of UniProt human proteome database using the Mascot search engine v.2.6.1 (Matrix Science). The search parameters included the mass tolerance of precursor peptide was set as 10 ppm, and the tolerance for MS/MS fragment was 0.02 Da, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, variable oxidation of methionine and variable deamidation of asparagine or glutamine. Peptide spectrum matches were verified by 1% false discovery rate. We obtained 13529 peptides with a SEQUEST score >20, which represented 3990 proteins in the MASCOT search (Table S3). Among them, 688 proteins showed ≥ 5 protein

### Publication Abstract
The eukaryotic exon junction complex component Y14 participates in double-strand break (DSB) repair via its RNA-dependent interaction with the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) complex. Using immunoprecipitation-RNA-seq, we identified a set of Y14-associated long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). The lncRNA HOTAIRM1 serves as a strong candidate that mediates the interaction between Y14 and the NHEJ complex. HOTAIRM1 localized to near ultraviolet laser-induced DNA damage sites. Depletion of HOTAIRM1 delayed the recruitment of DNA damage response and repair factors to DNA lesions and compromised the efficiency of NHEJ-mediated DSB repair. Identification of the HOTAIRM1 interactome revealed a large set of RNA processing factors including mRNA surveillance factors. The surveillance factors Upf1 and SMG6 localized to DNA damage sites in a HOTAIRM1-dependent manner. Depletion of Upf1 or SMG6 increased the level of DSB-induced non-coding transcripts at damaged sites, indicating a pivotal role for Upf1/SMG6-mediated RNA degradation in DNA repair. We conclude that HOTAIRM1 serves as an assembly scaffold for both DNA repair and mRNA surveillance factors that act in concert to repair DSBs.

### Keywords
Lc/ms/ms based proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Fu-An Li

### Lab Head
Dr Woan-Yuh Tarn
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


