### Accession
PXD029798

### Title
Proteome Changes in the Development of Chronic Human Papillomavirus Infection in Rwandan Women

### Description
What happens to the proteome when a high risk (HR)-HPV infection occurs, when it is cleared and when it becomes chronic was investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution (20 %) was added to the samples in RNA-later until 2% final concentration, the samples were sonicated for 25 min and subsequently heated at 60°C fro 5 min, followed by shaking on a FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) for 5 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s. Samples were centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. The samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, the samples were transferred onto Nanosep 30k Omega filters (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA) followed by centrifugation at 12 000 rpm for 10 min at 40°C to avoid the precipitation of salts and subsequently washed 3 times with 200 µl of 8 M urea at 40°C. The washed samples were reduced on filter with 100 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) solution in 8 M urea for 1 h at 37°C, then washed twice with 200 µl of 8 M urea. Alkylation of the cysteine residues was performed using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) solution in digestion buffer (0.5 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added (300 ng per sample) and incubated at 37°C overnight; another aliquot of trypsin solution (300 ng) was added and the mixture was incubated at 37°C for 3 h. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro 16plex) reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labeled samples were combined into the respective pools, the pooled samples were concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and subsequent centrifugation.  The combined TMT-labeled samples were fractionated into 40 primary fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21, 2+22, … 20+40), evaporated and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nanoflow LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and relative quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database search was performed using the Mascot search engine v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (December 2019) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with 1 missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, cysteine methylthiolation, TMTpro on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for PSM and Protein ID validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. TMTpro reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 20 ppm mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter S/N values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 on the total peptide amount (excluding the peptides from keratin and main plasma proteins). Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human papillomavirus, Hiv, Tandem mass tags, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Hpv, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
SAMBIO Core Facilities, Sahgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg
Associate Professor, Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Blå Stråket 2, SE-41345, Göteborg, Sweden.

### Submitter
Proteomics Core Facility

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Giglio
Associate Professor, Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Blå Stråket 2, SE-41345, Göteborg, Sweden.


