### Accession
PXD026801

### Title
Pomacea canaliculata ampullar proteome: a nematode-based bio-pesticide induces changes in metabolic and stress-related pathways

### Description
Recent pandemic outbreaks confirmed the crucial role of early detection and more comprehensive knowledge of invasive species and infectious diseases. The freshwater snail Pomacea canaliculata is indexed among the most invasive pests in the world and it can be the intermediate host of the human parasitic nematode Angiostrongylus cantonensis. Here, we investigated the changes in the proteome of the snail ampulla after the exposure to a nematode-based molluscicide.

### Sample Protocol
For each replicate, in solution digestion was performed using 50 µg of proteins. Briefly, proteins were reduced and alkylated by 5mM dithioerythritol and 15 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) solution buffered in 50 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37 °C using an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w).An UHPLC ultimate 3000 system coupled online to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Chromatographic separation of peptides took place in a reverse-phase C18 column (50 mm × 2.1 μm ID, 1.8 μm, Zorbax) and elution was performed using a binary system of solvent. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water. Mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. For separation, a linear binary gradient was applied: 2–3% B in 5 min, to 28% B in the next 59 min, and then 90% B in 7 min. The column was maintained at 30 °C and the flow rate employed was 0.3 mL/min. The precursor ion detection was done in an m/z-range from 200 to 2 000, the acquisition range for fragment ions was m/z from 200 to 2 000. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0.7 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw ms/ms data were converted by msConvert ProteoWizard (v.3.0.19239) in MGF file using default settings and uploaded to MASCOT server (v.2.7.0) for MS/MS Ion Search.  Search was performed using ASM307304v1 database [15] and Uniprot (2018_05) restricted to Protostomia. Furthermore, parameters for identification included: i) trypsin as enzyme with 1 of maximum missed cleavage; ii) mass error tolerances for precursor and fragment ions set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; iii) peptide charge (2+, 3+, 4+); iv) protein mass no restriction; v) carbamidomethyl cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification while deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ) and oxidation of methionine (M) were considered as dynamic modification. Label free quantification using spectral counting emPAI was performed by MASCOT.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pomacea canaliculata</i> is a freshwater gastropod known for being both a highly invasive species and one of the possible intermediate hosts of the mammalian parasite <i>Angiostrongylus cantonensis</i>. With the aim of providing new information concerning <i>P. canaliculata</i> biology and adaptability, the first proteome of the ampulla, i.e., a small organ associated with the circulatory system and known as a reservoir of nitrogen-containing compounds, was obtained. The ampullar proteome was derived from ampullae of control snails or after exposure to a nematode-based molluscicide, known for killing snails in a dose- and temperature-dependent fashion. Proteome analysis revealed that the composition of connective ampulla walls, cell metabolism and oxidative stress response were affected by the bio-pesticide. Ultrastructural investigations have highlighted the presence of rhogocytes within the ampullar walls, as it has been reported for other organs containing nitrogen storage tissue. Collected data suggested that the ampulla may belong to a network of organs involved in controlling and facing oxidative stress in different situations. The response against the nematode-based molluscicide recalled the response set up during early arousal after aestivation and hibernation, thus encouraging the hypothesis that metabolic pathways and antioxidant defences promoting amphibiousness could also prove useful in facing other challenges stimulating an oxidative stress response, e.g., immune challenges or biocide exposure. Targeting the oxidative stress resistance of <i>P. canaliculata</i> may prove helpful for increasing its susceptibility to bio-pesticides and may help the sustainable control of this pest's diffusion.

### Keywords
Qexactive, Amupulla, Biopesticide, Pomacea canaliculata

### Affiliations
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

### Submitter
Francesco Demetrio Lofaro

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Boraldi
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia


