### Accession
PXD024065

### Title
Interaction of Hsp70 Ssb1 and atypical Hsp70 Ssz1

### Description
Our goal was to better understand the interaction between the Hsp70 Ssb1 and the atypical Hsp70 Ssz1, which we had uncovered by in vivo site-specific Bpa crosslinking. Ssz1 having Bpa incorporated was purified and incubated with purified Ssb1 and the J-domain protein Zuo1 during activation of photo cross-linking. After protein gel electrophoresis and protease digestion of excised bands, the resulting cross-linked peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry and identified by StavroX.

### Sample Protocol
Polyacrylamide gels were stained with Coomassie R250 to visualize protein bands. Gel pieces were de-stained completely in MeOH/H2O/NH4HCO3 (50%/50%/100 mM), dehydrated for 2 min in ACN/H2O/NH4HCO3 (50%/50%/25mM) then once more for 30 sec in 100% ACN. After destaining, all samples were dried in a Speed-Vac for 1 min, reduced in 25 mM DTT (Dithiotreitol in 25 mM NH4HCO3) for 15 min at 56°C, alkylated with 55 mM IAA (Iodoacetamide in 25mM NH4HCO3) in darkness at room temperature for 15 min, washed once in H2O, dehydrated for 2 min in ACN/H2O/NH4HCO3 (50%:50%:25 mM) then once more for 30 sec in 100% ACN. Samples were dried again and rehydrated with 20 μl of trypsin solution with 0.01% ProteaseMAX™ surfactant (10 ng/μl Trypsin from Promega Corp. in 25 mM NH4HCO3/0.01% w/v of ProteaseMAX™ from Promega Corp.). Samples were allowed to stand for 2 min at room temperature prior to addition of an additional 30 μl of overlay solution (25 mM NH4HCO3/0.01% w/v of ProteaseMAX™) was added to keep gel pieces immersed throughout the digestion. The digestion was conducted for 3 hrs at 42°C. For all samples, proteolysis was terminated by acidification with 2.5% TFA (Trifluoroacetic Acid) to 0.3% final (10 μl added). Degraded ProteaseMAX™ was removed via centrifugation (max speed, 10 minutes) and the peptides solid phase extracted (Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tips from Agilent). Peptides were eluted off the C18 column with 15 μl of acetonitrile/H2O/TFA (70%:30%:0.1%) dried to minimum volume then brought up to 20 μl total volume with 0.1% formic acid; 3 μl was loaded on the instrument.  For further digestion of Ssz1S282Bpa in vitro crosslink products, soluble peptides generated from tryptic digestion were transferred to a new Protein LoBind tube (~50 μl volume) and secondary digestion carried out using 5 μl AspN proteinase (20 ng/μl endoproteinase AspN from Roche Diagnostics in 25 mM NH4HCO3) for 2 hrs at 37°C. Concurrently, the remaining gel pieces post tryptic digestion were dehydrated with 10 μl of ACN and re-hydrated with 20 μl of secondary digestion mix composed of 5 μl AspN proteinase (20 ng/μl endoproteinase AspN from Roche Diagnostics in 25 mM NH4HCO3), 13 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 2 μl of 0.1% ProteaseMAX™ surfactant. This digestion was allowed to proceed for 2 hrs at 37°C after which the solution was removed and combined with the primary “in liquid” AspN digestion. Proteolysis was terminated and subsequent steps performed as described above.  Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using the Agilent 1100 nanoflow system (Agilent) connected to a hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source held at constant 50C. Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 3 µM, 100 Å, 150 x 0.075 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto which 3 µl of extracted peptides was automatically loaded. NanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and B: 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.50 µL/min to load the peptides (over a 30 minute period) and 0.3 µl/min to elute peptides directly into the nano-electrospray with gradual gradient from 3% (v/v) B to 20% (v/v) B over 18 minutes and concluded with 5 minute fast gradient from 20% (v/v) B to 50% (v/v) B at which time a 4 minute flash-out from 50-95% (v/v) B took place. As peptides eluted from the HPLC-column/electrospray source survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 followed by MS2 for the 20 most intense peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 350 to 1800 m/z; redundancy was limited by dynamic exclusion with repeat count of 2 and 15 sec duration. CID-based MS/MS fragmentation in the Ion Trap portion of the instrument used activation time of 10 msec, normalized collision energy of 35 and isolation width of 2AMU. Monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled and +2 and lower charge states were rejected.

### Data Protocol
To obtain identifications of un-crosslinked peptides raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development). Resulting mgf files were used to search against E. coli amino acid sequence database containing Ssz1 and Zuo1 constructs with a decoy reverse entries and a list of common contaminants (8,493 sequence entries) using the UW Biotechnology Center Mascot search engine 2.2.07 [Matrix Science] with variable Methionine oxidation with Asparagine and Glutamine deamidation plus fixed cysteine Carbamidomethylation. To identify the proteins most highly represented in the samples derived from in vivo crosslinking, Scaffold4 (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to rank candidates based on total spectrum count. To determine the identity of crosslinked products a targeted database search of raw mass spec data was conducted using only the sequence of proteins used in the crosslinking experiment plus common lab protein contaminants. Crosslinked candidates were generated using StavroX software (StavroX Freeware version 3.6.6. from University of Halle-Wittenberg) with BPA chosen as a cross-linker, Lysine, Arginine and Aspartate, included only when applicable, with 3 missed cleavages as protease sites and static Cysteine  carbamidomethylation plus variable Methionine oxidation as possible modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass at 0.6 Da. All crosslinking candidates were below 5% of the false discovery rate. Designation of crosslinking sites was based on the number of occurrences of the crosslinking sites of the candidates within the top ten highest scores. MS1 and MS/MS spectrum of crosslinking candidates were manually examined. Crosslinking results were crosschecked with UV unexposed or individually UV exposed proteins as controls to ensure robustness.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ssz1, Yeast, Photo crosslinking, Ssb1, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Elizabeth A, Craig
Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin - Madison


