### Accession
PXD020261

### Title
Multi-platforms approach for plasma: complementarity of Olink PEA technology to DIA-based mass spectrometry-based protein profiling

### Description
Plasma proteome is the ultimate target for the biomarker discovery. It stores an endless amount of information on the pathophysiological status of a living organism, which however is still difficult to comprehensively access. The high structural complexity of the plasma proteome can be addressed by using a system-wide and unbiased tool such as mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) or highly sensitive targeted immunoassays as Olink Proximity Extension Assays. We have tested the performance of LC-MS/MS in data –dependent and -independent acquisition modes and Olink PEA to measure circulating plasma proteins in 173 human plasma samples from a southern Germany population-cohort. More than 300 proteins were measured by both LC-MS/MS approaches, mainly including high abundance functional plasma proteins. By using the Olink PEA technology we measured 728 plasma proteins, covering a broad dynamic range with high sensitivity down to pg/ml levels. We found 35 overlapping proteins in all three analytical platforms, predominantly secreted and highly abundant in plasma. The complementarity of the platforms was assessed by veryfing the reproducibility of data distributions, statistical correlation of measurements and gender-based differential expression analysis. Our work highlights the limitations and the advantages of both targeted and untargeted approaches and prove their complementarity. We demostrated that by combining the results of the three platforms we gain in depth proteome coverage as well as biological insights.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were prepared using PreOmics’ iST Kit (Preomics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) according to manufacturers’ specifications. After drying, the peptides were resuspended in 3% ACN and 0.5% TFA acid. The HRM Calibration Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to all of the samples according to manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
MS measurement MS data were acquired in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode on a Q Exactive (QE) high field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Approximately 0.5 μg per sample were automatically loaded to the online coupled RSLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) HPLC system. A nano trap column was used (300 μm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75µm ID x 250mm, 1.8µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40°C. For DIA acquisition, peptides were eluted from column at 250 nl/min using increasing acetonitrile (ACN) concentration (in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 40 % over a 45 minutes gradient. The HRM DIA method consisted of a survey scan from 300 to 1500 m/z at 120 000 resolution and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 or 120 ms maximum injection time (IT). Fragmentation was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a target value of 3e6 ions determined with predictive AGC. Precursor peptides were isolated with 17 variable windows spanning from 300 to 1500 m/z at 30 000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and automatic injection time. The normalized collision energy (CE) was 28 and the spectra were recorded in profile type. Generation of the spectral library for DIA data analysis For the spectral library an in-house generated plasma library was merged with publically available LS-MS/MS runs. The in-house library encompassed 89 files of plasma and serum preparations, spiked with the HRM Calibration Kit, were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific) using the search engine node Byonic (Version 2.0, Proteinmetrics, San Carlos, CA). Peptide and protein FDRs were filtered to satisfy the 1% peptide level. The peptide spectral library was generated in Spectronaut 10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with default settings using the Proteome Discoverer result file. Spectronaut was equipped with the Swissprot human database (Release 2017.02, 20194 sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a few spiked proteins (e.g., Biognosys iRT peptide sequences). The second part of the library was generated from 95 publically available runs of fractionated plasma from [10]. The spectral library was built in Spectronaut 12 - Pulsar directly, applying peptide and protein FDR of 1%. Both databases were merged in Spectronaut 12 according manufacturer settings. The final spectral library generated in Spectronaut contained 1838 protein groups and 37079 peptide precursors.  Spectronaut analysis and data processing of DIA measurements The DIA-MS data were analyzed using the Spectronaut software (version 12; Biognosys, Schlieren, Schwitzerland) as described previously [27]. Due to the explorative nature of the study no protein FDR on the identification level was applied. Quantification is based on the summed up abundances of proteotypic peptides with data filtering set to Qvalue required.

### Publication Abstract
The plasma proteome is the ultimate target for biomarker discovery. It stores an endless amount of information on the pathophysiological status of a living organism, which is, however, still difficult to comprehensively access. The high complexity of the plasma proteome can be addressed by either a system-wide and unbiased tool such as mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) or a highly sensitive targeted immunoassay such as the proximity extension assay (PEA). To address relevant differences and important shared characteristics, we tested the performance of LC-MS/MS in the data-dependent and data-independent acquisition modes and Olink PEA to measure circulating plasma proteins in 173 human plasma samples from a Southern German population-based cohort. We demonstrated the measurement of more than 300 proteins with both LC-MS/MS approaches applied, mainly including high-abundance plasma proteins. By the use of the PEA technology, we measured 728 plasma proteins, covering a broad dynamic range with high sensitivity down to pg/mL concentrations. Then, we quantified 35 overlapping proteins with all three analytical platforms, verifying the reproducibility of data distributions, measurement correlation, and gender-based differential expression. Our work highlights the limitations and the advantages of both targeted and untargeted approaches and proves their complementary strengths. We demonstrated a significant gain in proteome coverage depth and subsequent biological insight by a combination of platforms-a promising approach for future biomarker and mechanistic studies.

### Keywords
Kora: cooperative health research in the region of augsburg, Olink technology, Dia-ms

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Melanie Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany


