### Accession
PXD032007

### Title
Global Phosphoproteomics of BRCA1-deficient mammary tumors in genetic mouse models

### Description
The aim of the study is to identify differences in the global phosphoproteome across a BRCA1-deficient mouse mammary tumor panel. We have matched PARPi-naive and PARPi-resistant tumors, in which resistance was induced in vivo (mice bearing tumors were treated with PARPi untill the tumors stopped responding). Each pair of matched naive/resistant tumors originate from a different original tumor donor (one can consider each individual donor as an individual patient). From another analysis (RAD51 IRIF) we know that the mechanism of PARPi-resistance in a number of the tumors is driven by alterations in DNA damage response. Therefore, we can divide the tumors into four groups: (A) HR proficient, the exact mechanism not known, (B) HR proficient due to the loss of 53bp1 (TP53BP1), (C) HR proficient due to loss of Rev7 (MAD2L2) and (D) HR deficient, mechanism of resistance not known. Additionally, each tumor from our panel was retransplanted and challenged with 15 Gy irradiation to trigger a DNA damage response, therefore for each tumor we have an irradiated (IR) and a non-irradiated (NIR) sample. In this experiment each sample was processed in duplicate. Given all this, group (A) consists of 6 individual donors x 2 (matched naive/resistant) x 2 (NIR/IR) x 2 (duplicate) = 48 samples (samples 1-48); groups (B)-(D): 2 donors (per group) x 2 (naive/resistant) x 2 (NIR/IR) x 2 (duplicate) = 16 samples/group (B: samples 65-80, C: samples 81-96 and D: 49-64, according to the OPL label). In total this gives: 48 + 16 +16 +16 = 96 samples. Part of this analysis is used in the paper that also describes data from PXD031711

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen KB1P tumor samples were processed using a cryotome into 10 µm cryo-sections. Sliced tissue was lysed in urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate), followed by three cycles of sonication (MSE soniprep 150). Afterwards, samples were cleared by centrifugation (2800 x g, 15 min, room temperature).  An equivalent of 500 µg total protein was used and diluted with Urea lysis buffer to a final concentration of 1 µg/µl. Dithiotreitol (DTT) ( 4 mM, 30 min at 55°C) was added, followed by, iodoacetamide (10 mM,15 min in the dark). The solution was then diluted to 2 M Urea via the addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a final concentration of 5 µg/ml overnight (room temperature). The digests were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and desalted using (30mg) Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Columns were equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. Subsequently, bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% TFA and eluted in 0.1 % TFA/80% ACN. Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed from 500 µg peptides using titaniumdioxide (TiOx) beads from GL sciences (10 micron). For TiOx capture, 2.5 mg of TiO2 beads (GL sciences, 10 µm) were packed in Stage-tip fitted with a 16G-needle punch of C8 material at the narrow end and were washed with 200 µl of 0.1% TFA/80% ACN and equilibrated with 200 µl of 300 mM acid lactic solution. Desalted peptides were diluted 1:1 with lactic acid solution (0.3 g/ml lactic acid, 0.07% TFA, 53% ACN) and were loaded in the tips centrifuged at 1500 G for 4 min. Tips were washed with 200 µl lactic acid solution, and secondly with 200 µl 0.1% TFA/80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted in two steps with 50 µl 0.5% piperidine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 50 µl 5% piperidine, and quenched in 100 µl 20% H3PO4. Phosphopeptides were desalted using 200-µl STAGE tip fitted with a 16G-needle punch of SDB-XC SPE material at the narrow end, which was previously washed with 20 µl 0.1% TFA/80% ACN and equilibrated with 20 µl 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were loaded and centrifuged for 3 min at 1000G. SDB-XC beds were then washed with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA, and desalted phosphopeptides were eluted with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA/80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% TFA/4% ACN prior to injection; 18 µl was injected using partial loop injection.  Peptide separation for KB1P tumors was performed with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). The LC column was maintained at 50°C using a pencil-stype heater (Phoenix ST). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 80 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1% (resulting in an intensity threshold of 1.3E4). Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
For phosphoproteomic experiments with cells and tumors phosphosite quantification was performed using MaxQuant software. KB1P tumor samples were searched with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 and Uniprot Mus musculus reference proteome downloaded in June 2015 (canonical and isoforms, 34331 entries). Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met, +15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic hotspot mutations and structural amplifications and fusions that affect fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (encoded by FGFR2) occur in multiple types of cancer<sup>1</sup>. However, clinical responses to FGFR inhibitors have remained variable<sup>1-9</sup>, emphasizing the need to better understand which FGFR2 alterations are oncogenic and therapeutically targetable. Here we apply transposon-based screening<sup>10,11</sup> and tumour modelling in mice<sup>12,13</sup>, and find that the truncation of exon 18 (E18) of Fgfr2 is a potent driver mutation. Human oncogenomic datasets revealed a diverse set of FGFR2 alterations, including rearrangements, E1-E17 partial amplifications, and E18 nonsense and frameshift mutations, each causing the transcription of E18-truncated FGFR2 (FGFR2<sup>&#x394;E18</sup>). Functional in vitro and in vivo examination of a compendium of FGFR2<sup>&#x394;E18</sup> and full-length variants pinpointed FGFR2-E18 truncation as single-driver alteration in cancer. By contrast, the oncogenic competence of FGFR2 full-length amplifications depended on a distinct landscape of cooperating driver genes. This suggests that genomic alterations that generate stable FGFR2<sup>&#x394;E18</sup> variants are actionable therapeutic targets, which we confirmed in preclinical mouse and human tumour models, and in a clinical trial. We propose that cancers containing any FGFR2 variant with a truncated E18 should be considered for FGFR-targeted therapies.

### Keywords
Brca1, Global phosphoproteomics, Rad51 foci, Label-free, Dna damage response, Parpi, Gemm

### Affiliations
AmsterdamUMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
AmsterdamUMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


