### Accession
PXD009896

### Title
ITGA3 neg. human keratinocytes

### Description
Integrin alpha3beta1, a major epidermal adhesion receptor is critical for organization of the basement membrane during development and wound healing. Integrin alpha3 deficiency leads to interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome and epidermolysis bullosa (ILNEB), an autosomal recessive multiorgan disease characterized by basement membrane abnormalities in skin, lung and kidney. The pathogenetic chains from ITGA3 mutation to tissue abnormalities are still unclear. Although integrin 3 was reported to regulate multiple extracellular proteins, the composition of the extracellular compartment of integrin alpha3-negative keratinocytes has not been resolved so far. In a comprehensive approach, quantitative proteomics of deposited extracellular matrix, conditioned cultured media as well as of the intracellular compartment of keratinocytes isolated from an ILNEB patient and from normal skin were performed. By mass spectrometry-based proteomics, 167 proteins corresponding to the GO terms “extracellular” and “cell adhesion”, or included in the “human matrisome” were identified in the deposited extracellular matrix, and 217 in the conditioned media of normal human keratinocytes. In the absence of integrin alpha3, 33% and 26% respectively were dysregulated. Dysregulated proteins were functionally related to integrin alpha3 or were known interaction partners. The results show that in the absence of integrin alpha3 ILNEB keratinocytes produce a fibronectin-rich microenvironment and make use of fibronectin-binding integrin subunits alphav and alpha5.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were double SILAC labeled (light and heavy).  Three cellular compartments were analyzed: extracellular matrix (ECM), cell lysate (CL) and conditioned medium (CM). Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, bands cut in 10 sclices per sample and proteins in-gel digested with trypsin. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.4.1.2, using double labeling as quantification (0/0 and 8/10).

### Publication Abstract
Integrin &#x3b1;3&#x3b2;1, a major epidermal adhesion receptor is critical for organization of the basement membrane during development and wound healing. Integrin &#x3b1;3 deficiency leads to interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome and epidermolysis bullosa (ILNEB), an autosomal recessive multiorgan disease characterized by basement membrane abnormalities in skin, lung and kidney. The pathogenetic chains from ITGA3 mutation to tissue abnormalities are still unclear. Although integrin &#x3b1;3 was reported to regulate multiple extracellular proteins, the composition of the extracellular compartment of integrin &#x3b1;3-negative keratinocytes has not been resolved so far. In a comprehensive approach, quantitative proteomics of deposited extracellular matrix, conditioned cultured media as well as of the intracellular compartment of keratinocytes isolated from an ILNEB patient and from normal skin were performed. By mass spectrometry-based proteomics, 167 proteins corresponding to the GO terms "extracellular" and "cell adhesion", or included in the "human matrisome" were identified in the deposited extracellular matrix, and 217 in the conditioned media of normal human keratinocytes. In the absence of integrin &#x3b1;3, 33% and 26% respectively were dysregulated. Dysregulated proteins were functionally related to integrin &#x3b1;3 or were known interaction partners. The results show that in the absence of integrin &#x3b1;3 ILNEB keratinocytes produce a fibronectin-rich microenvironment and make use of fibronectin-binding integrin subunits &#x3b1;v and &#x3b1;5. The most important results were validated in monolayer and organotypic coculture models. Finally, the in vivo relevance of the most dysregulated components was demonstrated by immunostainings of skin, kidney and lung samples of three ILNEB patients.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Keratinocyte, Skin

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                   F  +41 26 300 9741                 W    http://www.unifr.ch/biology/research/dengjel/
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                   F  +41 26 300 9741                 W    http://www.unifr.ch/biology/research/dengjel/


