### Accession
PXD016579

### Title
Multi-omics profiling of non-small cell lung cancer patient-derived xenografts reveals proteome and phosphoproteome remodeling associated with patient outcome

### Description
131 patient-derived xenograft models were generated for non-small cell lung carcinoma and were profiled by analysis of gene copy number variation, whole exome sequence, methylome, transcriptome, proteome, and phospho(Tyr)-proteome. Proteome profiling resolved the known major histology subtypes and revealed 3 proteome subtypes (proteotypes) among adenocarcinoma and 2 in squamous cell carcinoma that were associated with distinct protein-phosphotyrosine signatures and patient survival. Proteomes of human tumor were discernible from murine stroma. Stromal proteomes were similar between histological subtypes, but two adenocarcinoma proteotypes had distinct stromal proteomes. Tumor and stromal proteotypes comprise signatures of targetable biological pathways suggesting that patient stratification by proteome profiling may be an actionable approach to precisely diagnose and treat cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Trypsinization As previously described (Krieger et al., 2019),  samples were weighted then sliced to thin pieces. Each mg of wet tissue was lysed using 20uL lysis buffer (0.5 M Tris pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM TCEP, 5 mM EDTA) and sonication for 15 seconds twice. Samples were heated at 95C for 20 min at 1000 rpm, then cooled to room temperature for 10 minutes. Samples are then spun at 20000 g for 5 min at 18C (Hughes et al., 2017). Protein concentration of the supernatant was measured by tryptophan fluorescence assay (Kulak et al., 2014).100 μg of proteins were precipitated by methanol-chloroform method and digested overnight at 37C with 1 μg trypsin/Lys-C mixture (Paulo and Gygi, 2017).  TMT Labeling of Peptides Peptide concentration was measured at A280 using nanodrop and 50 g of each sample was labeled with 10-plex tandem mass tag reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions. Eight PDX samples were grouped and individually labeled with isobaric compounds (TMT10-126, 127, 128N, 129, or 130), while two pooled mixtures of all 131 PDX samples were labeled with TMT10-126 or 131, to serve as normalization controls (Hughes et al., 2017). Excess TMT label was quenched with 8% ammonium hydroxide prior to TMT-labeled samples being pooled at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio, vacuum centrifuged. Fractionation by HPLC The pooled sample is resuspended using 20 L of ddH20 and was fractionated to 60 fractions using high pH reversed phase HPLC at 4C with a flow rate of 1mL/min using Waters 1525 binary HPLC pump. The 60 fractions were then lyophilized and resuspended in 100uL of 0.1% formic acid and transferred to a 96 well plate. Each fraction is then loaded into Evotip C18trap column as per manufacturer’s instruction. Samples were injected into Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS using an Evosep One instrument for 30 samples per day.  Total proteome MS acquisition settings For MS1 acquisition parameters, only ions with 2-6 charge states were accepted. MS1 acquisition resolution was 120000 with AGC target value of 4X10^5 and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 50 ms for scan range of 550-1800 m/z.  For MS2, ions were isolated in quadrupole by an isolation width of 2 m/z. MS2 scans were performed in the linear ion trap with maximum ion IT of 50 ms, AGC target value of 1 x 104 , and normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 35 using the turbo scan rate. For MS3 scans, ions were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation width of 2 m/z and MultiNotch synchronous precursor selection MS3 scanning for TMT tags was used. Higher energy collisional dissociation activation was used for fragmentation of ions with NCE of 65. Scans were then measure in orbitrap using a 50,000 resolution for scan range of 100-500 m/z with AGC target value of 1 x 105 , and maximum ion IT of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion of 65 s was used to permit more identification of peptides.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Quantification of Total Proteome The acquired raw data was then searched against reviewed Uniprot Human and Mouse proteome using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 search engine. Data analysis MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant and fragment lists searched against the human and mouse reviewed UniProt Reference databases. For both search algorithms, the parent and fragment mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Only complete tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages were accepted. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were included as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation was considered fixed modifications. Search results were filtered using a strict false discovery rate (FDR) q-value of 0.01. TMT reporter ions were quantified using MaxQuant reporter ions quantifier node with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm, on the MS order of MS3.  Proteome subtyping using consensus clustering Consensus clustering was performed using subset of tumor proteome quantified in at least 70% of the samples for ADC and SQC samples separately using ConsensusClusterPlus. Pearson correlation for the distance metric and Average method for the linkage algorithm, with 1000 resampling steps (epsilon=0.8) was used.  Number of clusters (3 for ADC and 2 for SQC) that had at least 0.8 cluster consensus score, which indicates high stability was picked(Wilkerson and Hayes, 2010). Proteome hierarchical clustering Unless indicated otherwise, all proteome hierarchical clustering was performed by using the subset of proteome quantified in at least 70% of samples. Protein expressions are transformed to a z-score across all samples. For sample (column-wise) and protein (row-wise) clustering, Pearson correlation distance with average linkage was used using Perseus software default parameters. Principal component analysis Only a subset of tumor proteome quantified in all samples were used for principal component analysis using Perseus software. PCA was performed on all 131 PDX and 6 normal tissues to illustrate the absence of TMT group or isobaric group batch affect. Further to illustrate the separation of 3 ADC proteotypes , and 2 SQC proteotypes. Only the two components with the highest proportion of variance were picked for plotting the PCA plot. Volcano Analysis All transcription factors found in data were first identified. Then, only a subset of transcription factors that were quantified in at least 70% of samples were used for volcano analysis using Perseus software. Volcano plot settings were false discovery rate below 0.05 and S0 of 0.1.  Analysis of Differentially Expressed Proteome and Pathway  Permutation based FDR corrected Student’s ttest between one subtype compared to others was performed. These proteins along with associated experimental expression and q-values were inputted in ingenuity pathway analysis. Resulting enriched pathways were further filtered based on significance pvalue<0.05 and activity score as determined by IPA zscore>0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsclc, Pdx, Lung, Tmt

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada
Hospital for Sick Children

### Submitter
Shideh Mirhadi

### Lab Head
Dr Michael F. Moran
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada


