### Accession
PXD012669

### Title
The histone chaperone CAF-1 cooperates with the DNA methyltransferases to maintain Cd4 silencing in cytotoxic T cells

### Description
FLAG IP-MS of transfected HEK293 cells with FLAG tagged mouse Chaf1a constructs (T1, T10) or empty vector (EV).

### Sample Protocol
Transfected Plat-E cells were cultured for 48-72 h and then cells were detached from 10cm dishes by pipetting and subsequently washed in PBS. Nuclei were isolated by re-suspending cell pellets in 500ul IPMS buffer (0.5% NP-40, 100mM NaCl, Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1x protease inhibitor (Sigma)) and rotating at 4°C for 30 minutes. Samples were homogenized by passing through 23.5-gauge needle 10-15 times. Cellular debris was spun down and supernatant was pre-cleared with protein A beads (Dyna beads) for 1 h prior to incubation with Flag antibody (10μg) overnight, rotating at 4°C. The next day, protein-bound beads were washed 5 times in IPMS buffer and bound proteins were eluted by boiling samples in loading buffer. Samples were either submitted to NYU School of Medicine Proteomics Laboratory for mass spectrometry or used for western blot.

### Data Protocol
High resolution full MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 1e6, with a maximum ion time of 200ms, and scan range of 300 to 1500 m/z. Following each full MS, fifteen data-dependent CID MS/MS spectra were acquired. All MS/MS spectra were collected using the following instrument parameters: in the Ion Trap, AGC target of 5e4, maximum ion time of 150 ms, one microscan, 2 m/z isolation window, fixed first mass of 150 m/z, and NCE of 35. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database, with the T1 and T10 sequences inserted, using Sequest within Proteome Discoverer

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional repression of alternative lineage genes is critical for cell fate commitment. Mechanisms by which locus-specific gene silencing is initiated and heritably maintained during cell division are not clearly understood. To study the maintenance of silent gene states, we investigated how the <i>Cd4</i> gene is stably repressed in CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Through CRISPR and shRNA screening, we identified the histone chaperone CAF-1 as a critical component for <i>Cd4</i> repression. We found that the large subunit of CAF-1, Chaf1a, requires the N-terminal KER domain to associate with the histone deacetylases HDAC1/2 and the histone demethylase LSD1, enzymes that also participate in <i>Cd4</i> silencing. When CAF-1 was lacking, <i>Cd4</i> derepression was markedly enhanced in the absence of the de novo DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a but not the maintenance DNA methyltransferase Dnmt1. In contrast to Dnmt1, Dnmt3a deficiency did not significantly alter levels of DNA methylation at the <i>Cd4</i> locus. Instead, Dnmt3a deficiency sensitized CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells to <i>Cd4</i> derepression mediated by compromised functions of histone-modifying factors, including the enzymes associated with CAF-1. Thus, we propose that the heritable silencing of the <i>Cd4</i> gene in CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells exploits cooperative functions among the DNA methyltransferases, CAF-1, and histone-modifying enzymes.

### Keywords
Caf-1, Dna methylation, Cd4, Heritability

### Affiliations
The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY 10016, USA.
NYU

### Submitter
Charles Ng

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Littman
The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY 10016, USA.


