### Accession
PXD011968

### Title
Stk38 interactomics by proximity ligation

### Description
STK38 (aka NDR1) is a Hippo pathway serine/threonine protein kinase with multifarious functions in normal and cancer cells. Using a context-dependent proximity labelling assay, we discovered that STK38 modulates its interaction with more than 250 proteins depending on the context. Upon starvation-induced autophagy, STK38 associates with cytoplasmic proteins while upon ECM detachment it binds to mainly nuclear proteins. This differential subcellular-localization-dependent activity is caused by the XPO1 (Exportin-1, CRM1) dependent nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling of STK38. STK38 associates with nuclear related partners upon ECM detachment and with cytoplasmic related ones upon autophagy, exhibiting a nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling under the dependency of XPO1 (Exportin-1, aka CRM1). We further uncovered that the XPO1-mediated export of STK38 is dependent on phosphorylation of XPO1s serin residue 1055 by STK38 itself. In addition to regulating its own nuclear export, STK38 also controls the subcellular distribution of Beclin1, a key regulator of autophagy. Moreover, the regulation of XPO1 by STK38 mediates the nuclear exclusion of YAP1. Collectively, our results reveal that functions of STK38 are linked to the XPO1-mediated subcellular distribution of STK38 and key regulators. These observations show that unrelated cellular functions can be regulated by a same mechanism controlled by a single kinase and demonstrate a novel mechanism of XPO1-dependent cargo export regulation y phosphorylation of XPO1s C-terminal auto-inhibitory domain.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and digestion Immunoprecipitates were prepared as described above. After the final elution in 1X reducing Laemmli buffer, the samples were proceeded for digestion using filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) method, performed essentially as described (Lipecka et al., 2016; Wiśniewski et al., 2009).  After recovery, peptides were subjected to detergent removal procedure using HiPPR (High Protein and Peptide Recovery) Detergent Removal Resin from Thermo Fisher Scientific, as recommended by manufacturer. Briefly, the spin columns containing detergent removal resin were centrifuged at 1500g for 1 min to remove the storage buffer. The resin was washed three times by adding ABC buffer and centrifuging at 1500g for 1 min. Samples were then added to resin in a vol:vol ratio and incubated for 10 min at room temperature. The spin columns were placed in a collection tube and centrifuged at 1500g for 2 min to collect the detergent-free sample. Peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS.  Mass spectrometry For each run, 1 µL were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Extracted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, 10% acetonitrile, and were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm, Dionex), followed by separation on the analytical 50 cm nano column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm, Dionex). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient from 5% to 40% B over 38 min and were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with a maximum injection time of 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec. Each sample was analyzed in three to five biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Following LC-MS/MS acquisition Raw MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the Homo Sapiens Uniprot KB/Swiss-Prot v.06/2016. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 aminoacids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Cox and Mann, 2008). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified on parent ions, selecting multiplicity “2” for standard quantification in SILAC; the heavy label was Arg10 and Lys8, while the light labelled corresponded to non-labelled Arg and Lys. Maximum labelled aminoacids per peptide was set to 3. Protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides ration counts per protein.  Three biological replicates were analysed for each condition studied.  Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. The matrix was filtered to keep proteins quantified at least three times in at least one condition. Statistical analysis was performed on each condition (group of three biological replicates) by one sample test against the value 1, and we retained the proteins significative according to t-test (S0=1, p value<0.05). Subsequently, we applied a personalized priority scoring in order to highlight the proteins who were changing the most and more significantly priority score=(1∕p-value × (<ratio>-1)2)).

### Publication Abstract
STK38 (also known as NDR1) is a Hippo pathway serine/threonine protein kinase with multifarious functions in normal and cancer cells. Using a context-dependent proximity-labeling assay, we identify more than 250 partners of STK38 and find that STK38 modulates its partnership depending on the cellular context by increasing its association with cytoplasmic proteins upon nutrient starvation-induced autophagy and with nuclear ones during ECM detachment. We show that STK38 shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm and that its nuclear exit depends on both XPO1 (aka exportin-1, CRM1) and STK38 kinase activity. We further uncover that STK38 modulates XPO1 export activity by phosphorylating XPO1 on serine 1055, thus regulating its own nuclear exit. We expand our model to other cellular contexts by discovering that XPO1 phosphorylation by STK38 regulates also the nuclear exit of Beclin1 and YAP1, key regulator of autophagy and transcriptional effector, respectively. Collectively, our results reveal STK38 as an activator of XPO1, behaving as a gatekeeper of nuclear export. These observations establish a novel mechanism of XPO1-dependent cargo export regulation by phosphorylation of XPO1's C-terminal auto-inhibitory domain.

### Keywords
Xpo1, Stk38, Apex

### Affiliations
Proteomic platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes, SFR Necker, INSERM US24/ CNRS UMS3633 Paris
Necker proteomics, INSERM

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr I Chiara GUERRERA
Proteomic platform 3P5-Necker, Université Paris Descartes, SFR Necker, INSERM US24/ CNRS UMS3633 Paris


