### Accession
PXD014517

### Title
Role of Y1212 VEGFR2 signaling transduction

### Description
The project concerns vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling, which is dependent on binding of VEGF to VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2) and leads to activation of the receptor kinase and autophosphorylation. Previous mouse studies with the VEGFR-2 phosphorylation site mutation Y1212F showed reduced vascular stability. We here investigate with LC-MS proteomics which signal transduction pathway(s) are lost in the mutant by identifying proteins that bind to the Y1212F site.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and Y1212F Human Dermal Microvascular Endothelial cells (HDMEC) were treated (or not in the case of the negative control) with VEGF. After cell lysis, the lysates were passed through columns with phosphotyrosine antibodies. The bound proteins were digested on beads by trypsin, after reduction and alkylation by dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide. The peptide mixtures were then run on a Q exactive Mass Spectrometer in 3h reversed phase LC gradients. Fourier transform mass spectrometer (FTMS) master scans with a resolution of 70000 (and mass range 400-1600 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35000 resolution) on the 5 most abundant ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursor ions were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1E6 for MS1 and 1E5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 150 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.2 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with a 60 s duration. Precursor ions with unassigned charge states or a charge state of +1 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were searched by Sequest/Percolator under the Proteome Discoverer software platform (PD 1.4, Thermo Scientific) using a target-decoy strategy. The reference database was the human protein subset of Uniprot, release 2015_06, with 42,431 canonical and isoform entries. Precursor ion and product ion mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively were used. Additionally, peptide spectral matches (PSMs) allowed for up to two missed trypsin cleavages (Lys-Pro and Arg-Pro were not considered cleavage sites). Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Signaling, Proteomics, Hdmec, Vegfr2

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Clinical proteomics, Oncology-Pathology department, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Clinical proteomics, Oncology-Pathology department, Karolinska Institutet


