### Accession
PXD023419

### Title
MS-based sequencing of the anti-FLAG-M2 antibody

### Description
We demonstrate a method for direct de novo sequencing of monoclonal IgG from the purified antibody products. The method uses a panel of multiple complementary proteases to generate suitable peptides for de novo sequencing by LC-MS/MS in a bottom-up fashion. Furthermore, we apply a dual fragmentation scheme, using both stepped high-energy collision dissociation (stepped HCD) and electron transfer high-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) on all peptide precursors. The method achieves full sequence coverage of the monoclonal antibody Herceptin, with an accuracy of 98% in the variable regions. We applied the method to sequence the widely used anti-FLAG-M2 mouse monoclonal antibody, which we successfully validated by remodeling a high-resolution crystal structure of the Fab and demonstrating binding to a FLAG-tagged target protein in Western blot analysis. The method thus offers robust and reliable sequences of monoclonal antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-Flag M2 antibody was purchased from Sigma (catalogue number F1804). Herceptin was provided by Roche (Penzberg, Germany). 27 μg of each sample was denatured in 2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 200 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), pH 8.0 at 95°C for 10 min, followed with 30 min incubation at 37°C for reduction. Sample was then alkylated by adding iodoacetic acid to final concentration 40 mM and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min.  3 μg Sample was then digested by one of the following proteases: trypsin, chymotrypsin, lysN, lysC, gluC, aspN, aLP, thermolysin and elastase in a 1:50 ratio (w:w) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C for 4 h. After digestion, SDC was removed by adding 2 uL formic acid (FA) and centrifugation at 14000 for 20 min. Following centrifugation, the supernatant containing the peptides was collected for desalting on a 30 µm Oasis HLB 96-well plate (Waters). The Oasis HLB sorbent was activated with 100% acetonitrile and subsequently equilibrated with 10% formic acid in water. Next, peptides were bound to the sorbent, washed twice with 10% formic acid in water and eluted with 100 µL of 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid in water (v/v). The eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 100 µL 2% FA.  The digested peptides (single injection of 0.2 ug) were separated by online reversed phase chromatography on an Agilent 1290 UHPLC (column packed with Poroshell 120 EC C18; dimensions 50 cm x 75 µm, 2.7 µm, Agilent Technologies) coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Samples were eluted over a 90 min gradient from 0% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Peptides were analyzed with a resolution setting of 60000 in MS1. MS1 scans were obtained with standard AGC target, maximum injection time of 50 ms, and scan range 350-2000. The precursors were selected with a 3 m/z window and fragmented by stepped HCD as well as EThcD. The stepped HCD fragmentation included steps of 25%, 35% and 50% NCE. EThcD fragmentation was performed with calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters and 27% NCE supplemental activation. For both fragmentation types, ms2 scan were acquired at 30000 resolution, 800% Normalized AGC target, 250 ms maximum injection time, scan range 120-3500.

### Data Protocol
Automated de novo sequencing was performed with Supernovo (version 3.10, Protein Metrics Inc.). Custom parameters were used as follows: non-specific digestion; precursor and product mass tolerance was set to 12/24 ppm respectively; carboxymethylation (+58.005479) on cysteine was set as fixed modification; oxidation on methionine and tryptophan was set as variable common 1 modification; carboxymethylation on the N-terminus, pyroglutamic acid conversion of glutamine and glutamic acid on the N-terminus, deamidation on asparagine/glutamine were set as variable rare 1 modifications. Peptides were filtered for score >=500 for the final evaluation of spectrum quality and (depth of) coverage. Supernovo generates peptide groups for redundant MS/MS spectra, including also when stepped HCD and EThcD fragmentation on the same precursor both generate good peptide-spectrum matches. In these cases only the best-matched spectrum is counted as representative for that group.

### Publication Abstract
Antibody sequence information is crucial to understanding the structural basis for antigen binding and enables the use of antibodies as therapeutics and research tools. Here, we demonstrate a method for direct <i>de novo</i> sequencing of monoclonal IgG from the purified antibody products. The method uses a panel of multiple complementary proteases to generate suitable peptides for <i>de novo</i> sequencing by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in a bottom-up fashion. Furthermore, we apply a dual fragmentation scheme, using both stepped high-energy collision dissociation (stepped HCD) and electron-transfer high-energy collision dissociation (EThcD), on all peptide precursors. The method achieves full sequence coverage of the monoclonal antibody herceptin, with an accuracy of 99% in the variable regions. We applied the method to sequence the widely used anti-FLAG-M2 mouse monoclonal antibody, which we successfully validated by remodeling a high-resolution crystal structure of the Fab and demonstrating binding to a FLAG-tagged target protein in Western blot analysis. The method thus offers robust and reliable sequences of monoclonal antibodies.

### Keywords
De novo sequencing, Antibody, Ethcd, Stepped hcd

### Affiliations
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr Joost Snijder
Utrecht University


