### Accession
PXD025180

### Title
White matter integrity requires continuous myelin synthesis at the inner tongue

### Description
Myelin, the electrically insulating axonal sheath, is composed of lipids and proteins with exceptionally long lifetime. Using 3D electron microscopy, mass spectrometry imaging, and quantitative proteome analysis, we addressed the question how myelin function is affected by myelin turnover. We studied the integrity of myelinated tracts after experimentally preventing the formation of new myelin in the CNS of adult mice by an inducible myelin basic protein (Mbp) null allele. Recombined oligodendrocytes continued to express myelin genes, but failed to establish MBP-dependent compaction of myelin sheaths. Abundance changes of myelin proteins upon Mbp ablation were analyzed in whole optic nerve lysates at different time points and compared with shiverer mice. This naturally occurring mutant is inable to developmentally form compact myelin due to the lack of MBP and served as proxy for the demyelination endpoint. Label-free protein quantification using an ion mobility-enhanced data-independent acquisition (DIA) workflow with alternating low and elevated energy (referred to as UDMS^E) revealed that numerous myelin proteins are reduced in abundance, while microglia and astrocyte markers were increased, indicative of neuropathology. Taken together, we observed an axonal pathology with about 50% myelin loss after 20 weeks and concluded that functional axon-myelin units require the continuous incorporation of new myelin membranes.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenization of whole optic nerves in RIPA buffer with Teflon beads in a tissue homogenizer. Solubilization of myelin proteins in ASB-14 detergent followed by automated in-solution protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and analysis by LC-MS. 1D LC separation of peptides using a Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system. Mass spectrometric analysis performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA) on a Waters Synapt G2-S quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer equipped with ion mobility option.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with Waters ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS). Retention time alignment, exact mass and retention time (EMRT) and ion mobility clustering, data normalization, isoform/homology filtering and calculation of absolute in-sample amounts for each detected protein according to the TOP3 quantification approach with ISOQuant. Statistical analysis and visualization of data with an RStudio pipeline employing the Bioconductor packages "limma" and "q-value".

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Juxtaparanode, Whole optic nerve proteome, Fib-sem, Myelinoid body, Optic nerve, Myelin basic protein (mbp), Myelin turnover, Shiverer, 3d reconstruction, Nanosims

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen Germany
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. Olaf Jahn
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen Germany


