### Accession
PXD026945

### Title
shotgun LC/MS/MS of L(3)mbt-IP samples using OSCs

### Description
L(3)mbt regulate the transcription of germ-specific genes in somatic cells but the detailed mechanism remains unclear. We performed shotgun LC/MS/MS of L(3)mbt-IP samples and identified a new interactor in OSCs.

### Sample Protocol
L(3)mbt regulate the transcription of germ-specific genes in somatic cells but the detailed mechanism remains unclear. We performed ChIP-seq of L(3)mbt and a newly identified interactor in OSCs to elucidate the genome-wide localization. Then we performed RNA-seq of OSCs before and after RNAi treatment of L(3)mbt and its interactors and performed differential expression analysis.The dried and desalted peptides were dissolved in distilled water containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. The LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto the LC-MS/MS system with a trap column (0.3 x 5 mm, L-column, octadecylsilyl groups; Chemicals Evaluation and Research Institute) and a capillary column (0.1 x 150 mm, L-column, octadecylsilyl groups, Chemicals Evaluation and Research Institute) at a flow late of 10 µL/min. The loaded peptides were separated by a gradient using the mobile phases A (1% formic acid in distilled water) and B (1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (2% to 35% B in 133 min, 35% to 50% B in 20 min, 50% to 95% B in 2 min, 95% B for 10 min, 95% to 2% B in 0.1 min and 2% B for 10 min). The eluted peptides were electrosprayed (2.0 kV) and introduced into the MS equipment (positive ion mode, data-dependent MS/MS). Each of the most intense precursor ions (the top 10) was isolated and fragmented by higher collision energy dissociation with a normalized collision energy (27%). For full MS scans, the scan range was set to 350−1,500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, and the AGC target was set to 3e6 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. For the MS/MS scans, the precursor isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 and the AGC target was set to 5e5 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The Orbitrap mass analyzer was operated with the “lock mass” option to perform shotgun detection with high accuracy.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra were extracted using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the Drosophila uniplot database (TaxID = 7227 and subtaxonomies) with the following settings: the parameter for the cleavage was set to trypsin, and the missed number of cleavages was allowed to a maximum of two. The mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ion. As for protein modifications, we set carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) at Cys as the fixed modifications of the peptide, oxidation (+15.995 Da) at Met as a dynamic (non-fixed) modifications of the peptide, and acetylation (+42.011 Da) at the N-terminus as a dynamic modification of the protein terminus. The amount of each peptide was semi-quantified using the peak area with Precursor Ions Quantifier in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Loss-of-function mutations in Drosophila lethal(3)malignant brain tumor [l(3)mbt] cause ectopic expression of germline genes and brain tumors. Loss of L(3)mbt function in ovarian somatic cells (OSCs) aberrantly activates germ-specific piRNA amplification and leads to infertility. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Here, ChIP-seq for L(3)mbt in cultured OSCs and RNA-seq before and after L(3)mbt depletion shows that L(3)mbt genomic binding is not necessarily linked to gene regulation and that L(3)mbt controls piRNA pathway genes in multiple ways. Lack of known L(3)mbt co-repressors, such as Lint-1, has little effect on the levels of piRNA amplifiers. Identification of L(3)mbt interactors in OSCs and subsequent analysis reveals CG2662 as a novel co-regulator of L(3)mbt, termed "L(3)mbt interactor in OSCs" (Lint-O). Most of the L(3)mbt-bound piRNA amplifier genes are also bound by Lint-O in a similar fashion. Loss of Lint-O impacts the levels of piRNA amplifiers, similar to the lack of L(3)mbt. The lint-O-deficient flies exhibit female sterility and tumorous brains. Thus, L(3)mbt and its novel co-suppressor Lint-O cooperate in suppressing target genes to maintain homeostasis in the ovary and brain.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Osc

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, School of Science, the University of Tokyo
Siomi Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, School of Science, the University of Tokyo

### Submitter
Hitomi Yamamoto-Matsuda

### Lab Head
Dr Mikiko C. Siomi
Siomi Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, School of Science, the University of Tokyo


