### Accession
PXD020936

### Title
Galectin-3 Mediated Inflammatory Response Contributes to Neurological Recovery to QiShenYiQi in Subacute Stroke Model

### Description
Cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury (CI/RI), including neurological behavior deficits, cerebral infarction, blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction, and neuroinflammation, et al. is a severe challenge in treatment of ischemic stroke. Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) with the characteristics of multi-components and multi-functions for multiple targets/pathways has been historically used in the treatment of stroke and post stroke recovery in China. QiShenYiQi (QSYQ), a representative component-based Chinese medicine, is capable of reducing organ injury caused by ischemia/reperfusion via multiple mechanisms. Recently, we have previously reported that the positive action of QSYQ against the acute phase of CI/RI is partly via modulation of neuroinflammatory response. However, the effects and underlying mechanisms of QSYQ on subacute phase of CI/RI remain unknown, which are aimed to investigate in present study. The pharmacological action of QSYQ treatment on brain damage was estimated in the experimental stroke rats underwent 90 min ischemia and 8 days reperfusion by assessing the neurological and locomotor deficits, cerebral infarction, brain edema, and BBB integrity. Furthermore, we used TMT-based quantitative proteomics technology to identify significantly differentially expressed proteins following QSYQ treatment, which could give important clues for revealing the possible mechanism underlying the positive role of QSYQ in CI/RI. Besides, immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, RT-qPCR, and rat ELISA kits were executed to further verify the accuracy of proteomics analysis results. As a consequence, we found that treatment with QSYQ (600mg/kg) for 7 days obviously improved neurological and behavioral impairment, attenuated infarct volume and brain edema, and alleviated BBB breakdown in stroke rats. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that differentially expressed protein galectin-3 mediated inflammatory response was closely related to the beneficial effect of QSYQ. Results of immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis and RT-qPCR showed that the model rats treated with QSYQ (600mg/kg) markedly downregulated the mRNA and protein expression level of galectin-3 in brain tissues compared to the untreated stroke rats. In addition, the decrease of mRNA level in brain tissues and contents in serum of TNF-α and IL-6 following QSYQ treatment were also observed. These interesting finding manifested that the effective action of QSYQ against subacute phase of CI/RI was partly via regulating galectin-3 mediated inflammatory reaction.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  According to the above experimental results, rats from the model group (n=3) and QSYQ high dose group (n=3) were screened to further perform proteomic analysis. A total of 8 days after MCAO, anesthetized rats were transcardially perfused with prechilled saline and then the brains were immediately removed. The post-ischemic cerebral hemisphere tissues were separated, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until use. Protein extraction from the cerebral tissues were carried out referring to a method previously described (Zhu et al., 2014) with some modifications. In brief, all samples were homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer. Subsequently, the homogenate was sonicated and boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14,000g for 40 min at 4°C, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters. Protein content was determined using the BCA protein assay kit.  Protein digestion based on filter-aided sample preparation  Protein digestion was performed according to the method of filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μL SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μL iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μL UA buffer three times and then 100 μL100 mM TEAB buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μL TEAB buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/L) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. TMT labeling and peptide fractionation   According to the manufacturer’s instructions, 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using tandem mass tags (TMT) isobaric label reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Subsequently, pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to fractionate TMT-labeled digest samples into 15 fractions by an increasing acetonitrile step-gradient elution according to instructions (Wei et al., 2018). The fractions were dried, lyophilized, and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Reversed-phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry  The NanoLC-MS/MS analysis of each fraction was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The labeled peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm inner diameter×2cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a 60 min linear gradient: 0-50% buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), 50 min; 50-100% buffer B, 5min; 100%-100% buffer B, 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to 3×106 with a maximum ion injection time of 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. The survey scans were acquired at a high resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specified the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. Protein identification and quantification  The MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (C), TMT 6-plex (N-term), TMT 6-plex (lysine, K) were chosen as fixed modification. Oxidation (methionine, M) was regarded as a variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for MS1 spectra acquired, and the fragment mass tolerance for MS2 spectra was set to 0.1 Da. In this study, only rank 1 peptides and a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤1% were accepted. The protein ratios were calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein. All peptide ratios were normalized by the median protein ratio, and the median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization. Comparisons of the protein identification and quantitation results were done between each QSYQ high dose (H) and the corresponding model (M) groups. Significantly regulated proteins between experimental groups were determined based on their p-value (p-value<0.05). Only proteins with more than 1.20-fold or less than 0.833-fold change compared to control groups were considered differentially regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Effective therapies for stroke are still limited due to its complex pathological manifestations. QiShenYiQi (QSYQ), a component-based Chinese medicine capable of reducing organ injury caused by ischemia/reperfusion, may offer an alternative option for stroke treatment and post-stroke recovery. Recently, we reported a beneficial effect of QSYQ for acute stroke <i>via</i> modulation of the neuroinflammatory response. However, if QSYQ plays a role in subacute stroke remains unknown. The pharmacological action of QSYQ was investigated in experimental stroke rats which underwent 90&#xa0;min ischemia and 8 days reperfusion in this study. Neurological and locomotive deficits, cerebral infarction, brain edema, and BBB integrity were assessed. TMT-based quantitative proteomics were performed to identify differentially expressed proteins following QSYQ treatment. Immunohistochemistry, western blot analysis, RT-qPCR, and ELISA were used to validate the proteomics data and to reveal the action mechanisms. Therapeutically, treatment with QSYQ (600&#xa0;mg/kg) for 7&#xa0;days significantly improved neurological recovery, attenuated infarct volume and brain edema, and alleviated BBB breakdown in the stroke rats. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that protein galectin-3 and its mediated inflammatory response was closely related to the beneficial effect of QSYQ. Specially, QSYQ (600&#xa0;mg/kg) markedly downregulated the mRNA and protein expression levels of galectin-3, TNF-&#x3b1;, and IL-6 in CI/RI brain as well as serum levels of TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-6. Overall, our findings showed that the effective action of QSYQ against the subacute phase of CI/RI occurs partly <i>via</i> regulating galectin-3 mediated inflammatory reaction.

### Keywords
Brain tissue of rats, Tmt-based quantitative proteomics analysis

### Affiliations
Tianjin Univerisity of TCM
Tianjin Univerisity of Traditional Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Yule Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Zhu
Tianjin Univerisity of Traditional Chinese Medicine


