### Accession
PXD038371

### Title
H3.3K27M HLA-A2 is not an effective immunotherapy target for diffuse midline glioma

### Description
The study investigated presentation of HLA A2 restricted H3.3K27M neopeptide using immunopeptidomics followed by DDA and/or targeted multiple monitoring reaction (MRM).

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I peptides were pulled down using HLA specific antibodies such as anti HLA A2 (BB7.2), anti HLA A3 (GAPA3) and pan class I antibody (W6/32). Peptides were eluted using 10% acetic acid. B2M and heavy chain were separated from HLA peptides using HPLC. Samples were acquired using either QE plus.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw files generated on the QE Plus were exported and analysed using Peaks software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) searching against the human proteome (Uniprot, accessed 15/06/2017; 20,182 entries). The following search parameters were used: error tolerance of 10 ppm using monoisotopic mass for precursor ions and 0.02 Da tolerance for fragment ions; enzyme used was set to none with following variable modifications: oxidation at Met, deamidation at Asp and Gln. False discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using a decoy fusion method. For data processing a 5% FDR cut-off was applied. Peptides matched to decoy database, iRT peptides, duplicates, and those detected in blanks were removed. Secondly, only peptides with 8-12 amino acids (aa) were retained with modified versions of the peptides also removed.

### Publication Abstract
Diffuse midline glioma (DMG) is a childhood brain tumor with an extremely poor prognosis. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T&#xa0;cell therapy has recently demonstrated some success in DMG, but there may a need to target multiple tumor-specific targets to avoid antigen escape. We developed a second-generation CAR targeting an HLA-A&#x2217;02:01 restricted histone 3K27M epitope in DMG, the target of previous peptide vaccination and T&#xa0;cell receptor-mimics. These CAR T&#xa0;cells demonstrated specific, titratable, binding to cells pulsed with the H3.3K27M peptide. However, we were unable to observe scFv binding, CAR T&#xa0;cell activation, or cytotoxic function against H3.3K27M<sup>+</sup> patient-derived models. Despite using sensitive immunopeptidomics, we could not detect the H3.3K27M<sub>26-35</sub>-HLA-A&#x2217;02:01 peptide on these patient-derived models. Interestingly, other non-mutated peptides from DMG were detected bound to HLA-A&#x2217;02:01 and other class I molecules, including a novel HLA-A3-restricted peptide encompassing the K27M mutation and overlapping with the H3 K27M<sub>26-35</sub>-HLA-A&#x2217;02:01 peptide. These results suggest that targeting the H3 K27M<sub>26-35</sub> mutation in context of HLA-A&#x2217;02:01 may not be a feasible immunotherapy strategy because of its lack of presentation. These findings should inform future investigations and clinical trials in DMG.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Car t cells, H3.3 k27m, Hla, Dipg

### Affiliations
Monash University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Kirti Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia


