### Accession
PXD034626

### Title
Extracellular vesicles of human diabetic retinopathy retinal tissue and urine of diabetic retinopathy patients analyzed using mass spectrometry

### Description
Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is a potentially blinding retinal disorder which develops through the pathogenesis of diabetes.  Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) provide a novel biomarker for pre-symptomatic disease diagnosis and prognosis. Proteomic analysis was performed on explanted DR retinal tissue, DR retinal EVs and DR urinary EVs. DR samples were compared to normal retinal tissue, retinal EVs and urinary EVs, respectively

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media from cultured human DR and control retina was collected, as well as urine from DR and control patients.  Samples were stored at -80. EVs were then isolated from conditioned media and urine using ultracentrifugation. Whole cell lysate and EV-enriched samples were denatured in 8M urea, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with  iodoacetamide. This was followed by proteolytic digestion with endoproteinase LysC and trypsin. Approximately 1μg of each sample was injected for analysis by reversed-phase nano-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched against the human database from uniprot.org at 1% FDR using either MaxQuant v.1.5.0.30.45 or MASCOT through Proteome Discoverer v.1.4. For MaxQuant analysis the match-between-runs feature was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diabetic retinopathy, Exosome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Lehman College, Bronx, New York, USA
Research Support Specialist

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Redenti
Lehman College, Bronx, New York, USA


