### Accession
PXD022572

### Title
Protein recruitment on chromatin in the presence or absence of Plk1

### Description
Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is an important protein kinase for checkpoint recovery and adaptation in response to DNA damage and replication stress. However, although Plk1 is present in S phase, little is known about its localization and function during unperturbed DNA replication. Here we used a previously described Chromatin Mass spectrometry (Chromass) protocol (Project PXD000490) to compare the protein recruitment on chromatin in Xenopus egg extracts during unperturbed DNA replication in the presence or after Plk1 depletion from the extract.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative analysis of chromatin-bound proteins by mass spectrometry (Chromass) (Raschle et al, 2015 DOI 10.1126/science.1253671), sperm nuclei (4000 nuclei/µl) were incubated in mock or Plk1 depleted egg extracts and were allowed to replicate for 40 minutes. Experiments were carried out in three replicates incubated in parallel. Replication reactions were diluted into a 13-fold volume of ELB buffer (10 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2) containing 1mM DTT, 0.2% TritonX100, protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors; chromatin was recovered through a ELB buffer, 500 mM sucrose at 6780 g, 50sec, 4◦C ) in a swing-out rotor. Interphase was washed twice with 200 µl ELB, 250 mM sucrose. The pellet was resuspended in ELB containing 250 mM sucrose, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Samples were submitted to trypsin digestion as previously described (Chromass protocol). Trypsin-generated peptides from the 2 triplicates were analyzed separately with a TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) coupled to the nanoElute system (Bruker) equipped with a trap column (nanoEase C18, 100 Å, 5µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (Aurora, 25cm x 75 µm, C18 1.6µm). Peptides were loaded directly on the separating column at 800 bar with solvent A and peptides separation was performed at a flow rate of 300nl.min-1 with a 5 to 35% solvent B gradient in 100 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile.  MS/MS spectra were acquired with the PASEF ion mobility-based acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with DataAnalysis software (Bruker). Mass spectrometry based-quantification was performed using MS1 ion intensity-based method. MS raw files were processed and analyzed with Maxquant software (Version 1.6.14.0) using the MaxLFQ algorithm and 4D feature alignment for a more specific quantitative analysis (match between run function including CCS alignment). Protein identifications were performed against Xenbase database (peptides release V9.2) with carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as fixed modification and with oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide and fragment tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 40 ppm, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Xenopus laevis, Chromass

### Affiliations
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

### Submitter
David Cornu

### Lab Head
Dr David Cornu
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


