### Accession
PXD005792

### Title
Identification of β-Catenin-Interacting Proteins in Nuclei of Aquaporin-2-Expressing Rat Collecting Duct Cells

### Description
The gene encoding the aquaporin-2 water channel is regulated transcriptionally in response to vasopressin. In the renal collecting duct, vasopressin stimulates the nuclear translocation and phosphorylation (at Ser552) of β-catenin, a multifunctional protein that can act as a transcriptional co-regulator in the nucleus. The purpose of this study was to identify β-catenin interacting proteins in nuclei of rat inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD) cells using both experimental and computational approaches. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry (ChIP-MS) in nuclei isolated from rat IMCD suspensions to identify β-catenin interacting proteins. We reproducibly (n=4) identified 43 β-catenin binding proteins, which included a number of known β-catenin binding partners as well as novel interacting proteins. Multiple proteins involved in transcriptional regulation were identified (Taf1, Jup, Tdrd3, Cdh1, Cenpj, and several histones). Many of the identified β-catenin binding partners were found in prior studies to translocate to the nucleus in response to vasopressin. There was one DNA-binding transcription factor (TF), viz. Taf1, part of the RNA-polymerase II pre-initiation complex. To identify sequence-specific TFs that may interact with β-catenin but are expressed at abundance levels too low to be detected by MS, Bayes’ Theorem was used to integrate data from several information sources. The analysis identified several TFs with potential binding sites in the Aqp2 gene promoter that could interact with β-catenin in the regulation of Aqp2 gene transcription viz. Jun, Junb, Jund, Atf1, Atf2, Mef2d, Usf1, Max, Pou2f1, and Rxra. The findings provide information necessary for modeling the transcriptional response to vasopressin.

### Sample Protocol
In each of four experiments, 12 male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 250 to 275 g were euthanized by rapid decapitation. Inner medullas from both kidneys were minced and rapidly subjected to treatment with a digestion solution (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM triethanolamine, pH 7.6) containing collagenase B (3 mg/ml) and hyaluronidase (3 mg/ml) for 75-90 minutes as previously described to produce IMCD suspensions (47). The resulting inner medullary suspension (whole IM) was subjected to three low-speed centrifugations (at 70 ×g, 20s) to separate the IMCD-enriched fraction in the pellet from the non-IMCD fraction in the supernatant. The IMCD-enriched pellet was resuspended in IMCD suspension fluid (in mM: 118 NaCl, 25 NaHCO3, 5 KCl, 4 Na2HPO4, 2 CaCl2, 1.2 MgSO4, 5.5 glucose, and 5 Na acetate, 290 mosmol/kgH2O) and divided into two equal-volume samples. One was exposed to the V2 receptor-selective vasopressin analog dDAVP (1 nM, Bachem) and the other to its vehicle for 30 minutes at 37°C under 95% air/5% carbon dioxide. Next, cells were washed in ice-cold PBS before carrying out immunoprecipitation. Briefly, cells were fixed and cross-linked with 1.1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes using truChIP Chromatin Shearing Reagent Kit (Covaris #520154). The cells were washed with PBS and the plasma membrane was lysed in 1 mL of the lysis buffer, provided in the kit, containing protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. The nuclear pellets were collected by centrifugation at 1700×g for 5 minutes at 4°C, washed with 1 mL of wash buffer (supplied in kit) containing protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, and washed twice with 1 mL of shearing buffer (from kit) containing protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. The nuclear pellets were resuspended in 1 mL shearing buffer. The samples were transferred to glass tubes with AFA Fiber (TC 12×12 mm, Covaris) and sheared using a S2 Covaris system (Duty cycle: 5%, Intensity: 4, Cycles per Burst: 200, Temperature: 4°C) to break up DNA. The quality of sheared chromatin was confirmed by DNA gel electrophoresis on 2% agarose gel (E-Gel® EX gels 2% Agarose, Invitrogen). Protein amounts of the sheared chromatin samples were determined by BCA assay.  Immunoprecipitation For immunoprecipitation (IP) of β-catenin, we used a Ctnnb1 antibody (Cell Signaling, Inc., #9562, 3.4 g IgG per 700 g protein at 4°C overnight with gentle rotation). For IP controls, we substituted an equal amount of rabbit pre-immune IgG. Next, the samples were mixed with magnetic beads with bound Protein G (ChIP-Grade Protein G Magnetic Beads, Cell Signaling, Inc. #9003). After incubation for 2 hours, the beads were collected using a magnetic rack and washed as manufacturer’s protocol. After washing with the wash buffer from the kit, the IP products were eluted with 50 μL of a detergent-based ChIP elution buffer for 30 minutes at 65°C with vortexing (1,200 rpm).  In-Gel Digestion 50 μL aliquots of each sample were loaded into individual lanes of a 12-well 7.5% Criterion TGX polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad) for SDS-PAGE. The gel was washed and stained with Coomassie blue dye for 10 minutes. Each lane was sliced into 2 mm × 9 mm rectangles above the nominal molecular weight of β-Catenin (above 80 kDa) by using GridCutter (Gel Company). Each of four experiments, then, yielded 32 separate samples for LC-MS/MS analysis (8 minced gel-slice samples × 2 treatments × 2 IP conditions). The gel pieces were washed in 100 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and then dehydrated with 25 mM of NH4HCO3/50% ACN. These samples underwent reduction with DTT, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and trypsinization using 12.5 ng/μL Trypsin Gold (Promega).  After digestion, the peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by four successive washes in 50% ACN/0.5% formic acid. The extracted peptides were desalted using ZipTips (Millipore, ZTC18S096, tip size: P10) prior to MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS All samples were analyzed on a nanoflow LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The sample loading onto a peptide trap cartridge (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) occurred at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. The trapped peptides were then fractionated with a reversed-phase PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a linear gradient of 5–35% ACN in 0.1% FA. The gradient time was 45 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min. Precursor mass spectra (MS1) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution and product mass spectra (MS2) were acquired with the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide/Protein Identification To maximize the number of peptide identifications, three algorithms were used to match spectra to peptides, viz. those coded by Mascot, SEQUEST, and InsPecT. The posttranslational modifications allowed were a fixed carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine, variable deamination modifications on asparagine and glutamine, and a variable oxidation modification on methionine. False discovery rate (FDR) at a peptide level was set to 0.01 based on target-decoy analysis (11). To identify ambiguous identifications, we used an in-house program (coded in Java) called ProMatch (http://esbl.nhlbi.nih.gov/Bioinformatic%20Tools.htm). The SEQUEST and Mascot searches were executed within Proteome Discoverer and peptides with FDR < 0.01 and peptide rank = 1 were retained for further analyses. The InsPecT search was carried out on the Biowulf Linux Cluster at the National Institutes of Health (http://biowulf.nih.gov). For InsPecT, the p-value cut off for the peptide identification was set at 0.01 (64). Peptides that only matched to one gene symbol were extracted as a “unique” identification. The peptides that matched to more than one gene symbol were separated as “multiple” identifications. To reconcile the multiple identifications, transcriptomic data from Affymetrix array profiling of rat renal IMCD transcripts was used (database at: https://esbl.nhlbi.nih.gov/IMCD-transcriptome/). Peptides that matched to more than one gene symbol were assigned to the gene symbol with the most abundant transcript in the IMCD based on prior data.  Spectral Counting  The number of peptide matches for a given gene symbol were counted and designated as the “spectral count” for that gene symbol. This was the sum of all spectra matching to the gene symbol in all gel slices. The spectral counts were normalized by the total number of spectral counts mapped to all proteins. Relative abundance of a given protein was estimated by dividing the normalized spectral counts by the number of amino acids in the mapped protein. Normalized spectral counts from specific-antibody IP versus non-immune IgG IP were expressed as a ratio of the two values. Vehicle samples and the dDAVP samples were compared using the Fisher exact test with the contingency table consisting of the control count, dDAVP count, total count of all peptides in control, and total count of all peptides in dDAVP.  Bioinformatics and Statistics To analysis the ChIP-MS data, several software tools were used. ABE (Automated Bioinformatics Extractor, Systems Biology Center, NHLBI, Bethesda, MD) was used to extract Gene Ontology terms without statistical analysis (http://helixweb.nih.gov/ESBL/ABE/). Nuclear translocation data were mined from a publicly accessible web page: https://hpcwebapps.cit.nih.gov/ESBL/Database/QuantNucProteomics/ (temporary login: clp; temporary password: Esbl!@#$). Statistical analysis of mass spectrometry data used Minimum Bayes’ Factors in lieu of conventional P values to summarize strength of evidence (15; 16). Conventional Chi-square analysis was used to test whether a set of proteins with a given property is found more frequently in a protein list than it would be in a list of randomly chosen proteins. Nuclear localization signal sequences (K-(R/K)-X-(R/K) in β-catenin interacting proteins were identified using an in house program ProMatch, which utilizes the Java Pattern Class using “Regular Expressions” (https://hpcwebapps.cit.nih.gov/ESBL/ProMatch/). Annotated domains of β-catenin interacting proteins were identified from domain information extracted with ABE (Automated Bioinformatics Extractor, https://hpcwebapps.cit.nih.gov/ESBL/ABE/). An interactive network of domain-protein was generated by Medusa (3.0) and Cytoscape (http://www.cytoscape.org/). Data regarding vasopressin responses in renal collecting duct cells was mined from prior publications using Biological Information Gatherer (BIG) (80) (https://big.nhlbi.nih.gov/index.jsp).

### Publication Abstract
The gene encoding the aquaporin-2 water channel is regulated transcriptionally in response to vasopressin. In the renal collecting duct, vasopressin stimulates the nuclear translocation and phosphorylation (at Ser<sup>552</sup>) of &#x3b2;-catenin, a multifunctional protein that acts as a transcriptional coregulator in the nucleus. The purpose of this study was to identify &#x3b2;-catenin-interacting proteins that might be involved in transcriptional regulation in rat inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD) cells, using experimental and computational approaches. We used a standard chromatin immunoprecipitation procedure coupled to mass spectrometry (ChIP-MS) in a nuclear fraction isolated from rat IMCD suspensions. Over four biological replicates, we reproducibly identified 43 &#x3b2;-catenin-binding proteins, including several known &#x3b2;-catenin-binding partners as well as novel interacting proteins. Multiple proteins involved in transcriptional regulation were identified (Taf1, Jup, Tdrd3, Cdh1, Cenpj, and several histones). Many of the identified &#x3b2;-catenin-binding partners were found in prior studies to translocate to the nucleus in response to vasopressin. There was only one DNA-binding transcription factor (TF), specifically Taf1, part of the RNA-polymerase II preinitiation complex. To identify sequence-specific TFs that might interact with &#x3b2;-catenin, Bayes' theorem was used to integrate data from several information sources. The analysis identified several TFs with potential binding sites in the <i>Aqp2</i> gene promoter that could interact with &#x3b2;-catenin in the regulation of <i>Aqp2</i> gene transcription, specifically Jun, Junb, Jund, Atf1, Atf2, Mef2d, Usf1, Max, Pou2f1, and Rxra. The findings provide information necessary for modeling the transcriptional response to vasopressin.

### Keywords
Aquaporin-2, Transcription, Transcriptional co-regulator, Kidney

### Affiliations
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA
National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Chung-Lin  Chou

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA


