### Accession
PXD031525

### Title
40S peak fraction from human Expi293 cells

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis of a sample derived from sucrose density gradient centrifugation of purified 80S ribosomes from human cells Expi293.

### Sample Protocol
A sample containing 30 OD260 of the human 40S subunit was loaded onto a 4-12% acrylamide gel and electrophoresed for 5 min to remove excess sucrose. Gel bands were excised, destained, reduced (using DTT), alkylated (iodoacetamide) and subjected to enzymatic digestion with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis. The liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS experiment was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm i.d. x 50 cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300μm i.d. x 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1 % formic acid for 3 min at a flow rate of 15 μL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile, 20 % water + 0.1 % formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40 % B over 90 min (the total run time including column washing and re-equilibration was 120 min). The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyser, set at a resolution of 35000 and scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Normalised collision energy (NCE): 25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from selection for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
The files were submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Science, London UK, version 2.6.0) and searched against a common contaminants database (125 sequences; 41129 residues) and the UniProt human database (CCP_UniProt_homo sapiens_proteome_20180409 database, 93609 sequences; 37041084 residues). Variable modifications of oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) phosphorylation (S,T and Y) acetylation (K and protein N-terminus), methylation (HKNR), sulfation (STY) and ubiquitination (K) were applied together with a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C). Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The chemical modification of ribosomal RNA and proteins is critical for ribosome assembly, for protein synthesis and may drive ribosome specialisation in development and disease. However, the inability to accurately visualise these modifications has limited mechanistic understanding of the role of these modifications in ribosome function. Here we report the 2.15 &#xc5; resolution cryo-EM reconstruction of the human 40S ribosomal subunit. We directly visualise post-transcriptional modifications within the 18S rRNA and four post-translational modifications of ribosomal proteins. Additionally, we interpret the solvation shells in the core regions of the 40S ribosomal subunit and reveal how potassium and magnesium ions establish both universally conserved and eukaryote-specific coordination to promote the stabilisation and folding of key ribosomal elements. This work provides unprecedented structural details for the human 40S ribosomal subunit that will serve as an important reference for unravelling the functional role of ribosomal RNA modifications.

### Keywords
Human, Ribosome, 40s ribosomal subunit

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research
1 Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK  2 Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Keith Peters Building, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK  3 Wellcome Trust–Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Simone Pellegrino

### Lab Head
Dr Alan John Warren
1 Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK  2 Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Keith Peters Building, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK  3 Wellcome Trust–Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


