### Accession
PXD036969

### Title
Multi-omics provide evidence for an anti-inflammatory immune signature and metabolic alterations in patients with Long COVID Syndrome – an exploratory study (plasma)

### Description
Despite the increasing prevalence of patients with Long Covid Syndrome (LCS), to date the pathophysiology of the disease is still unclear, and therefore diagnosis and therapy are a complex effort without any standardization. To address these issues, we performed a broad exploratory screening study applying state-of-the-art post-genomic profiling methods to blood plasma derived from three groups: 1) healthy individuals vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 without exposure to the full virus, 2) asymptomatic fully recovered patients at least three months after SARS-CoV-2 infection, 3) symptomatic patients at least 3 months after a SARS-CoV-2 infection, here designated as Long Covid Syndrome (LCS) patients. Multiplex cytokine profiling indicated slightly elevated cytokine levels in recovered individuals in contrast to LCS patients, who displayed lowest levels of cytokines. Label-free proteome profiling corroborated an anti-inflammatory status in LCS characterized by low acute phase protein levels and a uniform down-regulation of macrophagederived secreted proteins, a pattern also characteristic for chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS). Along those lines, eicosanoid and docosanoid analysis revealed high levels of omega-3 fatty acids and a prevalence of anti-inflammatory oxylipins in LCS patients compared to the other study groups. Targeted metabolic profiling indicated low amino acid and triglyceride levels and deregulated acylcarnithines, characteristic for CFS and indicating mitochondrial stress in LCS patients. The anti-inflammatory osmolytes taurine and hypaphorine were significantly up-regulated in LCS patients. In summary, here we present evidence for a specific anti-inflammatory and highly characteristic metabolic signature in LCS which could serve for future diagnostic purposes and help to establish rational therapeutic interventions in these patients.

### Sample Protocol
For untargeted plasma proteomics analyses, EDTA-anticoagulated plasma samples were diluted 1:20 in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, 5 % SDS), heated at 95 °C for 5 min prior the protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. For enzymatic protein digestion, 20 µg of protein was used and the ProtiFi S-trap technology applied. Briefly, solubilized protein was reduced and carbamidomethylated by adding 64 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 48 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively. Prior to sample loading onto the S-trap mini cartridges, trapping buffer (90 % v/v methanol, 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate) was added. Thereafter, samples were thoroughly washed and subsequently digested using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix at 37 °C for two hours. Finally, peptides were eluted, dried and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analyses.  LC-MS/MS analyses Reconstitution of dried peptide samples was achieved by adding 5 µL of 30 % formic acid (FA) containing 4 synthetic standard peptides and subsequent dilution with 40 µL of loading solvent (97.9 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid). Thereof, 1 µL were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In order to pre-concentrate peptides prior to chromatographic separation, a pre-column (2 cm × 75 µm C18 Pepmap100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) run at a flow rate of 10 µL/min using mobile phase A (99.9 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) was used. The subsequent peptide separation was achieved on an analytical column (25 cm x 75 µm 25 cm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks)) by applying a flow rate of 300 nL/min and using a gradient of 7 % to 40 % mobile phase B (79.9 % ACN, 20 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) over 43 min, resulting in a total LC run time of 85 min including washing and equilibration steps. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1650 V. Further, the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode and a moderate MS data reduction was applied. A scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700 to record MS and MS/MS spectra and a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60 – 1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 100 ms to achieve trapped ion mobility separation were set as further parameters. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle leading to a total cycle time of 1.16 s. Furthermore, the collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 59 eV and the quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700.

### Data Protocol
Subsequent LC-MS data analysis was performed using the publicly available software package MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 running the Andromeda search engine. Protein identification as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was achieved by searching the raw data against the SwissProt database “homo sapiens” (version 141219 with 20380 entries). General search parameter included an allowed peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. A minimum of one unique peptide per protein was set as search criterium for positive identifications. In addition, the “match between runs” option was applied, using a 0.7 min match time window and a match ion mobility window of 0.05 as well as a 20 min alignment time window and an alignment ion mobility of 1. An FDR≤0.01 was set for all peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
To investigate long COVID-19 syndrome (LCS) pathophysiology, we performed an exploratory study with blood plasma derived from three groups: 1) healthy vaccinated individuals without SARS-CoV-2 exposure; 2) asymptomatic recovered patients at least three months after SARS-CoV-2 infection and; 3) symptomatic patients at least 3&#xa0;months after SARS-CoV-2 infection with chronic fatigue syndrome or similar symptoms, here designated as patients with long COVID-19 syndrome (LCS). Multiplex cytokine profiling indicated slightly elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in recovered individuals in contrast to patients with LCS. Plasma proteomics demonstrated low levels of acute phase proteins and macrophage-derived secreted proteins in LCS. High levels of anti-inflammatory oxylipins including omega-3 fatty acids in LCS were detected by eicosadomics, whereas targeted metabolic profiling indicated high levels of anti-inflammatory osmolytes taurine and hypaphorine, but low amino acid and triglyceride levels and deregulated acylcarnitines. A model considering alternatively polarized macrophages as a major contributor to these molecular alterations is presented.

### Keywords
Long covid syndrome; chronic fatigue syndrome; proteomics; metabolomics; macrophage polarization

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


