### Accession
PXD006616

### Title
INKA, an integrative analysis pipeline for inference of hyperactive phosphokinases in mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics data

### Description
As a large proportion of current targeted cancer therapies is based on specific (tyrosine) kinase inhibitors, uncovering the identity of hyperactive kinases at work in tumors is crucial for proper treatment selection. A major challenge in phosphoproteomic data analysis is to relate kinases to the extent and magnitude of their phosphorylation 'footprint', and to rank them accordingly in order to single out kinases that are crucial for tumor growth in individual patients. Previous approaches have either zeroed in on phosphorylation of kinases themselves as a read-out of kinase activity, or focused on inferring kinase activities from the phosphorylation of their (supposed) substrates. Here, we combine both kinase-centric and substrate-centric analyses. We present a computational pipeline called Integrative Inferred Kinase Activity (INKA) scoring that integrates the observed abundance of phosphopeptides derived from (i) kinases as a whole, (ii) their kinase activation loop segments, (iii) proteins deduced to be kinase substrates based on prior experimental knowledge of kinase-substrate relationships, and/or (iv) kinase substrates predicted by the sequence motif- and network-based NetworKIN algorithm. As a proof of concept, applying this pipeline to the analysis of phosphoproteomic data on seven different oncogene-driven cancer cell lines highlighted the high, top ranking inferred activity of known driver kinases in these cells. This demonstrates the potential of label-free MS-based phosphoproteomics combined with dedicated data analysis for identifying (hyper)active kinases that, in potential future applications to tumors, may be selected for targeted inhibition in a personalized treatment setting.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, lysis and digestion K562 CML, SK MEL-28 melanoma cells, HCC827-ER3 renal cell carcinoma cells and H2228 lung cancer cells. Cells were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2 in air atmosphere and expanded on 150 mm petri dishes. Cells were washed once in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) prior to lysis in 9M urea buffer containing 20 mM HEPES pH 9.0 and phosphatase. Cells were scraped and sonicated and subsequent centrifugation of the lysate was performed for 15 min at maximum speed. The cleared lysate was aliquotted and stored at -80 °C until further use. Lysates were reduced in 4 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) for 20 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature and subsequently alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min in the dark. After dilution to 2M urea using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH 8.0, the lysate was digested with 20 µg Sequencing Grade Modified trypsin/mg protein by overnight incubation at 22°C. Digestion was then halted by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were then incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 5 min at 1800 x g and transferred to a new tube. Tryptic digests were desalted using 10 ml (cells) or 1 ml (biopsies) Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) placed on a vacuum system. Bound peptides were washed using 0.1% TFA before elution to glass vials in 40% ACN/0.1% TFA. Eluates were lyophilized for 48 hours and stored at -80 ºC until further use.  pTyr Phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment for tyrosine phosphorylated phosphopeptides was performed using the anti-phosphotyrosine antibody P-Tyr-1000 coupled to agarose beads (PTMScan, Cell Signaling Technology). Briefly, lyophilized phosphopeptides were dissolved in IAP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate and 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 2 µl P-Tyr-1000 beads per mg protein at 4 ºC for 2 hours. After washing in cold IAP buffer and MQ, peptides were eluted from the beads in two steps in 0.15% TFA, desalted in 20 ul StageTips using 0.1% TFA  and eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA into glass-lined autosampler vials. Eluates were dried in a speedvac and redissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% acetonitrile in 0.5% TFA)  and stored at 4˚ C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 20 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive or a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 (15 for HF) peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 or 4.0 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome FASTA files (release 2013_04, 44307entries release 2014_01 42104 entries) and Swissprot human proteome (canonical and isoforms 2015_01 42122 entries) using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. or 1.5.2.8 . Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 or 6 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17 or 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label-free phosphopeptide quantification Phosphopeptides were quantified by counting MS/MS spectra (spectral counts) or by their extracted ion intensities (‘Intensity’ in MaxQuant). For each sample the phosphopeptide intensities were normalized on the median intensity of all identified peptides (from the MaxQuant Evidence table) in the sample (‘normalised intensity’).

### Publication Abstract
Identifying hyperactive kinases in cancer is crucial for individualized treatment with specific inhibitors. Kinase activity can be discerned from global protein phosphorylation profiles obtained with mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics. A major challenge is to relate such profiles to specific hyperactive kinases fueling growth/progression of <i>individual</i> tumors. Hitherto, the focus has been on phosphorylation of either kinases or their substrates. Here, we combined label-free kinase-centric and substrate-centric information in an Integrative Inferred Kinase Activity (INKA) analysis. This multipronged, stringent analysis enables ranking of kinase activity and visualization of kinase-substrate networks in a single biological sample. To demonstrate utility, we analyzed (i) cancer cell lines with known oncogenes, (ii) cell lines in a differential setting (wild-type versus mutant, +/- drug), (iii) pre- and on-treatment tumor needle biopsies, (iv) cancer cell panel with available drug sensitivity data, and (v) patient-derived tumor xenografts with INKA-guided drug selection and testing. These analyses show superior performance of INKA over its components and substrate-based single-sample tool KARP, and underscore target potential of high-ranking kinases, encouraging further exploration of INKA's functional and clinical value.

### Keywords
Human, Tyrosine kinase, Phosphoproteomics, Phosphokinase ranking, Label-free, Single-shot

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


