### Accession
PXD035250

### Title
In vivo polycystin-1 interactome using heads of Pkd1 knock-in newborn mice

### Description
We generated a new mouse model with three copies of the HA epitope and eGFP knocked-in frame into the endogenous mouse Pkd1 gene by CRISPR/Cas9. The modified allele is fully functional. Using nanobody-coupled beads and large quantities of tissue (8 heads of P1 newborn mice / experiment / condition), we immunoprecipitated  a PC1 interactome that was characterized by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For each mass spectrometry experiment, 8 heads of P1 newborn mice of each genotype (Pkd1eGFP/eGFP and Pkd1wt/wt) were used as input for immunoprecipitation (approximately 80mg of protein crude lysate/genotype). Briefly, two heads were combined, dissociated and lysed. Protein concentration was measured and 20mg were used for immunoprecipation (IP) with GFP-trap. The eluates of the four independent IPs for each genotype were then pooled and immediately processed for mass spectrometry. This procedure was repeated three times (using a total of 24 heads). A bottom-up proteomic analysis used  soap to assist in rendering and digestion of sample proteins, followed by post-digestion reductive demethylation, neutral pH off line reversed phase separation using fraction concatenation and conventional High-Low microscale HPLC/mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 was used to analyze the resulting data searching against the common contaminants list and the Humane proteome and a file containing several chicken proteins used asa process control and experiment specific proteins and some retention standards.

### Publication Abstract
PKD1 is the most commonly mutated gene causing autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). It encodes Polycystin-1 (PC1), a putative membrane protein that undergoes a set of incompletely characterized post-transcriptional cleavage steps and has been reported to localize in multiple subcellular locations, including the primary cilium and mitochondria. However, direct visualization of PC1 and detailed characterization of its binding partners remain challenging. We now report a new mouse model with HA epitopes and eGFP knocked-in frame into the endogenous mouse Pkd1 gene by CRISPR/Cas9. Using this model, we sought to visualize endogenous PC1-eGFP and performed affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) and network analyses. We show that the modified Pkd1 allele is fully functional but the eGFP-tagged protein cannot be detected without signal amplification by secondary antibodies. Using nanobody-coupled beads and large quantities of tissue, AP-MS identified an in vivo PC1 interactome, which is enriched for mitochondrial proteins and components of metabolic pathways. These studies suggest this mouse model and interactome data will be useful to understand PC1 function, but that new methods and brighter tags will be required to track endogenous PC1.

### Keywords
Interactome, Polycystin-1, Pkd1 knock-in mouse model, Pkd1, Polycystic kidney disease

### Affiliations
Kidney Diseases Branch, NIDDK, NIH, US Government, United States
NIH/NIDDK

### Submitter
David Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory George Germino
Kidney Diseases Branch, NIDDK, NIH, US Government, United States


