### Accession
PXD003064

### Title
Top-down characterization of lunasin in a commercial soybean-derived product

### Description
The presence of lunasin was investigated in two soybean products, raw soy seeds and a commercial soybean beverage powder. Lunasin from the commercial soybean derivative was purified by reverse phase high pressure liquid chromatography and bystrong anion exchange solid phase extraction.  Lunasin was further characterized by Top-down mass spectrometry (MS). The top-down characterization of lunasin unraveled a wide range of  post-translationally modified proteoforms.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 10 g of raw soybeans were soaked overnight in distilled water. The soybeans were then blended with extraction buffer (75.5 mM sodium phosphate, 68.4 mM sodium chloride, 10 mM sodium metabisulfite, 20 mM ascorbic acid, pH 7.4). The mixture was then centrifuged at 4000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. Similarly, a total of 10 g of commercial soybean beverage powder was combined with 100 mL of extraction buffer. The mixture was then shaken for 30 min and centrifuged at 4000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were collected and filtered to remove any suspended material.   To remove lipids, a defatting process with hexane was performed.   Lunasin was isolated from other positively charged species by two different methodologies: Strong anion exchange solid phase extraction (SAX-SPE): The sample was loaded into the cartridge at pH 8.5 for better retention of analytes in the stationary phase and elution was then done with 1 mL of phase B (150 mM Tris-HCl buffer at pH 9 with 0.1 M NaCl) Reverse phase HPLC: Prior to the chromatographic purification of lunasin big proteins were remove by passing the soybean beverage soybean extract though an Amicon 30 kDa-molecular weight cut off filter. A RP-HPLC using a Luna column (3.6 µm, 100 mm × 4.6 mm, Phenomenex Inc, Torrance, CA, USA) was used to isolate the peptide lunasin and its counterparts from the soybean beverage powder extract. Water and ACN were used as mobile phase A and B, respectively. Separation was performed in a 90-min gradient as follows: 5 % B for 5 min, 5-45 % B for 60 min, 45-100% B for 3 min, 100 % B for 7 min and then returned to the initial conditions over 0.5 min and maintained isocratic at initial conditions for 14.5 min. A total of 400 µL of soybean beverage extract were injected and fractions were collected every minute.  Sample was reduced and alkylated with dithiotreitol (DTT) and 60 mM bromoethylamide (EA).  Desalting was carried out using a C18 Sep-Pak column.The eluted peptide solution was then dried overnight at room temperature in a vacuum concentrator.  Purified peptide was dissolved in  0.1 % formic acid prior to the mass spectrometry analysis.  The Top-Down NSI-MS/MS analysis of purified lunasin was performed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc.) manually tuned directly with the isolated peptide. Data was manually collected in positive mode using the LTQ Tune Plus software (Thermo Scientific Inc.).  The LC-MS/MS characterization of lunasin was performed using the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system. The separation was done using a reversed phase Acclaim PepMap RSL column. 0.1% FA and 90% ACN, 0.1% FA were used as mobile phase A and B, respectively. Data acquisition was done in positive mode using the LTQ Tune Plus software alternating between Full MS and MS/MS. The 5 most intense ions were isolated with a 1.5 Da mass isolation window and fragmented by HCD, with 27 % normalized collision energy, and by ETD, with 80 ms of reaction time.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by MALDI-MS using an Applied Biosystems 4800 MALDI-MS analyzer. The linear acquisition mode was used. Saturated α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 75% ACN with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was used as matrix. Desalting of samples was performed with C18 zip-tips if needed. Each MALDI spot comprised 0.5 μL desalted sample and 0.5 μL matrix solution. Data from Top-down NSI-MS/MS was analyzed using MASH Suite (version 1.0.0.23928, UW-Madison, U.S.A.) and further validated manually.   Peak deconvolution for manual data analysis was performed with Xtract algorithm (Thermo Scientific Inc.). Data from Top-down LC-MS/MS was analyzed by ProSightPTM and PEAKS studio (version 7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada).   10 ppm MS and 0.05 Da MS/MS tolerances were used for data analysis. EA (Cys, 43.04 Da) was included as fixed modification and additional EA was set as variable modification in order to consider possible polymerization of the alkylating agent. PTMs were searched in PEAKS studio using the PEAKS PTM algorithm searching for all PTMs contained in Unimod list. For the AGE analysis, CML (Lys) and CEL (Lys) were added as variable modifications. Identification of lunasin was performed by using the 2S albumin preprotein sequence.  All sequences identified were further validated manually.

### Publication Abstract
Nutraceuticals have been proposed to exert positive effects on human health and confer protection against many chronic diseases. A major bioactive component of soy-based foods is lunasin peptide, which has potential to exert a major impact on the health of human consumers worldwide, but the biochemical features of dietary lunasin still remain poorly characterized. In this study, lunasin was purified from a soy-based food product via strong anion exchange solid phase extraction and then subjected to top-down mass spectrometry analysis that revealed in detail the molecular diversity of lunasin in processed soybean foods. We detected multiple glycated proteoforms together with potentially toxic advanced glycation end products (AGEs) derived from lunasin. In both cases, modification sites were Lys24 and Lys29 located at the helical region that shows structural homology with a conserved region of chromatin-binding proteins. The identified post-translational modifications may have an important repercussion on lunasin epigenetic regulatory capacity. Taking together, our results demonstrate the importance of proper chemical characterization of commercial processed food products to assess their impact on consumer's health and risk of chronic diseases.

### Keywords
Top-down, Proteomics, Soybean, Advanced glycation end produts, Glycation

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.

### Submitter
Aida Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551


