### Accession
PXD010261

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics unravels synergistic bacterial-fungal interactions in an oral cross-kingdom biofilm

### Description
Candida albicans, a major opportunistic fungal pathogen is frequently found together with Streptococcus mutans in dental biofilms associated with severe childhood tooth-decay, a prevalent pediatric oral disease. Previous studies have demonstrated that S. mutans and C. albicans synergizes virulence of plaque-biofilms in vivo. However, the nature of this bacterial-fungal relationship in this cross-kingdom biofilm remains largely uncharacterized. Using iTRAQ based quantitative proteomics, we found that proteins associated with carbohydrate metabolism such as alpha-1,4 glucan phosphorylase, Hexokinase-2, Isocitrate lyase and malate synthase were significantly upregulated in C. albicans in the mixed-species biofilms (P<0.05). C. albicans proteins associated with growth/morphogenesis such as pH-responsive protein-2, Fma1p and Hsp21 were also induced. Conversely, S. mutans proteins in the tricarboxylic acid cycle such as citrate synthase and in the pentose phosphate pathway such as Ribose-5-phosphate isomerase A as well as proteins associated with sugar transport systems were upregulated indicating enhanced carbohydrate metabolism. Interestingly mixed-species biofilm microenvironment had a lower pH than S. mutans single-species biofilms.  This observation was supported by proteomics, wherein proteins associated with lactate and formate assimilation such as Glyoxalase and putative NADPH-dependent methylglyoxal reductase proteins were significantly upregulated in the mixed-species biofilms (P<0.05). Furthermore, we unexpectedly found that S. mutans derived glucosyltransferase B (GtfB), responsible for co-adhesion via glucans, can also contribute to C. albicans growth and carbohydrate metabolism by providing glucose and fructose from sucrose breakdown. These findings demonstrate synergistic bacterial-fungal interactions within mixed-species biofilms and a novel GtfB cross-feeding role. Taken together, quantitative proteomics provides new insights into this virulent cross-kingdom oral biofilm.

### Sample Protocol
Tube-gel digestion and sample clean up ─ For each sample, 100 μg of proteins were taken for downstream proteomics experiments. The sample was polymerized in a gel containing 4% SDS and subsequently fixed with a fixing reagent (50% Methanol, 12% Acetic acid) for 30 min in room temperature.  The gel was cut into small pieces (1 mm3). The finely-cut pieces of gel were washed with 50 mM TEAB/50%(v/v) acetonitrile and dehydrated using 100% acetonitrile and the step was repeated three times. Subsequently, samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 57 °C for 60 min followed by alkylation with 10 mM MMTS for 60 min at room temperature with occasional vortexing. Following reduction and alkylation, the gel pieces were washed with 500 μl of 50 mM TEAB. Then the gel pieces were dehydrated by adding 500 μl of acetonitrile and subsequently 500 μl of 50 mM TEAB was added for re-swelling. A final dehydration step was performed using 100 μl of acetonitrile. 1 μg of trypsin per 20 μg of proteins were added and trypsinization was performed at 37 °C for 16 h.  The digested peptides were extracted by sequentially adding 200 μl of 50 mM TEAB, 5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile and 100% acetonitrile. The solutions were added and allowed to stand for 5-10 min and centrifuged at 6000 rpm. The supernatant with the digested peptides were collected, combined and stored at -20 °C before LC separation and MS analysis. The samples were lyophilized until the tubes were completely dried and 30 μl of the dissolution buffer was added. Then the protein digests were labeled with the iTRAQ Reagents 8-plex kit (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) following manufacturers protocol. Elutes were then desalted in Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), dried and then reconstituted in 25 ml of diluent (98% water, 2% ACN, and 0.05% formic acid) before performing LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis ─ The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to a methodology previously described by our group (Ghosh and others 2013; Truong and others 2016). Briefly, the peptides were dissolved with 50 μl mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and the water peptide separation was conducted using an EksigentnanoLC Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) in TrapElute configuration. Subsequently, the samples were loaded on a 200 μm x 0.5 mm column and eluted on an analytical 75 μm x 15 cm column (ChromXP C18-CL, 3 μm). A gradient formed by mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was used to separate 2 μl of the sample at a 3 μl/min flow rate. The following gradient elution was used for peptide separation: 0 to 5% of mobile phase B in 1 min, 5 to 12% of mobile phase B in15 min, 12 to 30% of mobile phase B in 104 min, 30 to 90% of mobile phase B in 2 min, 90 to 90% in 7min, 90 to 5% in 3 min and finally held at 5% of mobile phase B for 13 min. The tandem MS analysis was performed using a 5600 TripleTOF system (SCIEX) under Information Dependent Mode. The mass range of 400-1800 m/z and accumulation times of 250 ms per spectrum were chosen for precursor ions selections. MS/MS analysis was performed on the 20 most abundant precursors (accumulation time: 100 ms) per cycle with 15 s dynamic exclusion. Recording of MS/MS was acquired under high sensitivity mode with rolling collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was carried out on the ProteinPilot 5.0 software Revision 4769 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm (5.0.0.0.4767) and the integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function. The data were searched against two protein sequence databases downloaded from UniProtKB for C. albicans SC5314 on 25th June, 2017 (total 6040 entries) and for S. mutans UA159 on 25th June, 2017 (total 1959 entries). The MS/MS spectra obtained were searched using the following user-defined search parameters: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8-plex (Peptide Labeled); Cysteine Alkylation: MMTS; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF5600; Special Factors: None; Species: None; ID Focus: Biological Modification; Database: Algae Transcriptome.fasta; Search Effort: Thorough; FDR Analysis: Yes; The MS/MS spectra were searched against a decoy database to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification. The decoy database consisted of reversed protein sequences from the C. albicans database. The resulting data set was auto bias-corrected to remove any variations imparted because of the unequal mixing during the combination of different labeled samples. Different modification states of the same peptide sequences are considered distinct by the software. In this study, a strict unused score cut-off ≥1.3 was adopted as the qualification criterion, corresponding to a peptide confidence level of ≥95%. The identified proteins with ≥2 peptides corresponding to 95% confidence interval was selected and further filtered using population statistics (Gan and others 2007). Population statistics was also applied to select the cut-off for up regulated and down-regulated proteins. The distribution of the protein expression of C. albicans and S. mutans mixed-species biofilms compared to the C. albicans and S. mutans was plotted on volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Itraq proteomics, Dental caries, Biofilms, Glucosyltransferase, Streptococcus mutans

### Affiliations
Oral Science,Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore
Assistant Professor, Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Kassapa Ellepola

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Chaminda Jayampath Seneviratne
Assistant Professor, Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore


