### Accession
PXD019135

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative proteomics implicates SOCS1 in modulating protein constituents of large macromolecular complexes in hepatocytes

### Description
Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling 1 (SOCS1) functions as a tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma by regulating cytokine, growth factor and other signaling pathways. The tumor suppressor functions of SOCS1 are mediated partly via promoting ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of several signaling proteins. In this study, we used an unbiased approach to characterize SOCS1-mediated changes in the protein profile of hepatocytes. The murine HCC cell line Hepa1-6 transduced with wildtype SOCS1, an SH2 domain mutant or the empty lentiviral vector were grown in Stable Isotopic Labelling of Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) media. The cells were stimulated with hepatocyte growth factor or left at steady state. Following cell lysis, proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE gels and peptides extracted by in-gel trypsinization were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Differentially modulated proteins identified and quantified were subjected to pathway enrichment analysis. In total, 3440 proteins were identified in Hepa cells in the presence of SOCS1 at steady state, of which 181 proteins were significantly modulated by SOCS1. The SH2 domain mutation and HGF stimulation increased the number of differentially modulated proteins, which showed only a limited overlap with SOCS1-modulated proteins. Protein interaction network analysis revealed enrichment of SOCS1-modulated proteins within multiprotein complexes such as ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, proteasome, mRNA spliceosome, mRNA exosome and mitochondrial ribosome. Further analysis indicated SOCS1-dependent regulation of the UBE2D ubiquitin conjugating enzymes, which are implicated in growth factor receptor signaling, indirectly via an unknown protein. Given the ubiquitous and highly regulated induction of SOCS1 by diverse cellular stimuli, our findings suggest a fundamental role of SOCS1 in regulating large macromolecular complexes that are important for cellular homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were prepared for mass spectrometry as previously described [31]. The cells were thoroughly washed in PBS before lysis in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1% Triton-X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 50mM sodium fluoride; 250l/petri dish). The cells were collected using a cell scrapper, incubated on ice for 30 min and sonicated using a probe sonicator (Branson 150D Ultrasonic Cell Disruptor, Danbury, CT). The lysates were centrifuged at 12,000g for 20 mins to remove cell debris and protein concentration in supernatants was determined using DC™ Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, #5000111). Twenty g of proteins from L, M and H isotope-labeled cultures from three experiments were pooled. The protein mixtures were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, and each lane was cut into 4 pieces. The gel stain was removed by repeated washing in acetonitrile (CH3CN; Fluka, #34967) and ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3; Fluka, #09830), and then digested by trypsin (Pierce, #90058) in situ overnight. The next day peptides were extracted into the trypsin digestion buffer by using equal amount of CH3CN and incubating for 30 min at 30oC. Following collection of the supernatant, the same step was repeated with 1% acetic acid. These two steps were done until the gel pieces were completely dehydrated. The solutions containing the peptides were dried using a Speedvac concentrator (Eppendorf™ Vacufuge™ Concentrator, #07-748-13) and suspended in 0.1% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich, #T6508). The peptides were cleaned from other impurities using ZipTips (Millipore, # ZTC18S) and re-suspended in 1% formic acid (Fisher, #A117-50). These purified peptides were quantified using a nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Nanodrop 2000c) before injection into the OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The peptides were identified and quantified using Maxquant software version 1.5.2.8 with the reference database from Uniprot KB (Mus musculus). The proteins obtained were filtered by removing the known possible contaminants, reverse sequences and protein identified with single peptides from the list. The fold change for each protein was obtained by using the formula log to the base 2 of protein ratios of each respective combination. The significantly modulated proteins were screened through R analysis software (R studio) by performing a one-sample T-test for each protein using the fold change. A criterion of 5% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied along with the restriction of more than 2 peptides identified for each protein to be considered as a confident hit. The list was further shortened by using a minimum cut-off of 0.5-fold change (FC) compared to control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Socs1, Ubiquitination, Silac, Cbl, Met, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,  University of Sherbrooke Canada
Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Subburaj Ilangumaran
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,  University of Sherbrooke Canada


