### Accession
PXD034360

### Title
Targeted proteomic analysis of small GTPases in radioresistant breast cancer cells

### Description
Radiotherapy benefits more than 50% of cancer patients and cures 40% of them, where ionizing radiation deposits energy to cells and tissues, thereby eliciting DNA damage and resulting in cell death. Small GTPases are a superfamily of proteins that play critical roles in cell signaling. Several small GTPases, including RAC1, RHOB and RALA, were previously shown to modulate radioresistance in cancer cells. However, there is no systematic proteomic study on small GTPases that regulate radioresistance in cancer cells. Herein, we applied a high-throughput scheduled multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) method, along with the use of synthetic stable isotope-labeled peptides, to identify differentially expressed small GTPase proteins in two pairs of breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and MCF7, and their corresponding radioresistant lines. We identified 7 commonly altered small GTPase proteins with over 1.5-fold change in the two pairs of cell lines. We also discovered ARFRP1 as a novel radioresistance regulator, where its downregulation promotes radioresistance in breast cancer cells. Together, this represents the first comprehensive assessment about the differential expression of the small GTPase proteome associated with the development of radioresistance in breast cancer cells. Our work also uncovered ARFRP1 as a new target for enhancing radiation sensitivity in breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein lysates of MDA-MB-231/C5 and MCF7/C6 cells were prepared by using CelLytic M cell lysis reagent (Sigma) supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Protein concentration was measured by using Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). Fifty μg of total proteins in SDS-PAGE loading buffer were boiled for 10 min and loaded onto a 15% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was subsequently stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250, destained, and proteins were digested in-gel as described previously.3-4 In brief, gel bands corresponding to a molecular weight range of 15−37 kDa were cut into 1 mm3 cubes and destained sequentially with 25% and 50% CH3CN in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8). Cysteine reduction and alkylation were performed by incubating the gel pieces in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 h and 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in dark for 20 min, respectively. The proteins were digested with MS-grade trypsin (Pierce) at 37°C for 16 h. Peptides were eluted by shaking in a solution containing CH3CN/H2O/acetic acid (45/45/5, v/v) and dried by a Speed-Vac. The tryptic peptides were then desalted using C18 ZipTip (Agilent). Prior the LC-MRM analysis, each digestion mixture was spiked-in with 4 fmol each of synthetic small GTPase peptides (New England Peptide, Inc.) with a C-terminal [15N2,13C6]-labeled lysine or [15N4,13C6]-labeled arginine. The MRM-based LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a TSQ Altis triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a Flex nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher), where an UltiMate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher) was employed for separation. The sample was loaded onto an in-house packed C18 (5 μm in particle size and 120 Å in pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) trapping column (150 μm i.d.) with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water). The eluted peptides were loaded to an analytical column (75 μm i.d.) packed in-house with C18 resin (3 μm in particle size and 120 Å in pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC), using a 90-min gradient of 10–45% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were ionized with a spray voltage of 2200 V and an ion transport tube temperature of 325°C. The resolution of Q1 and Q3 was set at 0.7 full width at half-maximum (FWHM). Fragmentation of precursor ions in Q2 was conducted with 1.5 mTorr argon. The collision energy was derived from default settings in Skyline (version 21.2).5 The retention time of 10 tryptic peptides of BSA were monitored and used to derive the normalized retention time (iRT)–RT calibration curve and to generate the MRM method in Skyline. The mass spectrometer was scheduled to monitor the precursor to product ion transitions of 144 unique peptides of human small GTPases with a cycle time of 3 sec in a 4.5-min retention time (RT) window.

### Data Protocol
The acquired LC-MRM data were imported to Skyline. In Skyline, all peptides were filtered with dot-product (dotp) value of > 0.7, where the dotp scores were assigned by comparing the similarities of the observed relative abundances of fragment ions to those in the spectral library.6 The potential interfering fragment ions that do not overlay with other fragment ions were manually excluded (i.e., processed data). The L/H ratios of each precursor ion were directly exported from Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Radiation therapy benefits more than 50% of all cancer patients and cures 40% of them, where ionizing radiation (IR) deposits energy to cells and tissues, thereby eliciting DNA damage and resulting in cell death. Small GTPases are a superfamily of proteins that play critical roles in cell signaling. Several small GTPases, including RAC1, RHOB, and RALA, were previously shown to modulate radioresistance in cancer cells. However, there is no systematic proteomic study on small GTPases that regulate radioresistance in cancer cells. Herein, we applied a high-throughput scheduled multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) method, along with the use of synthetic stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides, to identify differentially expressed small GTPase proteins in two pairs of breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and MCF7, and their corresponding radioresistant cell lines. We identified 7 commonly altered small GTPase proteins with over 1.5-fold changes in the two pairs of cell lines. We also discovered ARFRP1 as a novel regulator of radioresistance, where its downregulation promotes radioresistance in breast cancer cells. Together, this represents the first comprehensive investigation about the differential expression of the small GTPase proteome associated with the development of radioresistance in breast cancer cells. Our work also uncovered ARFRP1 as a new target for enhancing radiation sensitivity in breast cancer.

### Keywords
Small gtpase, Targeted proteomics, Radioresistance, Mrm, Breast cancer, Radiation therapy

### Affiliations
Distinguished Professor Department of Chemistry University of California Riverside
University of California, Riverside 

### Submitter
Zi Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Yinsheng Wang
Distinguished Professor Department of Chemistry University of California Riverside


