### Accession
PXD001639

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of mouse hippocampus in the context of fear memory

### Description
Quantitative proteomic analysis was used to identify the proteins associated with a formation of fear memory in mice. The proteins from the hippocampal region were isolated from three groups of trained aminals representing aquisition, consolidation and retrieval of a contextual fear conditioning. The samples were digested by trypsin, analyzed by LC-MSMS followed by protein identification and label-free quantitation using MaxQuant 1.3.0.5. Each group consisted of three individuals and each sample was processed in two technical replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen mice brain tissue pieces were transferred into falcon tubes. 100 µL of sample buffer (7.5M urea, 1.5M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100mM DDT) was added to each tissue piece and the tissue pieces dissolved on ice by use of an ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin electronic, Germany). Tissue homogenates were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 14 000g for 20 min for precipitation of residual tissue particles and undesired DNA fragments. 20 µg of whole cell lysate samples prepared previously were loaded onto 3 kDa molecular weight cut off spin columns (Pall GmbH, Austria) reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol and iodacetamide respectively followed by on-filter digestion applying trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Germany) at 37°C overnight. Tryptic peptides were purified by means of C18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) and samples dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were stored at -20°C for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MSMS analysis, the peptide samples were dissolved in 5µl of 30% formic acid (FA) in which 10 fmol/µL of 4 synthetic peptides were spiked for LC-MS quality control. 40 µL of eluent A (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) was added to the dissolved peptides and 10 µL thereof injected for LC-MS analysis via Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC system coupled to a Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). Coupling between LC and MS was realized using a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). Measurement of each sample was carried out in duplicates. Pre-concentration was carried out on a 2 cm x75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) applying a flow rate of eluent A of 10 µL/min. Peptides were eluted for separation onto a 50 cm x 75 µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) by applying a gradient from 8% to 40% of eluent B (79.9% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min for 235 min. Mass spectrometer scan range for intact peptides was set from 400 m/z to 1400 m/z at a resolution of 70 000 (at m/z = 200). Recording of MS/MS spectra of the 12 most abundant peptide ions per 1.5 s was achieved by applying HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy followed by analysis in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 17 500 (at m/z = 200). For label free quantitative (LFQ) data analysis we used the open source software MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 including the Perseus statistical package (version 1.3.0.4). Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database allowing a mass tolerance of 5ppm for MS spectra and 20ppm for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum of 2 peptide identifications per protein. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. FDR for both, peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. Protein identifications obtained from MaxQuant were further analyzed using Perseus, proteins being filtered for reversed sequences and contaminants. The determination of significantly up- and down-regulated proteins were achieved using a two-sided t-test with p<0.05 (permutation-based FDR correction).

### Publication Abstract
A series of protein kinases and phosphatases (PKPs) have been linked to contextual fear conditioning (cFC) but information is mainly derived from immunochemical studies. It was therefore decided to use an explorative label-free quantitative proteomics approach to concomitantly determine PKPs in hippocampi of mice in the individual phases of cFC. C57BL/6J mice were divided into four groups: three training groups representing the acquisition, consolidation and retrieval phases of cFC and a foot shock control group. Using this approach we identified 32 protein kinases or phosphatases/phosphatase subunits with significantly changed protein levels in one or more training groups as compared to foot shock control. These include members of PKP signalling modules of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP3K10, RAF1, KSR2), Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMKII&#x3b1;, DAPK1), protein kinase C (PRKCD) and protein phosphatases 1, 2A, 2B(3) previously implicated in various learning paradigms. In addition, our analysis showed protein kinases WNK1, LYN, VRK1, ABL1, CDK4, CDKL3, SgK223 and ADCK1, and protein phosphatases PTPRF, ACP1, DNAJC6, SSH2 and UBASH3B that have not been directly linked to fear memory processes so far. Determination of PKPs in the individual cFC phases represents a valuable resource for interpretation of previous and design of future studies on PKPs in memory mechanisms.

### Keywords
Fear memory, Contextual fear conditioning, Quantitative proteomic analysis, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Roman Smidak

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Austria


