### Accession
PXD010963

### Title
Locus-specific proteomics identification of OCT4 regulators

### Description
We set out to develop an unbiased, genome-wide method to screen for proteins that locate to the OCT4 proximal enhancer (PE) in hESCs; for this purpose, we developed an optimized locus-specific proteomics approach in hESCs. First, we designed TALEN (Transcription Activator-Like Effector Nuclease) constructs to target the sequences that are near the OCT4 PE, located in a region of DNaseI hypersensitivity. TALEN constructs with the highest cutting efficiency were chosen for locus-specific proteomics. We then made modifications to the original TALEN protein to transform it into a catalytically-dead TALE (dTALE) protein that is optimized for locus-specific proteomics in hESCs via three steps: 1) The nuclease-domain FokI at the C-terminus was replaced by a GFP (green fluorescence protein); 2) a 3X FLAG tag at the N-terminus was included for following pull-down analysis; 3) the existing CMV promoter was replaced with an EF1alpha promoter that has robust expression in hESCs. This dTALE protein could then be chemically crosslinked to the OCT4 locus together with all the other proteins that bind to the locus. We verified that dTALE protein binds to the targeted locus by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR. Following crosslinking, chromatin was sheared, and all the associated proteins were immunoprecipitated using an anti-FLAG antibody. Immunoprecipitation pulled down the dTALE protein as well as other proteins and complexes that are also attached to that region. Crosslinking was then reversed, and the samples were subjected to mass spectrometry to enable generation of a list of proteins that potentially bind to OCT4 PE locus.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with 1:25 trypsin 4h at 37C, followed by another addition of 1:25 trypsin 16h at 37C.  TFA was added and the samples desalted.  Analysis was performed on a Thermo Q-Exactive with a Waters nanoAcquity LC.

### Data Protocol
MS2 files were searched with Spectrum Mill and the UniProt human database with a reverse sequence decoy database and a FDR of <0.1%.

### Publication Abstract
Self-renewal and pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) depends upon the function of a remarkably small number of master transcription factors (TFs) that include OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG. Endogenous factors that regulate and maintain the expression of master TFs in hESCs remain largely unknown and/or uncharacterized. Here, we use a genome-wide, proteomics approach to identify proteins associated with the OCT4 enhancer. We identify known OCT4 regulators, plus a subset of potential regulators including a zinc finger protein, ZNF207, that plays diverse roles during development. In hESCs, ZNF207 partners with master pluripotency TFs to govern self-renewal and pluripotency while simultaneously controlling commitment of cells towards ectoderm through direct regulation of neuronal TFs, including OTX2. The distinct roles of ZNF207 during differentiation occur via isoform switching. Thus, a distinct isoform of ZNF207 functions in hESCs at the nexus that balances pluripotency and differentiation to ectoderm.

### Keywords
Oct4, Lc-msms, Talen, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
Caprion Biosciences
Caprion Biosciences Inc.

### Submitter
Daniel Chelsky

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Chelsky
Caprion Biosciences Inc.


