### Accession
PXD043205

### Title
Fungal COP9 signalosome assembly requires connection of two trimeric intermediates for integration of intrinsic deneddylase

### Description
The eight-subunit COP9 signalosome (CSN complex), controls the exchange of E3 ubiquitin cullin RING ligase receptors through its deneddylase activity, providing specificity to eukaryotic protein degradation. The conserved eight-subunit CSN complex is required for multicellular development of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans. The human, as well as the fungal CSN complex assembles through a heptameric subcomplex (pre-CSN complex) that is activated by the integration of the eighth subunit, the catalytic CsnE/5 deneddylase. The focus of this work was to unveil the assembly of the native fungal pre-CSN complex via combined genetic and biochemical approaches. Interactomes of various functional GFP-Csn subunit fusions, produced in pre-CSN deficient fungal double csn subunit gene deletion strains, were compared by affinity purifications coupled to mass spectrometry analyses. With this approach, two distinct heterotrimeric CSN subcomplexes were identified as pre-CSN assembly intermediates, namely CsnA/1-C/3-H/8 and CsnD/4-F/6-G/7 that form independently of CsnB/2 that connects the heterotrimers to a heptameric subcomplex and enables subsequent integration of CsnE/5, yielding in the enzymatically active CSN holocomplex. Surveillance mechanisms control accurate Csn subunit abundances and correct cellular localization for sequential assembly, since deprivation of Csn subunits change the abundance and location of the remaining Csn subunits.

### Sample Protocol
Protein-protein interactions were analyzed with GFP co-immunoprecipitation using fungal cell extracts of vegetatively grown pre-CSN deficient double csn gene deletion strains producing GFP-tagged Csn subunit fusions. 16 mg total protein in 2 mL final volume of the cell extracts was added to and incubated with equilibrated GFP-Trap® Agarose beads (Chromotek GmbH) for two hours at 4°C while rotating to bind the GFP-tagged Csn proteins. Afterwards, unspecifically or weakly bound proteins were washed off the GFP-Trap® Agarose beads with increasing salt concentration of W300 buffer (300 mM sodium chloride, 10 mM Tris-hydrogen chloride pH 7.5, 0.5 mM EDTA) and W500 buffer (500 mM sodium chloride, 10 mM Tris-hydrogen chloride pH 7.5, 0.5 mM EDTA). The bead-bound proteins were eluted with 150 µL 0.2 M glycine (pH 2.5) and immediately neutralized with 15 µL 1 M Tris pH 10.4. Elution was performed two additional times resulting in three elution fractions (e1, e2 and e3).  For chloroform-methanol extraction (Wessel and Flügge, 1984), the complete e1, e2 and e3 elution fractions (á approximately 150 µl) deriving from the GFP-CsnA, GFP-CsnB, GFP-CsnD and GFP-CsnF mediated co-immunoprecipitation assays were combined. For the GFP-CsnE mediated co-immunoprecipitation assays 50 µL of the e1 and e2 fractions were combined. The resulting protein pellets were mixed by stepwise resuspensions for in-solution tryptic digestion using RapiGestTM surfactant (Walters GmbH). The resulting peptides were further purified by C18 stage tipping (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The peptide samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC MS). The LC-MS analysis was performed with an UltiMateTM 3000 RLSC nano liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Velos ProTM mass spectrometer. The peptide sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap RLSCTM column and separated via a water-acetonitrile gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. Electrospray was provided by the Nanospray FlexTM Ion Source. Peptide ions were analyzed at a resolution of 30 000 within a mass range of 300 to 1850 m/z. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) was performed within the LTQ Velos ProTM linear ion trap to obtain the data-dependent top ten fragmentation spectra of the precursor peptides. The XcaliburTM software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) version 2.2 was applied for data recording and programming.  Wessel D, Flügge UI. A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids. Anal Biochem. 1984;138(1):141-143. doi:10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6 Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-1906. doi:10.1038/nprot.2007.261

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.16. (Cox and Mann, 2008) was used for protein identification. The A. nidulans-specific protein database was obtained from UniProt Proteomes (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes, Proteome ID: UP000000560, downloaded in 2014) using default settings. For the MaxQuant analyses the following setting were applied. Mode of digestion: trypsin/P; number of maximum missed cleavage: 3; fixed modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation; match between runs. FTMS re-quantification and FTMS recalibration were enabled. The subsequent data analysis was carried out with the Perseus software version 1.6.0.7 (Tyanova et al., 2016).  Cox J, Mann M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26(12):1367-1372. doi:10.1038/nbt.1511 Tyanova S, Temu T, Cox J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nat Protoc. 2016;11(12):2301-2319. doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.136

### Publication Abstract
The conserved eight-subunit COP9 signalosome (CSN) is required for multicellular fungal development. The CSN deneddylase cooperates with the Cand1 exchange factor to control replacements of E3 ubiquitin cullin RING ligase receptors, providing specificity to eukaryotic protein degradation. <i>Aspergillus nidulans</i> CSN assembles through a heptameric pre-CSN, which is activated by integration of the catalytic CsnE deneddylase. Combined genetic and biochemical approaches provided the assembly choreography within a eukaryotic cell for native fungal CSN. Interactomes of functional GFP-Csn subunit fusions in pre-CSN deficient fungal strains were compared by affinity purifications and mass spectrometry. Two distinct heterotrimeric CSN subcomplexes were identified as pre-CSN assembly intermediates. CsnA-C-H and CsnD-F-G form independently of CsnB, which connects the heterotrimers to a heptamer and enables subsequent integration of CsnE to form the enzymatically active CSN complex. Surveillance mechanisms control accurate Csn subunit amounts and correct cellular localization for sequential assembly since deprivation of Csn subunits changes the abundance and location of remaining Csn subunits.

### Keywords
Native complex assembly, Subcomplexes, Gfp-affinity purifications, Csn complex, Aspergillus nidulans, Cop9 signalosome

### Affiliations
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Grisebachstraße 8, 37077 Göttingen, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard H. Braus
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Grisebachstraße 8, 37077 Göttingen, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen


