### Accession
PXD000507

### Title
Acetylation Dynamics and Stoichiometry in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Quantitative MS analysis of acetylation in yeast using SILAC labeling and MaxQuant. Download Index of Raw files first.        We used quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze acetylation dynamics and stoichiometry in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We found that acetylation accumulated in growth-arrested cells in a manner that depended on acetyl-CoA generation in distinct subcellular compartments.        We used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture to quantify differences in protein, acetylation, and phosphorylation abundance by MS. Proteins from whole cell lysates were digested to peptides and acetylated peptides enriched using a polyclonal anti-acetyllysine antibody. Peptide fractions were analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution liquid chromatography‐tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and raw MS data were computationally processed using MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a frequently occurring posttranslational modification; however, little is known about the origin and regulation of most sites. Here we used quantitative mass spectrometry to analyze acetylation dynamics and stoichiometry in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We found that acetylation accumulated in growth-arrested cells in a manner that depended on acetyl-CoA generation in distinct subcellular compartments. Mitochondrial acetylation levels correlated with acetyl-CoA concentration in vivo and acetyl-CoA acetylated lysine residues nonenzymatically in vitro. We developed a method to estimate acetylation stoichiometry and found that the vast majority of mitochondrial and cytoplasmic acetylation had a very low stoichiometry. However, mitochondrial acetylation occurred at a significantly higher basal level than cytoplasmic acetylation, consistent with the distinct acetylation dynamics and higher acetyl-CoA concentration in mitochondria. High stoichiometry acetylation occurred mostly on histones, proteins present in histone acetyltransferase and deacetylase complexes, and on transcription factors. These data show that a majority of acetylation occurs at very low levels in exponentially growing yeast and is uniformly affected by exposure to acetyl-CoA.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Mitochondria, Yeast, Acetylation, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Proteomics

### Submitter
Brian Weinert

### Lab Head


