### Accession
PXD023137

### Title
Distinct CDK6 complexes determine tumor cell response to CDK4/6 inhibitors and degraders

### Description
CDK4/6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) are effective in metastatic breast cancer, but they have been only modestly effective in most other tumor types. Here we show that tumors expressing low CDK6 rely on CDK4 function, and are exquisitely sensitive to CDK4/6i. In contrast, tumor cells expressing both CDK4 and CDK6 have increased reliance on CDK6 to ensure cell cycle progression. We discovered that CDK4/6i and CDK4/6 degraders potently bind and inhibit CDK6 selectively in tumors in which CDK6 is highly thermo-unstable and strongly associated with the HSP90/CDC37 complex. In contrast, CDK4/6i and CDK4/6 degraders are ineffective in antagonizing tumor cells expressing thermostable CDK6, due to their weaker binding to CDK6 in these cells. Thus, we uncover a general mechanism of intrinsic resistance to CDK4/6i and CDK4/6i-derived degraders and the need for novel inhibitors targeting the CDK4/6i-resistant, thermostable form of CDK6 for application as cancer therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion. Cells with indicated treatments were harvested and lysed in lysis buffer (8M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). Sonication (5s on 5s off, 2ˣ30s) was performed to shear genome DNA. Lysate were centrifugated for 30 min at 10000ˣg at 4oC and the supernatant were transferred to a clean tube. Protein concentration was determined (BCA assay) and protein was reduced with 5mM DTT (dithiothreitol), alkylated with 15mM IAA (iodoacetamide) in the dark, then diluted with 3 ˣ volume of buffer 25mM Tris (pH 8.0), 1mM CaCl2. The final urea concentration is 2M.Trypsin was added into protein solution with 1:100 ratio (trypsin:protein), and digested 12-16 hrs or overnight at RT. Mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were cleaned up by C18 stage tips and the concentration was determined (Peptide assay, Thermo 23275). The clean peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X coupled with an Easy nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). 0.5µg of peptides were loaded on to an Acclain PepMap RSLC C18 Column (250 mm × 75 μm ID, C18, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher). Analytical separation of all peptides was achieved with 130 min gradient. A linear gradient of 5 to 30% buffer B over 110 min was executed at a 300 nl/min flow rate followed a ramp to 100%B in 5 min, and 15-min wash with 100%B, where buffer A was aqueous 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS experiments were performed in a data-dependent mode with full MS (externally calibrated to a mass accuracy of <5 ppm and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200) followed by high energy collision-activated dissociation-MS/MS of the top 20 most intense ions with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. High energy collision-activated dissociation-MS/MS was used to dissociate peptides at a normalized collision energy of 27 eV in the presence of nitrogen bath gas atoms. Dynamic exclusion was 30.0 seconds. There were two biological replicates for one treatment and each sample was subjected to two technical LC-MS replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis. Mass spectra processing and peptide identification were performed on the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.10.43) against a human UniProt database (UP000005640). All searches were conducted with a defined modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, with methionine oxidation and protein amino-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Peptides were confidently identified using a target-decoy approach with a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and a protein FDR of 1%. A minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required, maximally two missed cleavages were allowed, initial mass deviation for precursor ion was up to 7 ppm, and the maximum allowed mass deviation for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed on Perseus (Version 1.6.10.50). Protein quantitation was performed on biological replicate runs, and a two-sample t-test statistics was used to report statistically significant expression fold-changes.

### Publication Abstract
CDK4/6 inhibitors (CDK4/6i) are effective in metastatic breast cancer, but they have been only modestly effective in most other tumor types. Here we show that tumors expressing low CDK6 rely on CDK4 function, and are exquisitely sensitive to CDK4/6i. In contrast, tumor cells expressing both CDK4 and CDK6 have increased reliance on CDK6 to ensure cell cycle progression. We discovered that CDK4/6i and CDK4/6 degraders potently bind and inhibit CDK6 selectively in tumors in which CDK6 is highly thermo-unstable and strongly associated with the HSP90/CDC37 complex. In contrast, CDK4/6i and CDK4/6 degraders are ineffective in antagonizing tumor cells expressing thermostable CDK6, due to their weaker binding to CDK6 in these cells. Thus, we uncover a general mechanism of intrinsic resistance to CDK4/6i and CDK4/6i-derived degraders and the need for novel inhibitors targeting the CDK4/6i-resistant, thermostable form of CDK6 for application as cancer therapeutics.

### Keywords
Tumor, Cdk4/6 inhibitors and degraders, Cdk6 complex

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral Research Associate
Department of Oncological Sciences, Department of Dermatology, The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Li Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Poulikos Poulikakos
Department of Oncological Sciences, Department of Dermatology, The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai


