### Accession
PXD005518

### Title
Hsp90i resistance -  Targeting CDK2 overcomes melanoma resistance against BRAF and Hsp90 inhibitors

### Description
The goal is to describe the mechanisms underlying the resistance of melanoma against Hsp90i using  (phospho)proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis The cellular pellets of control sample and cells exposed to 2 days of 200 nM XL888 treatment were harvested and resuspended in lysis buffer [8 M Urea in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA‐free mixture (Roche Applied Science) and one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture per 10 ml of lysis buffer (Roche Applied Science)]. Cells were then lysed by 10 rapid passages through a 23‐gauge hypodermic syringe needle and by sonication on ice. After centrifugation (20,000 × g 30 min at 4°C), the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 2 mM DTT at RT for 1 h, alkylated with 4 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. A first enzymatic digestion step was performed in 8 M urea lysis buffer using Lys‐C at 37°C for 4 h (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50). The sample was diluted four times with 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and digested overnight at 37°C with Trypsin (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50). Finally, the digestion was quenched with 5% formic acid. The sample was desalted by reverse phase using Waters Sep-Pak 1 cc (50 mg) cartridges (WAT054960; Waters, Milford, MA). The resin was rinsed with ACN and then equilibrated with 0.6% acetic acid. The samples were loaded and washed with 0.6% acetic acid, eluated with 80% ACN/0.6% acetic acid. The eluated samples were lyophilized. Prior to LC/MS/MS analysis, samples were rehydrated in 10% formic acid (FA). Nearly 2 µg were injected for the protein expression level analyses. The analyses were conducted in three analytical and biological replicates. Phosphopeptide enrichment TiO2 material was prepared and used essentially as previously described {{796 Matheron,L. 2014;}}. The enrichment procedure for all samples was as follows: the TiO2 material was pre‐equilibrated two times with 50 μL of loading buffer (80% ACN, 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)). Next, 250 µg of each sample was resuspended in 50 μL of loading buffer and loaded onto the equilibrated GELoader tips. Then, the TiO2 material was washed with 50 μL wash buffer A (50% ACN, 0.5% TFA, 200 mM NaCl) and subsequently with 50 μL wash buffer B (50% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Bound peptides were first eluted by 30 μL of 10% ammonia into 30 μl of 10% FA. Finally, the remainder of the peptides was eluted with 2 μL of 80% ACN, 2% FA. The collected eluate was further acidified by adding 3 μL of 100% FA and one third of each sample was used for the subsequent LC‐MS/MS analysis. LC/MS/MS analysis The protein expression level and phosphoproteomics analyses were performed on a Fusion Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, Germany) connected to a Dionex UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). This UHPLC is equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoviper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mobile‐phase buffers for nLC separation consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (solvent B). The peptides were eluted during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min, and the LC gradient was as follows: 1-6% solvent B within 7 min, 6-37% solvent B within 113 min, 30–100% solvent B within 5 min, 100% solvent B for 8 min and 1% solvent B for 10 min. Nano spray was achieved with an applied voltage of 1.8 kV. The mass spectrometer was programmed in a data‐dependent acquisition mode (top 10 most intense peaks) and was configured to perform a Fourier transform survey scan from 350 to 1,550 m/z (resolution 120,000), RF lens (%)=60, AGC target 2 e5, maximum injection time 50 ms, 1 microscan. MS2 scans were acquired on the 10 most-abundant MS1 ions of charge state 2–7 using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1.4 m/z, CID activation with a collision energy of 32%, ion trap Rapid scan rate, AGC target of 1 e4, dynamic exclusion for 30 s, and maximum injection time of 100 ms, 1 microscan, centroid.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Label free quantification was performed by analyzing the raw data by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) {{371 Cox 2008;}}. Andromeda {{449 Cox 2011;}} was used to search the MS/MS data against the human UniProt Homo sapiens database (42144, composed of canonical and protein isoforms released 2016/03/21) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and phosphorylation of STY were used as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on a search with a mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 4.5 ppm (main search), and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 0.5 Da for ITMS. Data filtering was carried out using the following parameters: Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1%, minimum peptide length was set to 7, and Andromeda minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. The reverse and common contaminant hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Protein quantification was performed by using only unmodified peptides and oxidation (M); match between runs option was enabled. Only unique peptides with at least two ratio counts were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Novel therapies are undergoing clinical trials, for example, the Hsp90 inhibitor, XL888, in combination with BRAF inhibitors for the treatment of therapy-resistant melanomas. Unfortunately, our data show that this combination elicits a heterogeneous response in a panel of melanoma cell lines including PDX-derived models. We sought to understand the mechanisms underlying the differential responses and suggest a patient stratification strategy. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) identified the protein targets of XL888 in a pair of sensitive and unresponsive cell lines. Unbiased proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses identified CDK2 as a driver of resistance to both BRAF and Hsp90 inhibitors and its expression is regulated by the transcription factor MITF upon XL888 treatment. The CDK2 inhibitor, dinaciclib, attenuated resistance to both classes of inhibitors and combinations thereof. Notably, we found that MITF expression correlates with CDK2 upregulation in patients; thus, dinaciclib would warrant consideration for treatment of patients unresponsive to BRAF-MEK and/or Hsp90 inhibitors and/or harboring MITF amplification/overexpression.

### Keywords
Proteomics; phosphoproteomics; lc/ms/ms; hsp90i

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology, KTH
KTH

### Submitter
Gianluca Maddalo

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Uhlen
School of Biotechnology, KTH


