### Accession
PXD031731

### Title
A Novel Differentiated HuH-7 Cell Model to Examine Bile Acid Metabolism, Transport and Cholestatic Hepatotoxicity

### Description
Hepatic cell lines serve as economical and reproducible alternatives for primary human hepatocytes. However, the utility of hepatic cell lines to examine bile acid homeostasis and cholestatic toxicity is limited due to abnormal expression and function of bile acid-metabolizing enzymes, transporters, and the absence of canalicular formation. Previously, addition of dexamethasone (DEX) and Matrigel™ overlay restored expression, localization, and function of the bile salt export pump (BSEP), and formation of bile canalicular-like structures in four-week cultures of HuH-7 human hepatoma cells. We present here an improved differentiation process with the addition of 0.5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), which increased the expression and function of the major bile acid uptake and efflux transporters, sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) and BSEP, respectively, in two-week HuH-7 cell cultures. This in vitro model was further characterized for expression of cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYP450s), uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase (UGTs) and transporters using quantitative targeted proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane protein (20 microg) from each sample (n=3) of 2-week cultured HuH-7 cells in low-binding 0.2 mL PCR tubes was evaporated to dryness in a ThermoSavant SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were re-constituted in 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, 10 μL of 40 mM dithiothreitol, 10 μL of beta-casein (0.05 mg/mL) solution and 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate solution. The samples were reduced at 60°C for 40 min in an Isotemp Thermal Mixer (Fisher Scientific) with shaking (500 rpm) and cooled to room temperature. Next, samples were mixed with 10 μL of 135 mM iodoacetamide, vortexed briefly and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Then, 10 μL each of six stable isotope labeled (SIL) proteotypic tryptic peptide mixes (JPT Peptide Technologies, Germany; SpikeTides_TQL; purified and calibrated) were added to each sample at 1 pmol per peptide to measure transporters, CYP450 enzymes and carboxylesterases. Trypsin (#V5280, Promega), 10 μL of a 0.1 mg/mL solution, was added to give a trypsin: protein ratio of 1:20 (w/w). The samples were vortexed and incubated overnight (20 hours, 37°C, 300 rpm) in an Isotemp Thermal Mixer. After digestion, 10% TFA solution was added to precipitate sodium deoxycholate. Subsequently, samples were mixed with 10 μL of the SIL proteotypic tryptic peptide mix for UGT enzymes (Thermo Scientific Biopolymers; AQUA Quant Pro) at 1 pmol per peptide, vortexed and centrifuged at 13.3 K x g for 5 min. The recovered supernatant was subjected to solid phase extraction (SPE). The SPE cartridges Strata-X 33u Polymeric Reversed Phase (10 mg/1 mL; 8B S100 AAK, Phenomenex) were conditioned with methanol and purified water before addition of the sample. Next, the cartridges were washed and eluted with 60% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water into 0.5 mL LoBind tubes (#022431064, Eppendorf). Samples were evaporated to dryness before reconstitution in 50 microL of mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). After centrifugation at 13.3 K x g for 5 min, the supernatant was transferred to a silanized insert for analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity (Waters, Milford, MA) LC coupled to a QTRAP 5500 hybrid mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Framingham, MA) equipped with a NanoSpray III source. Analyst 1.5 software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA) and the nanoAcquity UPLC Console were used for data acquisition. Mobile phase A consisted of 1% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water and Mobile Phase B was 100% acetonitrile. An injection volume of 0.1 μL (0.04 μg or 0.2% of a 20 μg sample) was loaded onto a Symmetry® C18 trap column (2G-VM, 180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm particle size; #186006527, Waters) at a flow rate of 15 μL/min of mobile phase A for 1 min. Peptides were eluted from the trap column at a flow rate of 1.3 μL/min. The main resolving column used was a BEH130 C18 column (150 μm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm particle size; #186003550, Waters). Separation conditions were 100% mobile phase A initially, which was gradually decreased to 58% A at 24 min, held at 5% A at 24.5 min for 3 min and returned to 100% A at 28 mins for 7 min (35 min total run time). The analytical column temperature was set to 35 °C. MS/MS analysis was conducted in the positive mode with ion spray voltage set at 4000 V. The nanospray was produced using an uncoated PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) with a 20 μm inner diameter and 10 μm tip. The SIL peptides used to report protein abundance and the two MRMs (i.e., two labeled and two unlabeled) acquired for each peptide were validated previously. Equality of MRM response between the SIL and unlabeled peptides was assumed and the peptide with the highest concentration was reported. MultiQuant 2.0.2 software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA) was used for calculation of peak area ratios of unlabeled (endogenous) peptides to SIL peptides unique to each protein. The peak area ratios from two MRM transitions were averaged to calculate protein abundance, based on 1 pmol of SIL added during sample preparation. The lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) for the assay was 0.1 pmol/mg protein.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic cell lines serve as economical and reproducible alternatives for primary human hepatocytes. However, the utility of hepatic cell lines to examine bile acid homeostasis and cholestatic toxicity is limited due to abnormal expression and function of bile acid-metabolizing enzymes, transporters, and the absence of canalicular formation. We discovered that culturing HuH-7 human hepatoma cells with dexamethasone (DEX) and 0.5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for two weeks, with Matrigel overlay after one week, resulted in a shorter and improved differentiation process. These culture conditions increased the expression and function of the major bile acid uptake and efflux transporters, sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) and the bile salt export pump (BSEP), respectively, in two-week cultures of HuH-7 cells. This in vitro model was further characterized for expression and function of bile acid-metabolizing enzymes, transporters, and cellular bile acids. Differentiated HuH-7 cells displayed a marked shift in bile acid composition and induction of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 7A1, CYP8B1, CYP3A4, and bile acid-CoA: amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAAT) mRNAs compared to control. Inhibition of taurocholate uptake and excretion after a 24-h treatment with prototypical cholestatic drugs suggests that differentiated HuH-7 cells are a suitable model to examine cholestatic hepatotoxicity.

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative targeted proteomics, Sciex, Huh-7 cells

### Affiliations
Division of Pharmacotherapy and Experimental Therapeutics, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Chitra Saran

### Lab Head
Dr Kim Brouwer
Division of Pharmacotherapy and Experimental Therapeutics, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA


