### Accession
PXD041911

### Title
Portimine profiling in Human and mouse cells

### Description
practipractical access to the portimines and analogs thereof simplified the development of photoaffinity analogs, which were used in chemical proteomic experiments to identify a primary target of portimine A as the 60S ribosomal export protein NMD3cal access to the portimines and analogs thereof simplified the development of photoaffinity analogs, which were used in chemical proteomic experiments to identify a primary target of portimine A as the 60S ribosomal export protein NMD3

### Sample Protocol
Chemoproteomic samples were prepared in biological duplicates for each condition following similar procedures as previously described39. In general, cell pellets were resuspended in 500 µl cold DPBS and lysed by sonication (Branson Sonifier probe, method setting: 15 milliseconds (msec) on, 40 msec off, 15% amplitude, 1 second total on). Protein concentrations were normalized (2 mg ml-1 in 500 µl with ice-cold DPBS) using a DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) with absorbance measured using the Tecan, Infinite F500 plate reader following manufacturer’s instructions. Followed by add the “click-chemistry cocktail” to each 500 μl lysate sample: tris[(1-benzyl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl]amine (TBTA, 30 μl, 1.7 mM in DMSO/t-BuOH 1:4 v/v), tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, 10 µl, 50 mM), biotin-PEG3-azide (5 µl, 100 µM), and CuSO4 (10 µl, 50 mM) and samples were shaken at room temperature (RT) for 1 h. After click reaction, 2.5 ml of ice-cold 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3 solution and 1 ml ice-cold DPBS was added to each sample followed by centrifugation (3,200 × g, 4 °C, 10 min) to precipitate proteins. The precipitated protein was washed with 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3 two more times and resuspended in 6 M urea in DPBS, 500 µl; 10% SDS w/v, 10 µl. Protein reduction was then carried out by the addition of a freshly prepared 1:1 solution (50 µl total) of TCEP (25 µl, 200 mM in DPBS) and K2CO3 (25 µl, 600 mM in DPBS) and incubating the samples for 30 min at 37 °C. Following reduction, proteins were alkylated by the addition of freshly prepared iodoacetamide (70 µl, 400 mM in DPBS) and incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. After alkylation, 130 µl of 10% SDS was added to samples, and then diluted with 5.5 ml DPBS. 100 µl of 50% slurry of streptavidin agarose slurry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 20349) was added to each tube and rotated for 90 min at RT for enrichment of biotin-labeled protein. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (750 × g, 2 min, 4 °C) and subsequently washed once with 0.2% SDS in DPBS (5 min, 5 ml), twice with DPBS (5 ml), once with water (5 ml), and transferred to LoBind microcentrifuge tubes with 100 mM TEAB (1 ml, pH 8.5). Streptavidin enriched proteins were digested overnight with trypsin in digestion buffer [100 ml, 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5), 100 µM CaCl2] at 37 °C. The digest in each condition were taken out to new LoBind tubes, labeled with respective tandem-mass-tags (TMT; Thermo Fisher Scientific) 10plex or 16plex reagents (8 µl, 20 µg µl-1) for 1 h at 37 °C, quenched by hydroxylamine (6 µl, 5% v/v) for additional 15 min, acidified by formic acid (8 µl), and dried through SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dried pellets were dissolved, combined and proceeded to be fractionated into 12 fractions by Pierce high pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 84868) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The fractions were combined into 6 final fractions in a pairwise fashion, dried, and stored at −80 °C until ready for mass spectrometry analysis

### Data Protocol
TMT labeled peptides were resuspended in MS buffer (20 µl, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid in water) prior to LC-MS analysis as previously published methoeds39. In brief, 3 µl of each sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (75 µm × 2 mm) and eluted on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm × 15 cm) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A was (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used in a 220 min gradient (0.3 ml min-1, 35 °C) of 2% buffer B for 10 min, followed by an incremental increase to 30% buffer B over 192 min, 60% buffer B for additional 5 min, 60 – 95% buffer B for 1 min, and 95% buffer B for 5 min, followed by descent to 2% buffer B for 1 min followed by re-equilibration at 2% buffer B for 6 min. The eluents were analyzed with a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with a cycle time of 3 sec and nano-LC electrospray ionization source applied voltage of 2,000 V. MS1 spectra were recorded at a scan range was specified from 375 to 1,500 m/z, maximum injection time of 50 msec (dynamic exclusion enabled, repeat count 1, duration 20 sec), the resolution is 120,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1 × 106 ions,. Peptides selected for MS2 analysis were isolated with the quadrupole (isolation window 1.6 m/z) and fragmented using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with 30 % collision energy, resultant fragments recorded in the ion trap (AGC 1.8 × 104, maximum inject time 120 msec). MS3 spectra were generated through high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, 65% collision energy). Synchronous precursor selection (SPS) was employed to isolate up to 10 MS2 ions for MS3-based quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human mouse

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research
The Scripps Research Institute 

### Submitter
Weichao Li

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Parker
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research


