### Accession
PXD010663

### Title
Bacteria Associated with Russian Wheat Aphid (Diuraphis noxia) Enhance Aphid Virulence to Wheat

### Description
Phenotypic responses to biotic stresses are often studied as the interactions between two species; however, in the phytobiome, these responses frequently result from complex interactions involving several organisms. Here, we show that variation in chlorosis caused by Russian wheat aphid (Diuraphis noxia) feeding is determined, in part, by aphid-associated bacteria. Proteomic analysis of fluids injected into a sterile medium by the aphid during feeding indicate that 99% of the proteins are of bacterial origin. Of these, the greatest proportion are produced by bacteria in the order Enterobacteriales. Bacteria from five genera in four families that have the capacity to produce these proteins were isolated directly from aphids as well as from wheat leaves only after D. noxia feeding. By themselves or in combination, these bacteria were not virulent to wheat, even at high inoculum levels. Metagenomic analysis showed that the same five D. noxia-associated genera dominated the non-Buchnera component of the aphid microbiome, and that representation of these genera was reduced in aphids from colonies established after isolation of newborn nymphs from their mothers prior to feeding (‘isolated’ aphids). Isolation or treatment  with antibiotics reduced bacterial numbers, and these aphids caused less feeding damage on wheat than non-isolated or non-antibiotic treated aphids. Our data show that bacterial proteins are a significant component of Russian wheat aphid saliva, that the bacteria producing these proteins are associated with aphids and plants fed upon by aphids, and that these aphid-associated bacteria facilitate aphid virulence to wheat.

### Sample Protocol
Parthenogenic colonies of D. noxia biotypes 1 and 2,  collected from field infestations of wheat in CO, were reared and maintained on susceptible wheat plants (Triticum aestivum L.). Wheat plants susceptible to both aphid biotypes 1 and 2, were grown in a greenhouse with 16 h light/8 h dark at 23 ± 3 °C. The infested plants were held in 60 × 60 × 60 cm insect cages (Bug Dorm Store, Megaview Inc., Taichung, Taiwan) to avoid contamination with non-experimental aphid species.  Russian wheat aphid biotypes 1 and 2 were reared on susceptible wheat cultivar ‘TAM 107’ for several generations prior to the start of the experiment. Aphids were incubated at 22 °C under a yellow light at a 14 h light/10 h dark photoperiod as described (Cooper et al. 2010). The entire experiment was replicated three times with 130 cages constructed per biotype. Collection plates incubated without aphids served as controls. After 48 h of feeding, aphids were removed and the surface of the feeding sachet was rinsed with sterile water. Diet was collected into 50 ml centrifuge tubes and the proteins were precipitated from the artificial diet by the addition of 10% trichloroacetic acid, 60% acetone, 1% β-mercaptoethanol and incubating the samples at –20 °C overnight. Precipitated proteins were collected by centrifuging at 5,000 g for 30 min and removing supernatant. Samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator. Three biological replicates were analyzed for each of the two aphid biotypes. Each biological replicate was comprised of pools of saliva collected from thousands of individual insects from three clonal lineages of each D. noxia biotype. Protein pellets were solubilized in 0.1% ProteaseMax (PMAX) surfactant (Promega), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and total protein concentrations were estimated using a Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). The integrity of the protein samples was assessed by separation and visualization in 10% SDS-gels as described (Ramsey et al. 2015). Samples were each aliquoted at 1 µg µl–1 starting protein in a total volume of 65 µl.  For reduction and cysteine blocking steps, 50 mM TEAB and 0.1% PMAX was added to the solution. Samples were reduced with 5 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP, pH 8.5) for 20 min at 55 °C, and 10 mM methyl-methane-thiosulfonate (MMTS) was added to each sample and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. A methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out at 4 °C for 75 min after adding the following to each sample: 4× volume methanol; 1× volume chloroform; 3× volume deionized water. After centrifugation (15,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C) and removal of the supernatant, methanol was added to each pellet at 3× the sample volume, and the pellets were gently vortexed followed by centrifugation at 4 °C for 5 min. The methanol was removed and the pellet was air dried briefly. The pellets were solubilized in 0.1% PMAX/50 mM TEAB. Sequence grade modified trypsin (1µg/sample) was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were subjected to vacuum centrifugation until almost dry, and then 30 µl of 500 mM TEAB was added to each. The iTRAQ labeling reagents (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) were each reconstituted in 50 µl of isopropanol and added to each sample as directed by the manufacturer. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h during the labeling reaction. TFA was added to each sample to bring the pH below 4. All six biological replicates labeled with individual iTRAQ reporter mass tags were then pooled to one single tube and mixed for analysis. Combined, iTRAQ-labeled samples were analyzed using two-dimensional liquid chromatography MudPIT(Washburn 2004), using a two-dimensional vented column setup with a Proxeon nano-flow high-performance liquid pump (Taylor et al. 2009). A total of 50 µg of sample was loaded onto a tri-phasic, fused silica capillary column: 250 µm internal diameter packed with 3 cm of 5 µm Aqua C18, followed by 3 cm of 5 µm Luna SCX and 2 cm of 5 µm Aqua C18. A total of seven salt steps were used. For each salt step, peptides were eluted on an analytical column of a 100 µm internal diameter capillary with a 5 µm pulled tip and packed with 15 cm of 3 µm Aqua C18 on line with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher) as described in (Scuoppo et al. 2012). Data were acquired in profile mode using the following parameters: for full-scan Fourier transform mass spectrometry, resolution = 60,000, m/z = 380–1,700 and the 10 most intense ions were fragmented with higher-collision dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 40% and an activation time of 0.1. Minimum threshold signal was at 5,000 and isolation width at 1.2. Dynamic exclusion settings were repeat count 1, repeat duration of 30, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 and exclusion mass width 10 p.p.m.

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS data collected were submitted to Mascot v.2.3 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) using an in-house MASCOT server for database interrogation. The data were searched against the entire NCBI non-redundant database, which contained the A. pisum gene models (download date: January 2011). This initial search revealed that the samples were comprised predominantly of plant pathogenic bacterial proteins. Therefore, we also searched the data using a custom database that contained a combination of predicted proteins from A. pisum (from NCBI, download date 7-23-2014), sequences from common contaminant proteins, as well as prokaryotic proteins predicted from microbes known to be associated with aphids, including Erwinia spp., Pantoea spp., Enterobacter spp., Acinetobacter spp. and insect endosymbionts belonging either to the order Enterobacteriales (Photorhabdus spp., Candidatus Hamiltonella defensa, Candidatus Regiella insecticola, Arsenophonus spp., B. aphidicola, Candidatus Carsonella ruddii and Serratia symbiotica) or Rickettsiales (Wolbachia spp. and Rickettsia spp.). The latter custom database had a total of 2,033,158 sequences.  The following search parameters were used: methylthio-cysteine as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation as a variable modification, and one missed tryptic cleavage. The searches were done with a mass error tolerance of 25 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions.  As described in the Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) Publication Report, iTRAQ peptide and protein identifications were quantified as follows. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold local false discovery rate algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least two identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al. 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Channels were corrected according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker (Shadforth et al. 2005) as follows: Acquired intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run. Intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels were normalized to produce a 1:1fold change. All normalization calculations were performed using medians to multiplicatively normalize data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aphid saliva | proteome | enterobacteriaceae | multitrophic interactions | microbiome | phytobiome

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Heck
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute


