### Accession
PXD030781

### Title
Murine Western diet-induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitis liver proteome

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the number one cause of chronic liver disease worldwide, with 25% of these patients developing nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). NASH significantly increases the risk of cirrhosis and decompensated liver failure. Past studies in rodent models have shown the knockout of glycine-N-methyltransferase (GNMT) results in rapid pro-gression of steatosis, fibrosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the attenuation of GNMT in subjects with NASH and the molecular basis for its impact on the disease process are still unclear. To address this knowledge gap, we show the reduction of GNMT protein levels in the liver of NASH subjects compared to healthy controls. To gain insight into the impact of decreased GNMT in the disease process, we performed global label-free proteome studies on the livers from a murine Western diet-based model of NASH. Histological and molecular characterization of the animal model demonstrate high resemblance to the human disease.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free global proteomics studies the proteins were extracted by adding 6M guan-idium hydrochloride buffer and dilution buffer (25mM Tris, 10% acetonitrile). The pro-teins were digested with Lys-C for 4 hours at 37 0C. Second digestion was achieved by overnight incubation with trypsin. The incubated solution was acidified and centrifuged at 4,500 g for 5 minutes. The supernatants consisting of peptides were loaded onto acti-vated in-house-made cation stage tips. The peptides from each sample were eluted into six fractions using ammonium acetate buffers.

### Data Protocol
Mass spec analyses were performed on these fractions using the Q Exactive mass spec-trometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The desalted tryptic peptide samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (75 μm x 2cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) and sepa-rated by Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column with an emitter (2 μm particle size, 15 cm x 50 μm ID, ThermoFisher Scientific) by an Easy nLC system with Easy Spray Source (ThermoFisher Scientific). To elute the peptides, a mobile-phase gradient is run using an increasing concentration of acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) for-mic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 145-min gradient as follows: 0–25% buffer B (15% (v/v) of 0.1% formic acid and 85% (v/v) of acetonitrile) for 80 min, 25-40% B for 20 min, 40-60% B for 20 min and 60-100% B for 10 min. The column was then washed with 100% buffer B for 5 min, 50% buffer B for 5 min, and re-equilibrated with buffer A for 5 min. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nl/min. Electron spray ionization was delivered at a spray voltage of 1500 V. MS/MS fragmenta-tion was performed on the five most abundant ions in each spectrum using colli-sion-induced dissociation with dynamic exclusion (excluded for 10.0 s after one spec-trum), with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes. The complete system was entirely controlled by Xcalibur software. Mass spectra processing was performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.5. The generated de-isotoped peak list was submitted to an in-house Mascot server 2.2.07 for searching against the Swiss-Prot database (Release 2013_01, version 56.6, 538849 sequences) and Sequest HT database. Both Mascot and Se-quest search parameters were set as follows: species, homo sapiens; enzyme, trypsin with maximal two missed cleavage; fixed modification, cysteine carboxymethylation; 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor peptide ions; 0.02 Da tolerance for MS/MS fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the number one cause of chronic liver disease worldwide, with 25% of these patients developing nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). NASH significantly increases the risk of cirrhosis and decompensated liver failure. Past studies in rodent models have shown that glycine-<i>N</i>-methyltransferase (GNMT) knockout results in rapid steatosis, fibrosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma progression. However, the attenuation of GNMT in subjects with NASH and the molecular basis for its impact on the disease process is still unclear. To address this knowledge gap, we show the reduction of GNMT protein levels in the liver of NASH subjects compared to healthy controls. To gain insight into the impact of decreased GNMT in the disease process, we performed global label-free proteome studies on the livers from a murine modified amylin diet-based model of NASH. Histological and molecular characterization of the animal model demonstrate a high resemblance to human disease. We found that a reduction of GNMT leads to a significant increase in S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet), an essential metabolite for transmethylation reactions and a substrate for polyamine synthesis. Further targeted proteomic and metabolomic studies demonstrated a decrease in GNMT transmethylation, increased flux through the polyamine pathway, and increased oxidative stress production contributing to NASH pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Steatohepatitis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Temple University School of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Connor Quinn

### Lab Head
Dr Salim Merali
Temple University School of Pharmacy


