### Accession
PXD026731

### Title
Diverse mitochondrial abnormalities in a new cellular model of TAFFAZZIN deficiency are remediated by Cardiolipin-interacting small molecules

### Description
With the goal of identifying unappreciated pathways of mitochondrial dysregulation in Barth Syndrome, we utilized an unbiased proteomics strategy to identify pathways of metabolic dysregulation in an HEK293-based TAZ-deficiency model.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (WT (n=3) and TAZ45 (n=3), serial passages) were reduced in 5 mM DTT for 1 hour at 56oC, alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature, and precipitated in cold (-20oC) acetone 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid. The precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 minutes, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was rinsed with cold acetone and dried at room temperature. The samples were reconstituted in 50 µL of 20% acetonitrile 80 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested with 3.3 µg of trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) at 37oC overnight. The digested samples were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagent (Thermo, Lot #SK257889) and combined. The sample was lyophilized and reconstituted in 0.5 mL of 10 mM TEAB and fractionated by high (8-9) pH reversed phase chromatography into 84 fractions which were concatenated into 24. Each of the 24 fractions was lyophilized and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid and separated over a 90-minute low (2-3) pH reversed phase gradient (120 minutes run time) for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw spectra were processed in Proteome Discoverer (version: 2.2.0.38) using Mascot (version 2.5.1) against a complete SwissProt database, specifying the taxonomy Homo sapiens (TaxID=9606, release date v 2017-06-07, 20,206 sequences). The Mass tolerances were set to5ppm and  0.01Da for the precursor and  fragment masses, respectively. Trypsin was selected as the protease, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Based on a decoy database search, peptide spectral matches were assigned a strict false discovery rate of 0.01, based on a q-Value validation.  Only peptides that met this high criteria were selected for quantitation. Only unique peptides were used and abundances were normalized on total peptide amount. Protein ratios were directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances. An ANOVA based hypothesis test was used to calculate the p-values for the abundances of the individual proteins across the three biological replicates in each sample group.

### Publication Abstract
Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an X-linked disorder of mitochondrial phospholipid metabolism caused by pathogenic variants in TAFFAZIN, which results in abnormal cardiolipin (CL) content in the inner mitochondrial membrane. To identify unappreciated pathways of mitochondrial dysfunction in BTHS, we utilized an unbiased proteomics strategy and identified that complex I (CI) of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and the mitochondrial quality control protease presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protein (PARL) are altered in a new HEK293-based tafazzin-deficiency model. Follow-up studies confirmed decreased steady state levels of specific CI subunits and an assembly factor in the absence of tafazzin; this decrease is in part based on decreased transcription and results in reduced CI assembly and function. PARL, a rhomboid protease associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane with a role in the mitochondrial response to stress, such as mitochondrial membrane depolarization, is increased in tafazzin-deficient cells. The increased abundance of PARL correlates with augmented processing of a downstream target, phosphoglycerate mutase 5, at baseline and in response to mitochondrial depolarization. To clarify the relationship between abnormal CL content, CI levels, and increased PARL expression that occurs when tafazzin is missing, we used blue-native PAGE and gene expression analysis to determine that these defects are remediated by SS-31 and bromoenol lactone, pharmacologic agents that bind CL or inhibit CL deacylation, respectively. These findings have the potential to enhance our understanding of the cardiac pathology of BTHS, where defective mitochondrial quality control and CI dysfunction have well-recognized roles in the pathology of diverse forms of cardiac dysfunction.

### Keywords
Barth syndrome, Cardiolipin

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Department of Medical Genetics  Johns Hopkins School of Medicine

### Submitter
Hilary Vernon

### Lab Head
Dr Hillary Vernon
Department of Medical Genetics  Johns Hopkins School of Medicine


