### Accession
PXD005781

### Title
Membrane proteomics of Arabidopsis glucosinolate mutants cyp79B2/B3 and myb28/29

### Description
in our previous work we studied the molecular networks cotrolling their metabolism in Arabidopsis thaliana on the level of soluble proteome and metebolome using myb28/29 and cyp79B2/B3 as mutants for aliphilic and indollic glucosinolates production respectively.we go deeper to study the changes on the level of membrane and membrane associated proteins in both mutants.

### Sample Protocol
LC/MS-MS analysises of TMT labeled peptides from myb28/29and cyp79B2/B3 relative to wild type resulted in the identification of 4673 proteins from which 2171 are membrane proteins and 572 are membrane associated proteins.

### Data Protocol
TMT labeled peptides from myb28/29, cyp79B2/B3 and wild Arabidopsis thialliana were analyzed by LC/MS-MS on QE plus spectrametry. cut off point more than 1.2 and less than 0.8.p-value ia less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Glucosinolates (Gls) constitute a major group of natural metabolites represented by three major classes (aliphatic, indolic and aromatic) of more than 120 chemical structures. In our previous work, soluble proteins and metabolites in Arabidopsis mutants deficient of aliphatic (<i>myb28/29</i>) and indolic Gls (<i>cyp79B2B3</i>) were analyzed. Here we focus on investigating the changes at the level of membrane proteins in these mutants. Our LC/MS-MS analyses of tandem mass tag (TMT) labeled peptides derived from the <i>cyp79B2/B3</i> and <i>myb28/29</i> relative to wild type resulted in the identification of 4,673 proteins, from which 2,171 are membrane proteins. Fold changes and statistical analysis showed 64 increased and 74 decreased in <i>cyp79B2/B3</i>, while 28 increased and 17 decreased in <i>myb28/29</i>. As to the shared protein changes between the mutants, one protein was increased and eight were decreased. Bioinformatics analysis of the changed proteins led to the discovery of three cytochromes in glucosinolate molecular network (GMN): cytochrome P450 86A7 (At1g63710), cytochrome P450 71B26 (At3g26290), and probable cytochrome c (At1g22840). CYP86A7 and CYP71B26 may play a role in hydroxyl-indolic Gls production. In addition, flavone 3'-O-methyltransferase 1 represents an interesting finding as it is likely to participate in the methylation process of the hydroxyl-indolic Gls to form methoxy-indolic Gls. The analysis also revealed additional new nodes in the GMN related to stress and defense activity, transport, photosynthesis, and translation processes. Gene expression and protein levels were found to be correlated in the <i>cyp79B2/B3</i>, but not in the <i>myb28/29</i>.

### Keywords
Membrane proteomics, Cyp79b2/b3, Myb28/29, Tmt

### Affiliations
UF
biology department of University of Florida

### Submitter
Ning Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Zhu
biology department of University of Florida


