### Accession
PXD023175

### Title
A blood atlas of COVID-19 defines hallmarks of disease severity and specificity

### Description
Treatment of severe COVID-19 is currently limited by clinical heterogeneity and incomplete description of specific immune biomarkers. We present here a comprehensive multi-omic blood atlas for patients with varying COVID-19 severity in an integrated comparison with influenza and sepsis patients versus healthy volunteers. We identify immune signatures and correlates of host response. Hallmarks of disease severity involved cells, their inflammatory mediators and networks, including progenitor cells and specific myeloid and lymphocyte subsets, features of the immune repertoire, acute phase response, metabolism and coagulation. Persisting immune activation involving AP-1/p38MAPK was a specific feature of COVID-19. The plasma proteome enabled sub-phenotyping into patient clusters, predictive of severity and outcome. Systems based integrative analyses including tensor and matrix decomposition of all modalities revealed feature groupings linked with severity and specificity compared to influenza and sepsis. Our approach and blood atlas will support future drug development, clinical trial design and personalized medicine approaches for COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma and serum samples (were stored at -80C then thawed overnight at 4C before use. For the bottom-up proteomics approach, proteins were precipitated using Isopropanol (IPA) and loaded into the S-trap 96-well plates (Profiti, Huntington, NY, USA) where proteins were retained into the s-trap for subsequent trypsin digestion following S-trap manufacturer instructions. Briefly, five microliters of plasma or serum, previously thawed at 4C overnight, were pipetted under a category 2 fume hoods into a standard 96-well plates pre-filled with 200 µl of isopropanol following the 96-well plate layouts. Precipitation plates were kept at room temperature for a 1h before transferring the isopropanol – plasma (serum) mixture into the 96-well S-trap plates. 200 µl of S-trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) were added into each well of the precipitation plate to recover any protein precipitates and transferred into the corresponding 96-well S-trap plates. Plates were then spun at 1500g for 2 min. Protein colloidal precipitates were retained into the S-trap mesh. S-trap plates were then subjected to four consecutive washes with S-trap binding buffer (200 µl for the first wash and 350 µl the three remaining), followed by a 2 min spin at 1500g. 125 µl 50mM TEAB containing trypsin (Worthington) to a 1:25 wt:wt ratio was added into each well and incubated overnight at 37C. Tryptic peptides were sequentially eluted from the S-trap into a clean 96-well plate with 80 µl of 50mM TEAB, 80 µl of 0.2 % formic acid (FA) in LC-MS water and 80 µl of 0.2% FA in 50% acetonitrile with 2min spins at 1500 x g after each solvent addition. Finally, plates containing tryptic digests were dried in the speed vac and reconstituted with 70 µl of 0.1 % formic acid (FA) for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis after two serial dilutions (1/100 and 1/10) in 0.1 % FA for a final 1/1000 dilution plate to achieve suitable peptide concentration for LC-MS/MS loading.      C18 Evotips (Evosep one, Odense Denmark) were prepared following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, Eevotips were conditioned with 1-propanol, washed with solvent B (0.1% FA in 100% acetonitrile) and equilibrated in solvent A (0.1% FA in LC-MS water) before loading them with a total volume of twenty microliters containing 10 µl of sample (peptides) from dilution 1/1000 plate (equivalent to an estimated 300 ng of peptides).Evotips were washed once with solvent A and stored in 100 µl solvent A till the sample injection.   Samples were analysed using a Evosep One LC system connected to the TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). Peptides were analysed using the pre-built 100 samples / per day method (EvosepOne) with an 11.5 min gradient (total cycle time of 14.4min) at a 1.2 µl/min flow rat (N. Bache et al). In brief, tryptic peptides were transferred from the pre-loaded C18 Eevotips with a pre-built gradient to a sample loop and separated on an 8cm C18 analytical column (Evosep Pepsep, 3um beads, 100 um ID) with an overall gradient from 3 to 40% acetonitrile.        Mass spectrometry data were acquired in PASEF mode (oTOF control v6.0.0.12). The ion mobility window was set to 1/k0 start = 0.85 Vs/cm2 to 1/k0 end = 1.3 Vs/cm2, ramp time 100 ms with locked duty cycle, mass range 100 - 1700 m/z. MS/MS were acquired in 4 PASEF frames (3 cycles overlap). Target intensity was set to 6000 and threshold intensity 200.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed by the Fragpipe pipeline consisting of Fragpipe 13.0, MSFragger 3.0, Philosopher 3.2.9 and Python 3.8.2. Blank runs were excluded and each file defined as Experiment to facilitate LFQ. Data was searched against a fused target/decoy databased generated by Philosopher and consisting of human UniProt SwissProt sequences and UniProt SARS-nCov02 (retrieved 17/07/2020), plus common contaminants. The database had 40860 entries (including 50% decoy entries). MSFragger parameters were set to allow a precursor mass tolerance of plus/minus 10ppm and a fragment tolerance of 20ppm. Isotope error was left at 0/1/2 and masses were set to re-calibrate. Protein digestion was set to semi specific trypsin with up to 2 allowed missed cleavage sites, allowing peptides between 7 and 50 residues and mass range 500 to 5000 Da. N-terminal protein acetylation and Methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. ID validation was done with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet with default settings. Label free quantitation was conducted with IonQuant and Match-Between-Runs enabled (with default parameters) and using Top-3 quantitation. Feature detection tolerance was set to 10ppm and RT Window to 0.6 minutes with an IM Window of 0.05 1/k0. For matching, ion, peptide and protein FDRs were relaxed to 0.1 and min correlation set to 0 in order to allow pre-fractionated library samples to be included. MBR top runs was set to 600.  The proteomics dataset was processed following the following steps: (1) Sample filtering such that samples with more than 50% of missing values were removed from the dataset; (2) Protein filtering such that proteins with at least 50% of valid values in one group were kept; (3) Data normalization with median-centring of the dataset. Imputation of missing values was performed using a mixed model that combines a K-Nearest Neighbour approach (KNN) when at least 60% of valid values are present, otherwise a Minimum probability approach is used where missing values are randomly drawn from a Gaussian distribution (shift=1.8, nstd=0.3). The resulting data matrix, namely processed data, contains 353 samples and 108 proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Covid-19; clinical proteomics; high-throughput; timstof pro

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility Target Discovery Institute University of Oxford


