### Accession
PXD031349

### Title
Longitudinal proteomics study of serum changes after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation reveals potential markers of metabolic complications related to acute graft-versus-host disease

### Description
Even though hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) allows successful treatment for many malignant and non-malignant disorders, its curative potential remains limited by severe side effects, including infections and other transplant-related complications such as graft-versus-host disease (GvHD). This study examined changes in serum proteome via high-performance two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) during HSCT to search for diagnostic biomarkers for post-HSCT complications. Serum samples were collected from five acute leukaemia patients (n = 5) prior to HSCT (week 0) and weekly after HSCT for eight weeks (week 1–8).  A natural cubic spline with a single internal knot at the median HSCT time (t = 21 days after treatment) was fit to each spot’s log-percentage volume contribution (%vol) and 39 spots were determined to be significantly changed due to HSCT.

### Sample Protocol
Thirty-nine spots were excised automatically by Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare). The protein gels were reduced and alkylated using 100 mM DTT and 50 mM IAA, respectively. Gels were then incubated in Trypsin (+) solution [20 ng/µL trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega), 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2 mM HCl, 5 mM calcium chloride (CaCl2) and 10% acetonitrile (ACN)] for 5 min at R.T. Later, gels were incubated in Trypsin (-) solution containing the same components as Trypsin (+) solution but without trypsin at 37°C overnight.  Following collection of supernatant, gels were incubated in ultra pure water (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) at R.T. for 10 min. The supernatant was collected again and peptide extraction was carried out using 60% ACN, 80% ACN and 100% ACN. The collected peptide solution was concentrated by a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000, EYELA Tokyo Scientific Instruments) to approximately 10 µL. The concentrated peptides were desalted using C-tip (AMR) before mass spectrometry analysis. This was performed according to the manufacturer’s guideline. The concentrated samples were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% ACN in ultra pure water.

### Data Protocol
Measurements were performed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with NIMS Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Fisher) for analysis. Briefly, samples were injected to the inlet system with C18 column of 100 µm diameter x 150 nm length (packed with 3 µm of C18 particles). Formic acid of 0.1%/H2O was used for mobile phase A; 100% ACN used for mobile phase B. The samples were separated and eluted with a gradient of 5 - 45% in mobile phase B. The column temperature was maintained at 35°C, with the moving flow rate maintained at 500 nL/min, and measurement of sample was performed at 20 min per sample. After separation by LC, the samples were ionised using the electrospray ionisation (ESI) technique. The generated ions were then sent to the mass spectrometer (Quadrupole orbital trap mass spectrometer, Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher) where the mass measurements were taken. MASCOT (Version 2.2, Matrix Science, United Kingdom) was set to search MS/MS acquired data against Swiss-Prot database human (Homo sapiens) using the digestion enzyme trypsin. The parameters are set as follows: mass range of the precursor ion was 300 – 5000 Da; fragment tolerance was set to 0.02 Da and a precursor mass tolerance of 10.0 PPM; two missed cleavage sites were allowed; carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was considered as fixed modification while Met oxidation was listed as variable modifications.  Identified proteins were filtered to achieve a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05

### Publication Abstract
Even though hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) allows successful treatment for many malignant and non-malignant disorders, its curative potential remains limited by severe side effects, including infections and other transplant-related complications such as graft-versus-host disease (GvHD). This study examined changes in serum proteome via high-performance two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) during HSCT to search for diagnostic biomarkers for post-HSCT complications. Longitudinal proteomic analysis revealed proteins related to metabolic complications and hemolytic anemia. Retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4), a reliable marker of insulin resistance, was identified, and is possibly associated with the onset mechanism of acute graft-versus-host disease (aGvHD) and/or skin GvHD. Although the cause of insulin resistance is not fully understood, it is thought to be associated with adipocytes inflammation induced by RBP4, iron overload and hemolytic anemia after HSCT, as observed in this study. The present study has demonstrated that insulin resistance and metabolic complications could be immediate complications after transplantation and are associated with aGvHD. The biomarkers revealed in this study are promising tools to be used for improving the early diagnosis of HSCT-associated complications, especially aGvHD, possibly even before clinical manifestations.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Serum, 2-de

### Affiliations
School of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8550, Japan
Postdoctoral researcher, Hayashi Lab, Graduate School of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan

### Submitter
Sing Ying Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Nobuhiro Hayashi
School of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8550, Japan


