### Accession
PXD029902

### Title
A fully automated FAIMS-DIA mass spectrometry-based proteomic pipeline 

### Description
Here, we present a standardized, “off-the-shelf” proteomics pipeline working in a single 96-well plate to achieve deep coverage of cellular proteomes with high throughput and scalability. This integrated pipeline streamlining a fully automated sample preparation platform, data independent acquisition (DIA) coupled with high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometer (FAIMS) interface, and an optimized library-free DIA database search strategy. Our systematic evaluation of FAIMS-DIA showed single compensation voltage (CV) at -35V not only yields deepest proteome coverage but also best correlates with DIA without FAIMS. Our in-depth comparison of direct-DIA database search engines showed Spectronaut outperforms others, providing highest quantifiable proteins. Next, we apply three common DIA strategies in characterizing human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons and show single-shot MS using single CV(-35V)-FAIMS-DIA results in >9,000 quantifiable proteins with < 10% missing values, as well as superior reproducibility and accuracy compared to other existing DIA methods. 

### Sample Protocol
For the method development in iPSC lines, sample preparation followed a single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) approach (Hughes et al., 2019). After being cultured on Matrigel-coated 10 cm dishes, the iPSC lines WTC11 and KOLF2.1J were thoroughly washed with ice-cold PBS (Lonza Cat. #17-516F/12) and collected in 0.5 mL of SP3 buffer per well (50 mM Tris-HCI [pH = 8.0], 50 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100 (MilliporeSigma Cat. #X100), 1% NP-40 (Thermo Scientific Cat. # 85124), 1% Tween 20 (MilliporeSigma Cat. #P9416), 1% glycerol (MP Biomedicals Cat. #800687), 1% Sodium deoxycholate (wt/vol) (MilliporeSigma Cat. # D6750), 5 mM EDTA [pH = 8.0], 5mM Dithiothreitol [DTT] (Thermo Scientific Cat. # 20290), 5KU Benzonase (MilliporeSigma Cat. #E8263), and 1× complete protease inhibitor (MilliporeSigma Cat. # 5892970001). Cell lysates were reduced by incubation in a ThermoMixer pre-heated to 65 °C at 1200 r.p.m. for 30 minutes. Samples were subsequently alkylated through addition of iodoacetamide (IAA) (Thermo Scientific Cat. #A39271) to a final concentration of 10 mM and shielded from light for 30 minutes. The cell lysates were subjected to detergent compatible protein assay (DCA) according to manufacturer's instructions (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, Cat. #5000111). The final protein concentration of the cell lysates was normalized to 1 μg/μL, of which 20 μL (20 μg protein) was mixed in 26 μL of SP3 buffer and 4 μL of SP3 bead stock (Millipore Sigma Cat. #45152105050250 and #65152105050250) diluted to 50 μg/μl. After addition of equal parts (50 μL) 100% ethanol (Electron Microscopy Sciences Cat. #15055), the cell lysate/bead mixture was incubated on a ThermoMixer at 24 °C and 1200 r.p.m. for 10 minutes. The beads were separated from solution, followed by three consecutive washes with 200 μL of 80% ethanol.

### Data Protocol
The DDA raw files were searched by MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43)  using UniProt human proteome reference (v20191105), which includes 74,788 protein entries with isoforms. The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 4.5ppm and 0.05Da, respectively. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Both false discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 0.01. To generate the DDA spectral libraries, the DDA MaxQuant msms .txt output files were imported to Spectronaut (v16.2), at which time the “Generate Spectral Library from MaxQuant” function was used to create the spectral libraries with the same Uniprot reference (v20191105) as the FASTA file. The DIA raw files were searched by Spectronaut (SN). These searches were directly used by Pulsar (a search engine embedded in SN) to generate DIA-based spectral libraries via the “Generate Library from Pulsar / Search Archives” function. The default BGS factory settings, as well as the same Uniprot reference (v20191105) were used when generating all libraries. 

For the direct DIA database searches comparison, we performed in three search engines: Spectronaut (v16.2), DIA-NN (v1.8.1), and PEAKS studio (v10.6). Trypsin and/or lysine C were selected as the digestion enzyme in all search engines. Carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. FDRs of PSMs and peptide/protein groups were set to 0.01. Fragmentation was set to HCD or CID/HCD. In Spectronaut, we chose MS2 as quantity MS-level, and data imputing was disabled. In PEAKS studio, we selected the sequence database search as direct DIA, with MS1 scans used for quantification. 


### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Temporal proteomics, Ipsc, Neurodegenerative, Faims, Dia, Single-shot

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute/NIH
Center for Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

### Submitter
Yue Andy Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Andy Qi
Center for Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA


