### Accession
PXD043626

### Title
Schizophrenia and nicotine proteomics

### Description
Schizophrenia (SCHZ) and tobacco misuse comorbidity is frequently established during adolescence. However, comorbidity markers are still missing. Here, we used an label free quantitative proteomics approach to identify exclusively deregulated proteins in male and female mice modeled to SCHZ with a history of nicotine use during adolescence.

### Sample Protocol
In order to guarantee minimum sample concentration for the analysis, pools of samples from different mice were used instead of individual samples. Punches of the medial prefrontal cortex from two animals within each experimental condition and sex were mixed to produce one sample pool. Four sample pools of each experimental group and sex were used for a total of eight different animals in each experimental condition and sex, resulting in four biological replicates and three technical replicates. Seventy milligrams of each sample pool were extracted with 500 uL of buffer (50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate). The samples were briefly vortexed and then incubated in ultrasonic bath (SolidSteet, Brazil) for 30 min at 6°C. After centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C (Heraeus Megafuge 16R Centrifuge, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) (USAR gs e não RPM), the supernatants were transferred to new identified tubes. The extraction was performed twice, and the respective supernatants were merged. Acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid was added to the supernatant for protein precipitation in a 4:1 proportion (v/v), centrifuged at 14,000 rpm and 4°C for 10 min and washed twice with cold acetone. Proteins were resuspended in TEAB 50 mM pH 8.5, dosed using a Qubit® fluorometer (Invitrogen). Proteins were treated with 0.01% of sodium deoxycholate, reduced by the addition of 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with IAA 20 mM at 25°C for 30 min. Afterward, samples were digested with sequencing grade trypsin in 1:100 trypsin:protein ratio in TEAB 50 mM pH 8.5 for 18 h at 37°C at 1000 rpm on a Thermomixer Comfort (Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA). Peptides were desalinated and concentrated through reverse phase chromatography with a resin column POROS 20 R2 and eluted with 70% acetonitrile/0.05% formic acid. The peptides were dried, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, quantified (Qubit protein assay kit) and the supernatants were transferred to Waters Total Recovery vials. Four biological replicates were analyzed (three technical replicates).

### Data Protocol
The nanoUPLC analysis of tryptic peptides was carried out using nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) coupled to Synapt G2-Si high-definition mass spectrometer (HDMS) (Waters Corp., Manchester, UK). The chromatographic system was equipped with a nanoEase Symmetry C18 (5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) TRAP column and a nanoAcquity BEH130 C18 (1.7 µm, 75 µm x 100 mm) reversed-phase column. Mobile phase A consisted of water and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile, both with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptides were separated in MSE chromatographic methods with the following gradient: 3 to 50% of B in 60 min; followed by a cleaning column gradient of 50 to 85% of B for 1 min; maintained in 85% of B for 5 min; then from 85 to 3% of B in 1 min. The flow rate was 450 ηL.min-1. The analytical column temperature was maintained at 35°C and the sample manager temperature was 9°C. The lock mass was derived from the auxiliary pump using a constant flow rate of 500 ηL.min-1 at a concentration of 200 fmol of GFP to the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray source. The mass spectrometer was operated in the resolution mode for all measurements. All analyses were carried out using nano-electrospray ionization in the positive ion mode (nanoESI+) and a NanoLockSpray (Waters, Manchester, UK) ionization source. The lock mass channel was sampled at a frequency of 30 s. The ion source block temperature was set to 100°C and capillary voltage was set to 3 kV. The time-of-flight analyzer of the mass spectrometer was calibrated with a MS/MS spectrum of GFP solution. The final instrument calibration was obtained using the signal of GFP double charged precursor ion [M + 2H]2+ = 785.8426. The exact mass retention time (EMRT) from multiplexed DIA scanning (MSE) MS analyses was collected in an alternating low energy and elevated energy acquisition mode. In the elevated collision energy mode, the collision energy was increased from 15 to 55 eV applied to the trap “T-wave” CID (collision-induced dissociation) cell with argon gas. The radiofrequency was adjusted such that the ions were effectively acquired from m/z 50 to 2000, which ensured that any masses less than 50 m/z observed in the elevated-energy spectra were only derived from dissociations in the collision cell. In order to identify and quantify peptides and proteins, the MS data were processed and searched using the Progenesis QI for Proteomics version 4.2 (Nonlinear Dynamics, USA). The UNIPROT protein databank release 2022-03 (http://www.uniprot.org) with specific annotations for Mus musculus was utilized. A reverse database was generated for monitoring the false positive rate (false discovery rate - FDR). The parameters for database searching were tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavage, max protein mass of 650 kDa, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. The parameters set as default were peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance of 20 ppm and maximum of 1% of the FDR. At protein level, the criteria included the detection of at least two fragment ions per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and the determination of at least two peptides per protein. To protein identification the mass exact applied was less than 20 ppm and score more than 10. Relative quantification was determined from the absolute intensities obtained and considered the Hi3 (Top3) based quantitation method. The samples were compared in pairs to obtain expression data (CT, PCP, NIC and PCPNIC groups) and the following filters were used: coefficient of variance (maximum CV of 30%), max fold change (> 1.5) and ANOVA (p < 0.05). Only coexisting proteins in both conditions and proteins that were present in the 3 replicates (3/4) were considered to compare the conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Tobacco misuse as a comorbidity of schizophrenia is frequently established during adolescence. However, comorbidity markers are still missing. Here, the method of label-free proteomics was used to identify deregulated proteins in the medial prefrontal cortex (prelimbic and infralimbic) of male and female mice modelled to schizophrenia with a history of nicotine exposure during adolescence. Phencyclidine (PCP), used to model schizophrenia (SCHZ), was combined with an established model of nicotine minipump infusions (NIC). The combined insults led to worse outcomes than each insult separately when considering the absolute number of deregulated proteins and that of exclusively deregulated ones. Partially shared Reactome pathways between sexes and between PCP, NIC and PCPNIC groups indicate functional overlaps. Distinctively, proteins differentially expressed exclusively in PCPNIC mice reveal unique effects associated with the comorbidity model. Interactome maps of these proteins identified sex-selective subnetworks, within which some proteins stood out: for females, peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (Fkbp1a) and heat shock 70 kDa protein 1B (Hspa1b), both components of the oxidative stress subnetwork, and gamma-enolase (Eno2), a component of the energy metabolism subnetwork; and for males, amphiphysin (Amph), a component of the synaptic transmission subnetwork. These are proposed to be further investigated and validated as markers of the combined insult during adolescence.

### Keywords
Psychiatric disorder; nicotine addiction; proteome; comorbidity; e-cigarette; mass spectrometry, Prodrome.

### Affiliations
1. Laboratório de Neurofisiologia, Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Instituto de Biologia Roberto Alcantara Gomes, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ), Av. Prof. Manuel de Abreu 444, 5 andar – Vila Isabel, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 20550-170, Brazil.
Laboratório de Neurofisiologia, Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Instituto de Biologia Roberto Alcantara Gomes, Centro Biomédico, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro

### Submitter
Andres Rodriguez Vega

### Lab Head
Dr Andres Rodriguez Vega
1. Laboratório de Neurofisiologia, Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Instituto de Biologia Roberto Alcantara Gomes, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UERJ), Av. Prof. Manuel de Abreu 444, 5 andar – Vila Isabel, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 20550-170, Brazil.


