### Accession
PXD003611

### Title
FASIL-MS: An Integrated Proteomic and Bioinformatic Workflow to Universally Quantitate In vivo-acetylated Positional Isomers

### Description
Dynamic changes in histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) regulate gene transcription leading to fine-tuning of biological processes such as DNA replication and cell cycle progression.  Moreover, specific histone modifications constitute docking sites for recruitment of DNA damage repair proteins and mediation of subsequent cell survival.  Therefore, understanding and monitoring changes in histone PTMs that alter cell proliferation that can lead to disease progression are of considerable medical interest.  In this study, stable isotope labelling with N-acetoxy-D3-succinimide (D3-NAS) was utilised to efficiently derivatise unmodified lysine residues at the protein level.  The sample preparation method was streamlined to facilitate buffer exchange between the multiple steps of the protocol by coupling chemical derivatisation to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP).  Additionally, the mass spectrometry method was adapted to simultaneously co-isolate and concurrently fragment all differentially-H3/D3-acetylated histone peptide clusters.  The combination of these multi-plexed MS2 spectra with the implementation of a data analysis algorithm enabled the quantitation of each and every in vivo-acetylated DMSO- and SAHA-treated H4(4-17) and H3(18-26) peptide.  We have termed our new approach FASIL-MS for filter-aided stable isotopic labelling coupled to mass spectrometry.  FASIL-MS enables the universal and site-specific quantitation of peptides with multiple in vivo-acetylated lysine residues.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided sample preparation was performed on 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filters. Briefly, reduction of disulphide bonds was achieved by adding 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to 100 µg BSA or 50 µg histone extracts in 50 mM HEPES buffer containing 2% SDS. Samples were mixed with 200 µL 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (SIGMA-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) pH 8.5 (UA) and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 15 min at 20°C to remove SDS.  The remaining SDS was exchanged with urea by two additional 200 µL UA washes.  The proteins were alkylated on the filter by adding 100 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide (IA) in 8 M urea buffer at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min.  The filter units were then centrifuged twice at 14,000×g for 15 min with 1×100 µL UA wash step between each centrifugation. An additional 3×100 µL washes of 80% IPA in 100 mM TEAB buffer (SIGMA-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) were performed to exchange the UA with the buffer required for the reaction with the D3-NAS.  One hundred microliters 50 mM D3-NAS in 80% IPA/100 mM TEAB was added to the filter units and incubated on a shaker at RT for 2 h and the excess D3-NAS in 80% IPA/100 mM TEAB, or solvent alone (BSA controls), was removed by centrifugation at 14,000×g for 15 min at 20°C.  All samples were washed three times with 100 µL 50 mM TEAB buffer and digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C.  Following incubation, digested peptides were recovered from the filter with 40 µL 50 mM TEAB buffer and 50 µL 0.5 M NaCl (SIGMA-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).  The peptides were acidified with 5 µL 30% TFA, desalted using two C18 spin columns with 5-60 µg peptide-binding capacity per sample (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA), concentrated and reconstituted with 5% formic acid (FA) to 0.02 µg/µL prior to LCMS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using the Xcalibur software (version 2.1.0).  The instrument was coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system with a dual pump, one precolumn and one analytical column (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source with a liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark).   The peptide mixtures were automatically loaded from the thermostatted autosampler (4°C) onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5µm, 5×0.3 mm, Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) with the binary pump solvent comprised of 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) in water at a flow rate of 45 µL/min.  The peptides were eluted by back-flushing from the trap column onto a 16 cm fused silica analytical column with an inner diameter of 50 μm packed with C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, DE).  Solvents for peptide separation were composed of 0.4% FA in water (solvent A) and 0.4% FA in 20% isopropanol, 70% methanol (solvent B).  A multi-step linear gradient elution of the peptides was achieved by a 27 min gradient ranging from 3 to 30% solvent B, followed by a 25 min gradient from 30 to 70% solvent B and, finally, a 7 min gradient from 70 to 100% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 100 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The global MS analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode.  The top 10 or 15 most intense ions were selected for higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and collision-induced dissociation (CID), respectively.  In both cases, normalised collision energy was set to 30%.  Dynamic exclusion of selected ions for MS2 fragmentation was 60 s and a single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 for the siloxane Si(CH3)2O)629 was used for internal mass calibration with a target loss mass abundance of 0%.  Maximal ion accumulation time allowed for MS1 was 500 ms in the C-trap; and for MS2, ion accumulation times were 50 ms in the LTQ (CID) and 200 ms in the C-trap (HCD). Overfilling of the C-trap was prevented by automatic gain control (AGC) and set to 106 ions for a full FTMS scan and 5×105 ions for MSn mode.  Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap mass analyser at a resolution of 60,000 (CID) and 30,000 (HCD).  Fragment ion resolution for HCD was 7,500.  Signal threshold for triggering MS2 fragmentation was 5,000 and 2,000 ion counts for HCD and CID, respectively.   The MS acquisition method for the targeted approach was defined as described above with the following changes.  An inclusion list was utilised to target the differentially H3/D3-acetylated H4(4-17) and H3(18-26) peptides for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was disabled to increase recurrent fragmentation of the targeted m/z values.  The precursor ion masses that were monitored were re-calculated from H3/D3-acetylated doubly-charged peptide species that were distinguishable in the MS1 spectrum.  For the H4(4-17) and H3(18-26) histone proteins, 5 and 3 m/z values were chosen, respectively.  Additionally, the precursor-ion isolation width was broadened to ±7.0 Th to simultaneously isolate and fragment co-eluted H3/D3-acetylated histone H4 and H3 peptide species.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic changes in histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) regulate gene transcription leading to fine-tuning of biological processes such as DNA replication and cell cycle progression. Moreover, specific histone modifications constitute docking sites for recruitment of DNA damage repair proteins and mediation of subsequent cell survival. Therefore, understanding and monitoring changes in histone PTMs that can alter cell proliferation and thus lead to disease progression are of considerable medical interest. In this study, stable isotope labeling with N-acetoxy-D3-succinimide (D3-NAS) was utilized to efficiently derivatize unmodified lysine residues at the protein level. The sample preparation method was streamlined to facilitate buffer exchange between the multiple steps of the protocol by coupling chemical derivatization to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Additionally, the mass spectrometry method was adapted to simultaneously coisolate and subsequently cofragment all differentially H3/D3-acetylated histone peptide clusters. Combination of these multiplexed MS(2) spectra with the implementation of a data analysis algorithm enabled the quantitation of each and every in vivo-acetylated DMSO- and SAHA-treated H4(4-17) and H3(18-26) peptide. We have termed our new approach FASIL-MS for filter-aided stable isotopic labeling coupled to mass spectrometry. FASIL-MS enables the universal and site-specific quantitation of peptides with multiple in vivo-acetylated lysine residues. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD003611).

### Keywords
Lysine deacetylase inhibitor, Protein derivatisation, Ms2-based quantitation, N-acetoxy-d3-sucinnimide, Fasp, Histone acetylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Bennett Laboratory Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics

### Submitter
Dijana Vitko

### Lab Head
Dr Keiryn L. Bennett
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Bennett Laboratory Mass Spectrometry & Proteomics


