### Accession
PXD023443

### Title
Complexome profiling on the lpa2 mutant

### Description
Chlamydomonas wild type CC 4533 and lpa2 mutant were grown in TAP medium at 25°C and ~30 µmol photons m^-2 s^-1 on a rotary shaker. Protein complexes of three wild type (wt) and three lpa2 (mut) samples were separated by BN-PAGE and cut into 36 slices. Subsequent mass spectrometry enables the analysis of protein complex migration patterns of wild type and mutant complexes.

### Sample Protocol
o BN-PAGE with whole cell proteins was carried out as described previously (Schagger and von Jagow, 1991) with minor modifications. Briefly, 10^8 cells were pelleted, washed with 750 µl of TMK buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10 mM MgCl2, 20 mM KCl) and resuspended in 350 µl of ACA buffer (750 mM ε-aminocaproic acid, 50 mM Bis-Tris/HCl, pH 7.0, 0.5 mM EDTA) supplemented with 0.25x protease inhibitor (Roche). Cells were then broken by sonication and starch and cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Cell lysates (equivalent to 0.8 µg/µl of protein) were solubilized with 1 % β-DDM for 20 min on ice and in darkness. Insolubilized material was pelleted at 13,200 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was supplemented with loading buffer (0.5 M ε-aminocaproic acid, 75 % glycerol, 2.5 % Serva Blue G-250 (Roth)). After three cycles of centrifugation at 13,200 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C and transferring the supernatant to a fresh tube, samples were loaded on a 4-15 % BN acrylamide gel. The isolation of thylakoids was performed according to (Chua and Bennoun, 1975) with minor modifications. Briefly, ~2 * 10^9 cells were pelleted and washed with 25 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2 and 0.3 M sucrose, before resuspending in the same buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor (Roche). Cells were then lysed using a BioNebulizer (Glas-Col) with an operating N2 pressure of 1.5-2 bar. After centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 min, the pellet was washed with 5 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 0.3 M sucrose before resuspending in 5 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 1.8 M sucrose. After a sucrose step gradient (0.5 M, 1.3 M, 1.8 M) centrifugation at 24,000 rpm for 1 h, intact thylakoids, floating between the 1.3 M and 1.8 M layers, were collected and diluted with 5 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5 and 1 mM EDTA. After another centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 1 h, the pellet was resuspended in small volumes of the same buffer.  In-gel digestion and mass spectrometry Coomassie stained BN-PAGE gel pieces were destained by repeated cycles of washing with 40 mM NH₄HCO₃ for 5 min and incubating in 70 % acetonitrile for 15 min, until they were colorless. They were then dehydrated completely by adding 100 % acetonitrile for 5 min and dried under vacuum. Samples were then digested by covering the gel pieces in 10 ng/µl trypsin in 40 mM NH₄HCO₃ and incubating them over night at 37 °C, before first, hydrophilic peptides were extracted with 10 % acetonitrile and 2 % formic acid for 20 min and afterwards, all other tryptic peptides were extracted with 60 % acetonitrile and 1 % formic acid. Samples were then desalted according to (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Mass spectrometry was performed basically as described previously (Hammel et al., 2018). For peptide separation, a HPLC flow rate of 4 μl/min and 21 min gradients from 2 % to 33 % HPLC buffer B were employed (buffer A 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). MS1 spectra (350 m/z to 1250 m/z) were recorded for 250 ms and 25 MS/MS scans (100 m/z to 1500 m/z) were triggered in high sensitivity mode with a dwell time of 50 ms resulting in a total cycle time of 1550 ms. Analyzed precursors were excluded for 5 s, singly charged precursors or precursors with a response below 500 cps were excluded completely from MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
o The analysis of MS runs was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Library generation for peptide spectrum matching was based on Chlamydomonas reinhardtii genome release 5.5 (Merchant et al., 2007) including chloroplast and mitochondrial proteins. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were considered as peptide modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, the maximal mass to 6000 Da. Thresholds for peptide spectrum matching and protein identification were set by a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Further parameters are listed in mqparTrunc.xml

### Publication Abstract
While the composition and function of the major thylakoid membrane complexes are well understood, comparatively little is known about their biogenesis. The goal of this work was to shed more light on the role of auxiliary factors in the biogenesis of photosystem II (PSII). Here we have identified the homolog of LOW PSII ACCUMULATION 2 (LPA2) in Chlamydomonas. A Chlamydomonas reinhardtii lpa2 mutant grew slower in low light, was hypersensitive to high light, and exhibited aberrant structures in thylakoid membrane stacks. Chlorophyll fluorescence (Fv/Fm) was reduced by 38%. Synthesis and stability of newly made PSII core subunits D1, D2, CP43, and CP47 were not impaired. However, complexome profiling revealed that in the mutant CP43 was reduced to ~23% and D1, D2, and CP47 to ~30% of wild type levels. Levels of PSI and the cytochrome b6f complex were unchanged, while levels of the ATP synthase were increased by ~29%. PSII supercomplexes, dimers, and monomers were reduced to ~7%, ~26%, and ~60% of wild type levels, while RC47 was increased ~6-fold and LHCII by ~27%. We propose that LPA2 catalyses a step during PSII assembly without which PSII monomers and further assemblies become unstable and prone to degradation. The LHCI antenna was more disconnected from PSI in the lpa2 mutant, presumably as an adaptive response to reduce excitation of PSI. From the co-migration profiles of 1734 membrane-associated proteins, we identified three novel putative PSII associated proteins with potential roles in regulating PSII complex dynamics, assembly, and chlorophyll breakdown.

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas complexomics lpa2

### Affiliations
Computational Systems Biology, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
Molecular Biotechnology & Systems Biology, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany

### Submitter
Benedikt Venn

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Schroda
Molecular Biotechnology & Systems Biology, TU Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany


