### Accession
PXD039572

### Title
Proteomic study of whole brain in SNAT10 deficient mice

### Description
Solute carriers belong to the biggest group of transporters in the human genome, but more knowledge is needed in order to fully understand their function and possible role as therapeutic targets. SLC38 is a family of amino acid transporters, commonly referred to as SNATs, consisting of 11 members. The tenth member, SLC38A10, is one of the least characterized members and is the focus of this study. By using a knockout mouse model, we studied the biological effects of SLC38A10 deficiency on the proteome in whole brain. Mice were bred on a C57bl6/J background.

### Sample Protocol
Brains from seven week old males were dissected and kept in -80 °C until further use (n=5/genotype, only KO and WT genotypes used). The brain tissue samples were thereafter homogenized in liquid nitrogen. Aliquots of 25 mg brain samples were homogenized in the presence of 1 mL of lysis buffer (1% β-octyl-glucoside, 8 M urea, protease inhibitor cocktail in PBS) for 60 seconds with a sonication probe (VibraCell 600 W, 1.5 cm probe) and for 30 minutes using ice in ultrasound bath. Protease inhibitor cocktail (5 μL) was added during the sample preparation to prevent protein degradation. After homogenization, the samples were incubated for 90 min at 4 °C during mild agitation. The tissue lysates were clarified by centrifugation for 15 min at 16000 x g at 4 °C. Thereafter the total protein concentration in the samples was measured using the DC Protein Assay with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. Aliquots corresponding to 30 μg protein were taken out for digestion. The proteins were reduced, alkylated and on-filter digested by trypsin using 3 kDa centrifugal filters (Millipore, Ireland) according to a standard operating procedure. The collected peptide filtrate was vacuum centrifuged to dryness using a speedvac system. Dried peptides were resolved in 100 μL of 0.1 % FA prior to nano-LC-MS/MS. The resulting peptides were separated in reversed-phase on a C18-column, applying a 150 min long gradient, and electrosprayed on-line to a QEx-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan). Tandem mass spectrometry was performed applying HCD.

### Data Protocol
Qualitative analysis: Database searches were performed using the quantification software MaxQuant 1.5.1.2. The search was performed towards proteins from Mus musculus proteome extracted from Uniprot, Release October 2016. The search parameters were set to Taxonomy: Mus musculus, Enzyme: Trypsin. Fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications were Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ). The search criteria for protein identification were set to at least two matching peptides of 95% confidence level per protein. Quantitative analysis: Ten samples were included in the quantitative analysis. The ten RAW-data files were quantitatively analyzed by the quantification software MaxQuant 1.5.1.2. Protein identification was performed by a search against the same in-house FASTA database as for the qualitative analysis. A decoy search database including common contaminations and reverse database was used to estimate the identification false discovery rate (FDR). The results of all samples were combined to a total label free intensity analysis for each sample. A two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed on the generated full protein expression list and a p-value < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. A ratio cut-off value was set to a two-fold change for upregulated proteins, and a cut-off value of 0.5 for downregulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Solute carriers belong to the biggest group of transporters in the human genome, but more knowledge is needed to fully understand their function and possible role as therapeutic targets. SLC38A10, a poorly characterized solute carrier, is preliminary characterized here. By using a knockout mouse model, we studied the biological effects of SLC38A10 deficiency in vivo. We performed a transcriptomic analysis of the whole brain and found seven differentially expressed genes in SLC38A10-deficient mice (<i>Gm48159</i>, <i>Nr4a1</i>, <i>Tuba1c</i>, <i>Lrrc56</i>, <i>mt-Tp</i>, <i>Hbb-bt</i> and <i>Snord116/9</i>). By measuring amino acids in plasma, we found lower levels of threonine and histidine in knockout males, whereas no amino acid levels were affected in females, suggesting that SLC38A10<sup>-/-</sup> might affect sexes differently. Using RT-qPCR, we investigated the effect of SLC38A10 deficiency on mRNA expression of other SLC38 members, <i>Mtor</i> and <i>Rps6kb1</i> in the brain, liver, lung, muscle, and kidney, but no differences were found. Relative telomere length measurement was also taken, as a marker for cellular age, but no differences were found between the genotypes. We conclude that SLC38A10 might be important for keeping amino acid homeostasis in plasma, at least in males, but no major effects were seen on transcriptomic expression or telomere length in the whole brain.

### Keywords
Amino acid transporter, Snat10, Mouse, Slc38a10

### Affiliations
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Robert Fredriksson

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Fredriksson
Uppsala University


