### Accession
PXD038836

### Title
Elucidating Fibroblast Growth Factor-induced kinome dynamics using targeted mass spectrometry and dynamic modeling

### Description
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are paracrine or endocrine signaling proteins that when activated by their ligands, can elicit a wide range of healthy and disease-related processes such as cell proliferation and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The detailed molecular pathway dynamics that coordinate these responses have remained unclear. To elucidate and monitor these dynamics we stimulated MCF-7 breast cancer cells with either FGF2, 3, 4, 10, or 19. Following activation of the receptor, we quantified the kinase activity dynamics of 44 kinases using a targeted mass spectrometry assay. Our system-wide kinase activity data, supplemented with (phopsho)proteomics data, reveal ligand-dependent distinct pathway dynamics, elucidate the involvement of not earlier reported kinases such as MARK, and revise some of the pathway effects on biological outcomes. In addition, logic-based dynamic modeling of the kinome dynamics further verifies the biological goodness-of-fit of the predicted models and reveals tight regulation of the RAF kinase family.

### Sample Protocol
FGF-stimulated MCF-7 cells were digested using trypsin and LysC, desalted. Subsequently, the samples were measured on a Thermo Exploris HF.

### Data Protocol
Label-free data were analyzed with the following software: MaxQuant/ArtMS/R

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) are paracrine or endocrine signaling proteins that, activated by their ligands, elicit a wide range of health and disease-related processes, such as cell proliferation and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. The detailed molecular pathway dynamics that coordinate these responses have remained to be determined. To elucidate these, we stimulated MCF-7 breast cancer cells with either FGF2, FGF3, FGF4, FGF10, or FGF19. Following activation of the receptor, we quantified the kinase activity dynamics of 44 kinases using a targeted mass spectrometry assay. Our system-wide kinase activity data, supplemented with (phospho)proteomics data, reveal ligand-dependent distinct pathway dynamics, elucidate the involvement of not earlier reported kinases such as MARK, and revise some of the pathway effects on biological outcomes. In addition, logic-based dynamic modeling of the kinome dynamics further verifies the biological goodness-of-fit of the predicted models and reveals BRAF-driven activation upon FGF2 treatment and ARAF-driven activation upon FGF4 treatment.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics; kinase; targeted mass spectrometry; kinase dynamics; fibroblast growth factors; dynamic modeling; fibroblast growth factor receptor; breast cancer. 

### Affiliations
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands 2. Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Tim Veth

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
1. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands 2. Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CH, The Netherlands


