### Accession
PXD019977

### Title
Phactr1/PP1 phosphatase substrates in mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts

### Description
It was previously shown that expression of an activated Phactr1 mutant (Phactr1XXX) that constitutively forms the Phactr1/PP1 phosphatase holoenzyme, induces F-actin rearrangements in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Expression of the Phactr1 PP1-binding domain (C-terminal) alone is also sufficient to induce such cytoskeletal changes. In contrast, expression of Phactr1XXXC derivative, which lacks the PP1 binding sequences does not result in alteration of cytoskeletal morphology (Wiezlak et al., 2012). These observations suggest that Phactr1/PP1 dephosphorylates target proteins involved in cytoskeletal dynamics. To identify potential Phactr1/PP1 substrates, we used differential SILAC phosphoproteomics in NIH3T3 cells inducibly expressing Phactr1XXX, Phactr1XXXC constructs or vector alone. Over 3000 phosphorylation sites were quantified, among which we determined Phactr1/PP1 target dephosphorylation sites by comparative analysis.

### Sample Protocol
NIH3T3 cells stably expressing Flag-Phactr1 mutants in a doxycycline-inducible manner were maintained for at least 6 passages in “heavy” (R10K8) or “light” (R0K0) DMEM medium supplemented with 10% SILAC dialysed fetal calf serum; MWCO 3 kDa. Phactr1 expression was induced by doxycycline addition (final concentration 1μg/ml) for five hours. Then, cells were washed in PBS, harvested and lysed in urea-based buffer (8 M Urea; 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2; 10 mM glycerol 2-phosphate; 50 mM NaF; 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate; 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM sodium orthovanadate; 1 mM dithiothreitol; protease inhibitors). 0.5 mg “light” and 0.5 mg “heavy” labelled lysates were mixed together, andtogether and stored dried in speedvac.  To reduce and alkylate cysteines, 1 µl of 1 M dithiothreitol was added to the samples for 25 min and vortexed at 56°C, followed by addition of 4 µl of 500 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, which was then quenched by addition of 1.5 µl of 1 M dithiothreitol for 30 min. The lysates were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to urea concentration <2 M. Sequencing grade trypsin was added at a ratio 1:50 and vortexed overnight at 37°C. 3.2 µl of TFA acid was added. The samples were centrifuged at 14000 rpm at 4°C for 30 min. The supernatant was purified on C18 SepPak Lite column from Waters according to manufacturer’s protocol and then dried in speedvac. Peptides were solubilized in buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate buffered formic acid, pH 3.0, 25% MeCN) by sonication for 15 min. The samples were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography using Poly LC PolySULFOETHYL A 100x4.6 mm 5 um 200A column. The gradient of 0% - 80% of buffer B (500 mM ammonium formate pH 6.8, 25% MeCN) in buffer A was used, 6 fractions were collected for each sample. The resulting fractions were dried in speedvac. 5 mg of Titansphere titanium dioxide beads was used per fraction and enrichment was performed with the following buffers: Loading buffer (80% MeCN, 5% TFA, 1 M glycolic acid), Wash buffer I (80% MeCN, 1% TFA), Wash buffer II (10% MeCN, 0.2% TFA), Elution buffer I (1% ammonium hydroxide), Elution buffer II (5% ammonium hydroxide). The eluted phosphopeptides were dried in speedvac. The samples were desalted using C18 STAGE tips following manufacturer’s protocol and dried in speedvac. Each sample was resuspended in 35 μl of 1% TFA and sonicated for 15 min. Peptide mixtures were separated on a 50 cm, 75 μm I.D. Pepmap column over 3 h gradient and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos). The Xcalibur software was used to setup data dependent acquisition in top10 mode.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) for peptide and protein identification; the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Mus musculus canonical sequences from UniProtKB. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications set as Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Phospho (STY). The estimated false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and site levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed.  The resulting phosphorylation sites tables were imported into Perseus (v1.4.0.2) for data analysis. Contaminants and reverse peptides were cleaned up from the Phosphosites (STY). SILAC experiment was quantified according to dephosphorylation score: log2(dephosphorylation score) = 0.25*[log2(2H/1L) + log2(3H/1L) + log2(2L/1H) + log2(3L/1H)] where “1” is Phactr1XXX derived samples, “2” is Phactr1XXXΔC, “3” is empty vector; H and L denote samples generated in R10K8 and R0K0 media correspondingly.

### Publication Abstract
PPP-family phosphatases such as PP1 have little intrinsic specificity. Cofactors can target PP1 to substrates or subcellular locations, but it remains unclear how they might confer sequence-specificity on PP1. The cytoskeletal regulator Phactr1 is a neuronally enriched PP1 cofactor that is controlled by G-actin. Structural analysis showed that Phactr1 binding remodels PP1's hydrophobic groove, creating a new composite surface adjacent to the catalytic site. Using phosphoproteomics, we identified mouse fibroblast and neuronal Phactr1/PP1 substrates, which include cytoskeletal components and regulators. We determined high-resolution structures of Phactr1/PP1 bound to the dephosphorylated forms of its substrates IRSp53 and spectrin &#x3b1;II. Inversion of the phosphate in these holoenzyme-product complexes supports the proposed PPP-family catalytic mechanism. Substrate sequences C-terminal to the dephosphorylation site make intimate contacts with the composite Phactr1/PP1 surface, which are required for efficient dephosphorylation. Sequence specificity explains why Phactr1/PP1 exhibits orders-of-magnitude enhanced reactivity towards its substrates, compared to apo-PP1 or other PP1 holoenzymes.

### Keywords
Mouse, Fibroblasts, Phactr1, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
Director of Research Head, Signalling and Transcription Group The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, UK
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Roman Fedoryshchak

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Treisman
Director of Research Head, Signalling and Transcription Group The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, London, UK


