### Accession
PXD025339

### Title
Adenovirus remodeling of the host proteome and of host factors associating with viral genomes

### Description
Viral infections are associated with extensive remodeling of the cellular proteome. Viruses encode gene products that manipulate host proteins to redirect cellular processes or subvert antiviral immune responses. One way in which host antiviral proteins antagonize viral infection is by associating with viral genomes and inhibiting essential viral processes. Adenovirus (AdV) encodes gene products from the early E4 region which are necessary for productive infection. Some cellular antiviral proteins are known to be targeted by AdV E4 gene products, resulting in their degradation or mislocalization. However, the full repertoire of host proteins manipulated by viral E4 proteins has not been defined. To identify cellular proteins and processes manipulated by viral products, we developed a global, un-biased proteomics approach to analyze changes to the host proteome during infection with Adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) virus. We combined quantification of total protein abundance in the proteome together with an analysis of proteins associated with viral genomes using isolation of Proteins on Nascent DNA (iPOND). By Integrating these proteomics datasets, we identified cellular factors that are degraded in an E4-dependent manner or are associated with the viral genome in the absence of E4 proteins. We further show that some identified proteins exert inhibitory effects on Ad5 infection. Our systems-level analysis reveals cellular processes that are manipulated during Ad5 infection and points to host factors counteracted by early viral proteins as they remodel the host proteome to promote efficient infection.   Importance Viral infections stimulate myriad changes to the host cell proteome. As viruses harness cellular processes and counteract host defenses, they impact abundance, modifications, or localization of cellular proteins. Elucidating the dynamic changes to the cellular proteome during viral replication is integral to understanding how virus-host interactions influence the outcome of infection. Adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) encodes early gene products from the E4 genomic region that are known to alter host response pathways and promote replication, but the full extent of proteome modifications they mediate is not known. We use an integrated proteomics approach to quantitate protein abundance and protein associations with viral DNA during virus infection. Systems-level analysis identifies cellular proteins and processes impacted in an E4-dependent manner that could overcome potentially inhibitory host defenses. This study provides a global view of Adenovirus-mediated proteome remodeling which can serve as a model to investigate virus-host interactions of DNA viruses.

### Sample Protocol
iPOND:The iPOND assay was performed as previously described (PMID: 28972080). For each condition, eight 15cm dishes of 90% confluent U2OS cells (~1.8 × 107 cells) were either mock infected or infected with WT Ad5 or AdE4 (dl1004) at MOI of 40. Three independent biological replicate experiments were performed per condition. For mass spectrometry analysis, iPOND isolates were separated on 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gels (Invitrogen) using MOPS buffer. The gels were stained with Coomassie blue and cut into four 2 x 7mm gel segments. Gel pieces were destained with 50% methanol and 1.25% acetic acid, reduced with 5mM DTT for 1h, and alkylated with 40mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45min both at room temperature. Gel pieces were incubated with 20mM ammonium bicarbonate and rapidly dehydrated with acetonitrile. To digest the proteins, trypsin was added to the gel pieces (5ng/µl in ammonium bicarbonate) and incubated overnight at 37oC. Peptides were extracted using the sequential addition of 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid and then 50% acetonitrile; the two solutions were then combined for each condition. Tryptic digests were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled online with tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) on a nanoLC Ultra (Eksigent Technologies) coupled to a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated via reversed phase chromatography on a nanocapillary column (75µm id × 15cm C18 Reprosil-pur 3µm, 120Å) in a Nanoflex chip system. The mobile phase A contained 1% methanol, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B contained 1% methanol, 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300nl/min along a 90min gradient from 5-35% B. For data-dependent MS/MS scans, the full scan range was performed in the Orbitrap and set to 300-1800 m/z at 240,000 resolution. The top twenty most abundant precursor ions at every duty cycle were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap, with a minimum signal of 1500 counts, dynamic exclusion enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion window of 500 and duration of 60s, isolation width of 2 m/z, normalized collision energy of 35, and injection waveform enabled. FTMS full scan automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1E6, while MSn AGC target was set to 1E4. FTMS full scan maximum fill time was 500ms, while the ion trap MSn fill time was 50ms. Microscans were set at one.   Whole cell proteome (WCP):In biological quadruplicate, A549 cells were mock-infected or infected with WT Ad5 at 90% confluency in 60mm dishes. Cell monolayers were scraped and collected at 16, 24, and 48hpi. Mock-infected samples were scraped and collected at 24hpi. Samples were pelleted, washed with PBS, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80oC until further processing. Cell pellets were lysed in ice cold lysis buffer (8M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) with Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by vortexing, following sonication with a Bioruptor (Diagenode) on medium power (200W) for 30 s “ON” and 30 s “OFF” for twenty cycles. Samples were then centrifuged for 10min, 17,000xg at 4°C and the supernatant transferred to a new set of tubes. Samples were reduced using 5 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM IAA in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 1.5 M urea with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, and then digested with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of ∼1:50 for 12h at room temperature. Peptides were loaded onto a Hamilton C18 stage tip and high pH reverse phase fractionation was performed using 8, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36, 42, 60% acetonitrile with 100mM ammonium formate buffer (pH 10.0) to bin peptides by hydrophobicity. Fraction 1 was then combined with fraction 5, i.e. 8% and 30%, and so 2 with 6 etc. to obtain four final fractions for MS analysis. Samples were desalted using P200 columns with C18 3 M plug (3 M Bioanalytical Technologies, St. Paul, MN) and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to nLC–MS/MS analysis. Peptide quantification by nLC-MS/MS was performed on a Thermo Fisher Ultimate 3000 DionexTM liquid chromatography system and a Thermo FusionTM mass spectrometer. The mobile phase A contained 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300nl/min along a 120min gradient from 2-50% B. Samples were quantified by A280 absorbance and 1 µg of each was injected onto a laser pulled 2.4µm C18 particle size silica column of 35 cm in length. Samples were run with MS1 settings of 300-1200 m/z window, a resolution of 60,000, normalized AGC target of 125%, and maximum inject time (MIT) of 54ms. Fragment (MS2) scans were collected in data dependent mode with a TopN loop count of 10, resolution of 30,000, normalized AGC target of 150%, and MIT of 100ms. Fragmentation was performed with HCD using normalized collision energies (NCE) of 29%.

### Data Protocol
iPOND data processing: The raw mass spectrometer files were processed for protein identification using the Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific) and the Sequest HT algorithm with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment m/z tolerance of 0.25 Da, and a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. Quantification was performed using a label-free approach using the "Precursor ions quantifier" node, and peptide abundances were rolled up into protein abundance using the summed abundance algorithm using only unique or razor peptides. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database of Human (9606; downloaded February 2021; 20,397 entries) and Adenovirus C serotype 5 (28285; downloaded February 2021; 31 entries) sequences using the parameters as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M) and protein N-terminus acetylation.  WCP data processing: Data files were processed using the Sequest HT algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific) software using 10 ppm tolerance for MS1 and 0.02 Da tolerance for fragment masses. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database of Human proteins (9606; downloaded February 2021; 20397 entries) (PMID: 33237286) and an Ad5 viral proteome that was curated from a reannotated Ad5 genome (bioRxiv doi:https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.13.876037). An FDR cut off 1% was used for all peptide spectral matches using Percolator and a subsequent 1% FDR for all protein IDs with peptides less that a q-value of 0.01 were selected (PMID: 27572102). To match features between runs, we used Minora feature detector at tolerances of 3 ppm to identify peptides and a maximum retention time shift of 2 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna virus, Virus infection, Adenovirus, Ipond, Intrinsic defense

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania 3400 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104

### Submitter
Katarzyna Kulej

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics Smilow Center for Translational Research Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania 3400 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104


