### Accession
PXD018251

### Title
Formaldehyde regulates one-carbon metabolism through S-adenosylmethionine biosynthesis

### Description
One-carbon metabolism is a universal hub for cellular metabolism and epigenetic regulation.1–3 Here, we report that formaldehyde (FA), a one-carbon unit that organisms produce in substantial quantities through folate metabolism,4 is a regulator of the one-carbon cycle via the biosynthesis of S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM), an essential one-carbon building block for synthesis of nucleotides, amino acids, and methylated nucleic acids and proteins.5 Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) in mouse liver tissue identifies FA-sensitive cysteine sites across the proteome, revealing several one-carbon cycle targets including S-adenosylmethionine synthetase isoform 1 (MAT1A), the terminal enzyme in SAM biosynthesis. Biochemical studies of the formaldehyde-MAT1A interaction establish FA-dependent inhibition of MAT1A activity through a conserved C120 site, as the MAT2A isoform lacking this cysteine is not FA-sensitive. CRISPR knockout-generated HepG2 cell models that predominantly express either MAT1A or MAT2A show that MAT1A-positive cells respond to FA treatment in a dose-dependent manner by decreasing their SAM levels and downstream RNA methylation, whereas the MAT2A-positive cells are not affected by FA. Our findings reveal an unexpected interplay between SAM and FA, two central one-carbon units to influence the overall methylation potential of the cell.

### Sample Protocol
IsoTOP-ABPP analyses were performed as previously described. Mouse liver tissue was lysed in PBS using a bead homogenizer followed by concentration determination through a BCA assay. Liver lysates were incubated double-distilled H2O vehicle or 500 µM FA for 30 minutes at 37 °C. Lysates were incubated for 1 hour at RT with 100 µM N-(5-Hexyn-1-yl)-2-iodoacetamide (IA-alkyne). Click chemistry was performed to label lysates with 100 µM isotopically light (+464.28596) or heavy (+470.29977) TEV-biotin tag modifications (Figure S1). Proteins were precipitated and incubated with streptavidin agarose beads at 4 °C overnight. Bead-bound proteins were trypsinized at 37 °C overnight and then cleaved with Ac-TEV protease at 29 °C for 24 h. Peptides were washed from the beads and acidified with a final concentration of 5% formic acid. The peptide samples were pressure-loaded onto a pre-equilibrated 250 µm diameter fused silica capillary tubing packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse-phase resin (Phenomenex 04A-4299). The samples were then run with a 13 cm laser pulled 100 µm diameter tubing packed with 10 cm Aqua C18 reverse-phase resin and 3 cm of strong-cation exchange resin (Phenomenex 04A-4398), attached using a MicroTee PEEK 360 μm fitting (Thermo Fisher Scientific p-888). Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus LC-MS/MS system using a five-step Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT) program set to 400–1800 m/z scan range, 200 °C heated capillary temperature, and 2.75 kV nanospray voltage.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched and analyzed as previously described.39 Briefly, data was searched using ProLuCID methodology in IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc.) against the Uniprot mouse proteome. Modifications were set to search for fixed cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02146) and up to two differential modifications for methionine oxidation (+15.994915), light (+464.28596), or heavy (+470.29977) TEV tag modifications (Figure S1). Results was filtered through DTASelect for a peptide false-positive rate less than 5%. Only fully tryptic probe-modified peptides evident across two out of the three biological replicates were interpreted for their isotopic light-to-heavy ratios to determine residue reactivity towards formaldehyde. Probe-modified peptides that showed ratios >3.0 were further analyzed as potential targets of formaldehyde. Light versus heavy isotopic probe-modified peptide ratios were calculated by taking the ratio mean of each replicate. Ratios that were ‘infinite’, >1000 due to no corresponding heavy or light signal or those ratios <0.001 were replaced with the median ratio of the remaining ratio values. The paired abundances were also used to calculate a paired sample t-test P value, corrected using the Benjamini–Hochberg method, in an effort to estimate constancy within paired abundances and significance in change between FA-treatment and vehicle control.

### Publication Abstract
One-carbon metabolism is an essential branch of cellular metabolism that intersects with epigenetic regulation. In this work, we show how formaldehyde (FA), a one-carbon unit derived from both endogenous sources and environmental exposure, regulates one-carbon metabolism by inhibiting the biosynthesis of <i>S</i>-adenosylmethionine (SAM), the major methyl donor in cells. FA reacts with privileged, hyperreactive cysteine sites in the proteome, including Cys120 in S-adenosylmethionine synthase isoform type-1 (MAT1A). FA exposure inhibited MAT1A activity and decreased SAM production with MAT-isoform specificity. A genetic mouse model of chronic FA overload showed a decrease n SAM and in methylation on selected histones and genes. Epigenetic and transcriptional regulation of <i>Mat1a</i> and related genes function as compensatory mechanisms for FA-dependent SAM depletion, revealing a biochemical feedback cycle between FA and SAM one-carbon units.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Mouse, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, One-carbon metabolism, Formaldehyde

### Affiliations
University of California, Berkeley 
University of California, Berkeley  Dept. of Chemistry Dept. of Molecular and Cell Biology Member, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institue

### Submitter
Kevin Bruemmer

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Chang
University of California, Berkeley  Dept. of Chemistry Dept. of Molecular and Cell Biology Member, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institue


