### Accession
PXD009319

### Title
An alliance of gel-based and gel-free proteomic techniques displays substantial insight into the proteome of a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain

### Description
The current work aimed to detect and identify significantly differentially expressed proteins between a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain which were in vitro co-cultivated with Escherichia coli DH5alpha. This was done by applying 2D-DIGE and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra (SWATH) MS as tools on the two well-defined strains. In the gel-based experiments, 49 identified protein spots were found to be differentially expressed, of which 37 belonged to the in vitro cultivated virulent strain and 12 to the attenuated one. The most frequently identified proteins in the virulent strain take part in cytoskeleton formation, carbohydrate metabolism and adaptation to stress. However, post-translationally modified or truncated ubiquitous cellular proteins such as actin and GAPDH were identified as upregulated in multiple gel positions. This indicated their contribution to processes not related to cytoskeleton and carbohydrate metabolism, such as fibronectin or plasminogen binding. On the other hand, proteins involved in cytoskeleton, cell division and cytoskeleton organization were frequently observed in the attenuated strain. The findings of the gel-based studies were supplemented by the gel-free SWATH MS analysis, which identified and quantified 42 significantly differentially regulated proteins. In this case proteins with peptidase activity, metabolic proteins and actin-regulating proteins were the most frequent findings in the virulent strain, while proteins involved in hydrogenosomal carbohydrate metabolism dominated the results in the attenuated one.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of the H. meleagridis proteins by LC-MS/MS without previous gel electrophoretic separation, protein digestion was performed using a two-step in-solution digestion protocol with a combination of LysC and trypsin according to the manufacturer’s recommendation (https://www.promega.com/-/media/files/resources/protocols/technical-manuals/101/trypsinlysc-mix-mass-spec-grade-protocol.pdf?la=en). For each sample 10 µg of total protein were diluted with 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, to a total volume of 10 µl. Proteins were reduced with 50 mM DTT (30 min, 37°C) and alkylated with 200 mM IAA (30 min, 25°C) before stepwise digestion with Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) (4 h, 37°C; dilution with 50 mM Tris; 8 h, 37°C). After acidification with concentrated TFA, samples were frozen at -20°C until mass spectrometric analysis. An aliquot of peptides was analyzed by LC-MS/MS as described in the manuscript’s chapter with the title “Identification of differentially abundant protein spots by LC-MS/MS”.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification and statistical analysis with SWATH MS technology - Creation of SWATH ion library= LC parameters for data independent SWATH quantification analyses were the same as described for IDA injections in the manuscript’s chapter with the title “Identification of differentially abundant protein spots by LC-MS/MS”. MS parameters were adapted for SWATH. MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 400-1500 m/z with an accumulation time of 50 ms. Product ion spectra were collected in 34 windows in the range of 400-1250 m/z with a fixed width of 25 Da. For each window ions were accumulated for 80 ms. IDA identification results were used to create the SWATH ion library with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in PeakView 2.2 (both Sciex, USA). Peptides were chosen based on a FDR rate <1%, excluding shared and modified peptides. Up to 6 peptides per protein and up to 6 transitions per peptide were used. Calculation of peak areas of SWATH samples was performed with MarkerView 1.2.1 (Sciex, USA) after retention time alignment and normalization using total area sums. Further statistical evaluations were based on the normalized peak areas. Two different software tools were used: R programming language (R Development Core Team, 2014) as well as MarkerView (Sciex). MarkerView= After principal component analysis (PCA), groups were defined and a t-Test was performed. Proteins with at least two peptides were considered differential if the p-value was below α=0.00001 and the absolute fold change was at least two (fold change < −2 or > +2). As MarkerView does not differentiate between technical and biological replicates an additional statistical evaluation with R was performed. R programming language= cRAP proteins and proteins quantified with just one peptide were removed from the MarkerView normalized raw protein list before further processing. Raw peak areas were log2-transformed to approach a normal distribution. On a logarithmic scale, technical replicates were aggregated by arithmetic mean before application of statistical tests. Differential expression of proteins was assessed using two-tailed t-Test for independent samples for each protein. To adjust for multiple testing, the method of Benjamini and Hochberg was used to control the FDR (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995, J.R. Stat. Soc. 57, 289-300). Protein expression was considered differential if the adjusted p-value was below α=0.08 and the absolute fold change was at least two (fold change < −2 or > +2).

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular protozoan <i>Histomonas meleagridis</i> is notorious for being the causative agent of histomonosis, which can cause high mortality in turkeys and substantial production losses in chickens. The complete absence of commercially available curative strategies against the disease renders the devising of novel approaches a necessity. A fundamental step toward this objective is to understand the flagellate's virulence and attenuation mechanisms. For this purpose we have previously conducted a comparative proteomic analysis of an <i>in vitro</i> cultivated virulent and attenuated histomonad parasite using two-dimensional electrophoresis and MALDI-TOF/TOF. The current work aimed to substantially extend the knowledge of the flagellate's proteome by applying 2D-DIGE and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) MS as tools on the two well-defined strains. In the gel-based experiments, 49 identified protein spots were found to be differentially expressed, of which 37 belonged to the <i>in vitro</i> cultivated virulent strain and 12 to the attenuated one. The most frequently identified proteins in the virulent strain take part in cytoskeleton formation, carbohydrate metabolism and adaptation to stress. However, post-translationally modified or truncated ubiquitous cellular proteins such as actin and GAPDH were identified as upregulated in multiple gel positions. This indicated their contribution to processes not related to cytoskeleton and carbohydrate metabolism, such as fibronectin or plasminogen binding. Proteins involved in cell division and cytoskeleton organization were frequently observed in the attenuated strain. The findings of the gel-based studies were supplemented by the gel-free SWATH MS analysis, which identified and quantified 42 significantly differentially regulated proteins. In this case proteins with peptidase activity, metabolic proteins and actin-regulating proteins were the most frequent findings in the virulent strain, while proteins involved in hydrogenosomal carbohydrate metabolism dominated the results in the attenuated one.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Protozoa, Attenuation., Virulence factors, Lc-ms/ms, Swath ms, 2d-dige, Maldi-tof/tof, Histomonas meleagridis

### Affiliations
Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ivana BILIC

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ivana Bilic
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


