### Accession
PXD020135

### Title
Time-resolved combined analysis of transcriptome and proteome of the pathogenicity-activated plant pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae

### Description
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) is a rice pathogen causing bacterial blight, which outbreaks in most rice cultivating countries and reduces yield up to 50% due to no effective pesticide. Urgent responses of Xoo upon the initial contacts with rice at infection site are essential for pathogenesis. We studied the time-resolved gene expression of both transcriptome and proteome in the pathogenicity-activated Xoo cells with an in vitro assay system. Genes related to cell mobility, inorganic ion transport and effectors are early response genes to help Xoo cells invade into damaged rice leaf tissues, obtain rare cofactors, and evade rice immune responses. Although the time-resolved gene expression pattern of Xoo is conserved in both mRNA and protein, there are varied time gaps in genes between the expression peaks of mRNA and protein, which implies there is an additional translational selection step of specific mRNAs for rapid translation. The expression pattern of genes from a polycistronic mRNA in the same gene cluster is strictly conserved. The time-resolved gene expression study of Xoo in both transcriptome and proteome provides a valuable information about the pathogenic responses of Xoo at the initial stage of Xoo-rice interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain and culture conditions Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo) KACC10331 was obtained from the Korean Agricultural Collection Center (KACC), which has 4,941,439 nucleotides and 4,065 protein genes and no autonomous plasmids were apparent [4]. The bacteria were grown in nutrient broth (Difco, Detroit, MI, USA) or YGC (2.0% D-(+)-glucose, 2.0% CaCO3, 1.0% yeast extract, 1.5% agar) at 28°C.   Construction of expression vector and transformation of Xoo  The XoAvrBs2 (Xoo0168) and XoAvrBs3 (Xoo2276) genes including the promoter region (from -149 bps and -750 to start codon of each gene) were synthesized by PCR and ligated into the pGEM-T easy vector (Promega). The inserted sequences were confirmed and then digested with KpnI and SacI, and the products were inserted into pHM1-XTAP-Tgap [14, 15]. The recombinant vectors were purified and introduced into Xoo strain KACC10331 using the electroporation with Gene Pulser II (Bio-RAD, Hercules, CA) electroporator with 0.2 cm gap cuvette at 2.5 kV cm-1. Then, Xoo cells were immediately diluted with 1 mL SOC medium and incubated at 28°C with agitation for 2 hours. After recovery, cultured cells were plated on nutrient broth agar plates containing 50 µL·mL-1 spectinomycin and incubated at 28°C for 4 days.  The transformants were cultured in 100 mL of nutrient broth and grown to mid-exponential phase (A600 of 0.5). 1 mL of cell was harvested from 100 mL cell culture by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. Harvested cells were washed once with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and resuspended in 200 µL PBS and sonicated. The serial dilution of protein samples was prepared with 2 M urea/PBS in 96-well plates. Following transfer from the 96-well plate to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (PVDF, 0.2 µm, Bio-Rad) with a 96-well vacuum dot-blotter (Bio-Rad), the membrane was washed three times with PBS, blocked with 5% skim milk for 30 min, and subjected to a one-step immune-affinity procedure using a Peroxidase-Anti-Peroxidase Soluble Complex antibody produced in rabbit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). Bound antibody was detected using a chemiluminescence reaction followed by developing on film.  Treatment of rice leaf extract  Rice was grown on a paddy field at Jeonju in South Korea (35°49'52.0"N 127°03'55.6"E) before panicle initiation (approximately 8 to 9 weeks). The 40 clumps rice leaves (Oryza sativa L. cv. Milyang 23; a Xoo-susceptible rice cultivar) were harvested and homogenized in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. The resulting homogenate (RLX) was aliquoted to 1 g in Eppendorf-tubes and stored at -80°C. The 100 mL culture of Xoo was grown in nutrient broth to the mid-exponential phase (A600 of 0.5) in a shaking incubator at 28°C with an agitation speed of 200 rpm and an RLX aliquot (2 g) was added to the culture medium. 100ml of culture medium were subjected to sequential filtration starting with gauze, followed by 40 µm nylon cell strainer (FALON, New York, USA) and final filtration will be continued with 5 µm syringe filter (Sartorius, Germany) to remove RLX. 100 mL of the filtered culture were centrifuged at 10,000 ×g for 10 min at 4°C.   Proteomic samples preparation  The harvested samples were lysed in lysis buffer containing 9 M urea in 20 mM HEPES with protease inhibitors cocktail (Complete mini, Roche) and with phosphatases (2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate) and sonicated on ice. Bicinchoninic acid assay was performed to find out the exact amount of proteins in each sample. A total of 200 ug of proteins for each sample was used after confirming protein integrity by SDS-PAGE. First, 10 mM of DTT was used to reduce disulfide bonds for 1 hour and then, 30 mM iodoacetamide was used to alkylate free sulfhydryl functional groups for 30 min in the dark. Samples were diluted with ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0) to a final concentration of urea to 1 M. Proteins were digested with MS grade trypsin (Thermo) with a protein to enzyme ratio of 50:1 for 12 hours in 37°C. The enzyme reaction was quenched by lowering the pH the sample using trifluoroacetic acid to a final pH of less than 3. Protein digests were kept in -80 after vacuum dry. Peptides were desalted using C18 spin column (Harvard) to remove salts and other contaminants, and clean peptides were dry. Tandem mass tag (TMT, Thermo) were used to isotopically label peptides following manufacture’s protocol. Shortly, after addition of TMT, reaction was carried out by for 2 hours in room temperature and TMT-labeled samples were dried using speedvac. After confirming the chemical labeling with TMT, samples were pooled and fractionated by basic RPLC system. Peptide mixture was resuspended using 10 mM ammonium formate and fractionated using a C18 column (C18, 5µm 4.6 × 250 mm, XBridge, Waters) into 12 fractions. Fractionated peptides were dried and kept in -80°C until use.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis  Using the data obtained from MaxQuant software, in “protein groups.txt” the contamination and reverse identified proteins were removed. Proteins that were identified in both replicant were pulled together for quantile normalization. To normalized, non-value input was imputed than using R software, each column was quantile normalized as shown in figure S1 (E). Using the average value between the replicants, the value was used to create multi scatter plot (Figure S1C) and principle component analysis (Figure S3). Using Perseus software, hierarchical clustering was created by Z scoring individual replicants separately. The hierarchical cluster unique pattern was observed and using the involved proteins, String-map analysis was done.  Time-resolved continuous heat map analysis Log2-scaled RPKM values from RNA-Seq data at each time point within the first hour post-RLX treatment were fitted to a curve and non-linear regression was performed using GraphPad Prism (version 3.02 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com) to obtain the resulting continuous RPKM values vs. time from the fitted curve. The maximum expressed level of each gene within 1 h was set as 1.0 and the continuous expression level vs. time was scaled based on the maximum reference level. When the expressed level was downregulated compared with that at 0 h, the lowest expressed level was set to -1.0 and the continuous expression level was scaled in the same manner. The increasing and decreasing expression level of each gene was compared with other genes in time-resolved continuous heat map. Heat maps were generated with MeV (Multi Experiment Viewer) [16] by adding the fold changes of RPKM values into a single-color array.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Xanthomonas oryzae</i> pv. <i>oryzae</i> (<i>Xoo</i>) is a plant pathogen responsible for causing bacterial blight in rice. The immediate alterations in <i>Xoo</i> upon initial contact with rice are essential for pathogenesis. We studied time-resolved genome-wide gene expression in pathogenicity-activated <i>Xoo</i> cells at the transcriptome and proteome levels. The early response genes of <i>Xoo</i> include genes related to cell motility, inorganic ion transport, and effectors. The alteration of gene expression is initiated as early as few minutes after the initial interaction and changes with time. The time-resolved comparison of the transcriptome and proteome shows the differences between transcriptional and translational expression peaks in many genes, although the overall expression pattern of mRNAs and proteins is conserved. The discrepancy suggests an important role of translational regulation in <i>Xoo</i> at the early stages of pathogenesis. The gene expression analysis using time-resolved transcriptome and proteome provides unprecedented valuable information regarding <i>Xoo</i> pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Pathogenicity, Xoo–rice interactions, Transcriptome, Time-resolved gene expression, Proteome, Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae

### Affiliations
kyung hee university
DGIST, Department of new biology, Q-Bio laboratory

### Submitter
Wooyoung Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
DGIST, Department of new biology, Q-Bio laboratory


