### Accession
PXD001114

### Title
Characterization of LysargiNase for use in phosphoproteomics experiments, partII

### Description
Use of parallel digest with LysargiNase and trypsin to cover complementary phosphosites / characterization of phospho-motifs preferentially identified by each protease

### Sample Protocol
SILAC-labeled MDA-MB 231 cells were treated with media containing 0.1% DMSO (Lys0/Arg0 cells, 5 min, control) or 0.1%DMSO and 200ng/ml PMA (Lys4/Arg6 cells, 5 min; Lys8/Arg10 cells, 20 min) and harvested as described (Rogers et al 2011),  Proteins were denatured with 3.5M Gnd-HCl, reduced with 10mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation, pellets dissolved in a small volume of 8M urea, 2M thioruea, diluted at least 5-fold with 50 mM Hepes, 10 mM CaCl2, pH7.5 and digested with50:1 LysArgiNAse or 100:1 trypsin (equimolar amounts) at 30C over night. Peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges,phosphopeptides enriched using commercial TiO2 tips (Sigma) or homemade TiO2 tips as described (Rogers et al 2011) and desalted using Stage tips prior analysis.

### Data Protocol
Analysis with MaxQuant 1.4.12. using [X|KR] as specificity rule for LysargiNase and [KR|X] for trypsin. For details, see parameter file in the uploaded seach folder

### Publication Abstract
To improve proteome coverage and protein C-terminal identification, we characterized the Methanosarcina acetivorans thermophilic proteinase LysargiNase, which cleaves before lysine and arginine up to 55 &#xb0;C. Unlike trypsin, LysargiNase-generated peptides had N-terminal lysine or arginine residues and fragmented with b ion-dominated spectra. This improved protein C terminal-peptide identification and several arginine-rich phosphosite assignments. Notably, cleavage also occurred at methylated or dimethylated lysine and arginine, facilitating detection of these epigenetic modifications.

### Keywords
Human, Trypsin, Phosphopeptides, Mda-mb 231, Silac, Pma stimulation, Lysarginase

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Centre for Blood Research, Dept. Oral Biological Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of British Columbia, Canada

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher M. Overall
Centre for Blood Research, Dept. Oral Biological Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of British Columbia, Canada


