### Accession
PXD009328

### Title
Molecular changes during extended endocrine treatment of breast cancer

### Description
Sequential patient-matched samples treated with extended neoadjuvant therapy were studied. Samples were classified as pre-treatment (timepoint1, <0 days), early-on treatment (timepoint2, 0-120 days) and long-term treatment (timepoint4, >120 days).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were isolated from the organic phase of QIAzol Lysis Reagent (QIAGEN) (1). Pellets were sonicated and dissolved in 1% SDS. Proteomics was performed using Thermo Q Exactive plus and Label-free Quantitation (LFQ). Peptides obtained from samples were analysed in mass spectrometry runs, serial samples from the patients were run on the same day. A modified version of FASP was performed using serial digests with lysC and trypsin to generate two orthogonal fractions per sample (2, 3). Peptides were separated on a Thermo RSLC Nano using packed emitters made in-house.  HPLC solutions A and B were 0.5% acetic acid in 2% and 100% acetonitrile respectively.  Peptides were loaded with 2% B and separated on a gradient from 2-30% B 120 minutes and by 30-45% B in the following 10 minutes.  Data were acquired on a Thermo Q Exactive Plus, with MS1 resolution 70,000, scan range 300 to 1650 and data dependent MS2 resolution 17,500, with NCE 26, isolation window 1.4 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. 1. Likhite N, Warawdekar UM: A unique method for isolation and solubilization of proteins after extraction of RNA from tumor tissue using trizol. J Biomol Tech 22:37-44, 2011 2. Coleman O, Henry M, Clynes M, et al: Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) for Improved Proteome Analysis of Recombinant Chinese Hamster Ovary Cells. Methods Mol Biol 1603:187-194, 2017 3. Rappsilber J, Ishihama Y, Mann M: Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 75:663-70, 2003

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry spectra generated in each run was used for relative quantitation of individual peptides. Normalization and quantifications of peptides were performed using MaxQuant 1.5.7.4 (4). A total of 6251 protein groups were identified using uniprot human proteome fasta. Data was log2 transformed and missing values were imputed as the minimum observed value in each sample. 4. Cox J, Mann M: MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26:1367-72, 2008

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dormancy, Breast cancer, Sequential samples, Letrozole

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Applied Bioinformatics of Cancer University of Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine Edinburgh, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Cigdem Selli

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew H Sims
Applied Bioinformatics of Cancer University of Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine Edinburgh, United Kingdom


