### Accession
PXD029424

### Title
Integrative functional proteomics identifies PARP1 protein complex differences and PARP inhibitor-mediated DDR and AKT-mTOR signaling in ovarian carcinoma: Chemical Proteomics

### Description
BRCA1/2-deficient ovarian carcinoma (OC) has been shown to be particularly sensitive to PARP inhibitors (PARPis) and BRCA1/2 mutation status is currently used as a predictive biomarker for PARPi therapy. Despite eliciting major clinical benefit for the majority of patients, a significant proportion of BRCA1/2-deficient OC tumors do not respond to PARPis for reasons that are incompletely understood. Using an integrated chemical, phospho- and ADP-ribosylation proteomics approach, we sought to develop additional mechanism-based biomarker candidates for PARPi therapy in OC and identify new targets for combination therapy to overcome primary resistance. Chemical proteomics with PARPi baits in a BRCA1-isogenic OC cell line pair, as well as patient-derived BRCA1-profiecient and deficient tumor samples, and subsequent validation by co-immunoprecipitation showed differential PARP1 and PARP2 protein complex composition with Ku70 and Ku80 in PARPi-sensitive, BRCA1-deficient UWB1.289 (UWB) cells compared to PARPi-insensitive, BRCA1-reconstituted UWB1.289 (UWB+B) cells. Global phosphoproteomics and ADP-ribosylation proteomics furthermore revealed that rucaparib induced the cell cycle pathway and NHEJ pathway in UWB cells, but down-regulated ErbB signaling in UWB+B cells. In addition, we observed AKT PARylation and pro-survival AKT-mTOR signaling in UWB+B cells after PARPi treatment. Consistently, synergy of PARPis with DNAPK or AKT inhibitors was more pronounced in UWB+B cells identifying these pathways as actionable vulnerabilities. In conclusion, the combination of chemical proteomics, phosphoproteomics and ADP-ribosylation proteomics can identify differential PARP1/2 complexes and diverse, but actionable drug compensatory signaling in OC.

### Sample Protocol
The drug pulldown experiments were performed essentially as described previously (Knezevic et al.Cell Chem Biol. 2016 Dec 22;23(12):1490-1503). Briefly, c-olaparib and c-rucaparib were immobilized on NHS-activated sepharose beads by overnight room temperature incubation in the presence of triethylamine. Successful coupling was confirmed using HPLC-MS and beads were blocked overnight with ethanolamine. Lysates (5 mg per sample) were pre-incubated with competition compound (20 µM), or DMSO for 30 min at 4°C. The drug beads were washed with DMSO followed by lysis buffer and affinity pulldown experiments were performed by incubating drug beads with lysates for 2 hrs at 4°C. Beads were further washed on Bio-spin disposable chromatography columns (BioRad) with lysis buffer, bound proteins were eluted by heating to 95°C in 30 µL of Laemmli buffer for 5 min. A portion of each eluate was set aside for analysis by western blotting. The eluates were run on SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion, and cleared with C18 ZipTip clean up (Millipore). Briefly, the ZipTips were activated by pipetting methanol a few times followed by 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Samples were then pipetted up and down a few times and tips were washed with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and eluted in 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Eluates were concentrated using vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were re-dissolved in HPLC buffer spiked with Scientific Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture (PRTC). LC-MS/MS analysis using a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) was performed as described previously (ibid).
Control (CT), Olaparib (Ola), and Rucaparib (Ruca) pulldowns were performed for UWB parental cells (U) and UWB cells expressing BRCA1 (U+B).  Samples are: PD867-869 U-Ola-CT1-3; PD870-872 U-Ola-PD1-3; PD873-5 U+B-Ola-CT1-3; PD876-878 U+B-Ola-PD1-3; PD901-903 U-Ruca-CT1-3; PD904-906 U-Ruca-PD1-3; PD907-909 U+B-Ruca-CT1-3; PD910-912 U+B-Ruca-PD1-3

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniProt 2018 human protein database using the MaxQuant search engine (version 1.5.2.8). Up to two missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 20ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.05. Similar parameters were used for Mascot searches to support this upload.

### Publication Abstract
BRCA1/2-deficient ovarian carcinoma (OC) has been shown to be particularly sensitive to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors (PARPis). Furthermore, BRCA1/2 mutation status is currently used as a predictive biomarker for PARPi therapy. Despite providing a major clinical benefit to the majority of patients, a significant proportion of BRCA1/2-deficient OC tumors do not respond to PARPis for reasons that are incompletely understood. Using an integrated chemical, phospho- and ADP-ribosylation proteomics approach, we sought here to develop additional mechanism-based biomarker candidates for PARPi therapy in OC and identify new targets for combination therapy to overcome primary resistance. Using chemical proteomics with PARPi baits in a BRCA1-isogenic OC cell line pair, as well as patient-derived BRCA1-proficient and BRCA1-deficient tumor samples, and subsequent validation by coimmunoprecipitation, we showed differential PARP1 and PARP2 protein complex composition in PARPi-sensitive, BRCA1-deficient UWB1.289 (UWB) cells compared to PARPi-insensitive, BRCA1-reconstituted UWB1.289+BRCA1 (UWB+B) cells. In addition, global phosphoproteomics and ADP-ribosylation proteomics furthermore revealed that the PARPi rucaparib induced the cell cycle pathway and nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway in UWB cells but downregulated ErbB signaling in UWB+B cells. In addition, we observed AKT PARylation and prosurvival AKT-mTOR signaling in UWB+B cells after PARPi treatment. Consistently, we found the synergy of PARPis with DNAPK or AKT inhibitors was more pronounced in UWB+B cells, highlighting these pathways as actionable vulnerabilities. In conclusion, we demonstrate the combination of chemical proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and ADP-ribosylation proteomics can identify differential PARP1/2 complexes and diverse, but actionable, drug compensatory signaling in OC.

### Keywords
Parp1, Brca-deficient, Chemical proteomics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


