### Accession
PXD000023

### Title
EHEC O157:H7 Sakai vs. TW14359: Secreted and Cytosolic iTRAQ; sepD secretome analysis of TW14359

### Description
Comparative analysis of EHEC O157:H7 Sakai vs. TW14359 secreted and cytosolic protein using iTRAQ and mass spectrometry on an LTQ Orbitrap.  Samples were fractionated through strong cation exchange and HPLC before analsyis.  For TW14359 sepD secretome analysis, strains were similarly prepared and analyzed.  All samples were searched against a TW14359 specific protein database (Uniprot) coupled with randomized protein sequences.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The 2006 US spinach outbreak of Escherichia coli O157&#x200a;:&#x200a;H7, characterized by unusually severe disease, has been attributed to a strain (TW14359) with enhanced pathogenic potential, including elevated virulence gene expression, robust adherence and the presence of novel virulence factors. This study proposes a mechanism for the unique virulence expression and adherence phenotype of this strain, and further expands the role for regulator RcsB in control of the E. coli locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) pathogenicity island. Proteomic analysis of TW14359 revealed a virulence proteome consistent with previous transcriptome studies that included elevated levels of the LEE regulatory protein Ler and type III secretion system (T3SS) proteins, secreted T3SS effectors and Shiga toxin 2. Basal levels of the LEE activator and Rcs phosphorelay response regulator, RcsB, were increased in strain TW14359 relative to O157&#x200a;:&#x200a;H7 strain Sakai. Deletion of rcsB eliminated inherent differences between these strains in ler expression, and in T3SS-dependent adherence. A reciprocating regulatory pathway involving RcsB and LEE-encoded activator GrlA was identified and predicted to co-ordinate LEE activation with repression of the flhDC flagellar regulator and motility. Overexpression of grlA was shown to increase RcsB levels, but did not alter expression from promoters driving rcsB transcription. Expression of rcsDB and RcsB was determined to increase in response to physiological levels of bicarbonate, and bicarbonate-dependent stimulation of the LEE was shown to be dependent on an intact Rcs system and ler activator grvA. The results of this study significantly broaden the role for RcsB in enterohaemorrhagic E. coli virulence regulation.

### Keywords
Sepd, Tw14359, Ltq orbitrap, Enterohemorrhagic escherichia coli o157:h7, Ltq, Secretome, Sakai, Spinach, Itraq, Hypersecretion

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Jason Morgan

### Lab Head


