### Accession
PXD004531

### Title
Phosphorylation of Cyclin F at Serine 621 regulates the Lys48-ubiquitylation E3 ligase activity of the SCF(Cyclin F) complex.

### Description
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder that is characterized by progressive weakness, paralysis and cachexia often resulting in patient death within 3-5 years of diagnosis. Recently, we identified mutations to the CCNF gene, which encodes the Cyclin F protein, in cohorts of patients with familial and sporadic ALS (1). Cyclin F is a part of a Skp1-Cul-F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complex and is responsible for ubiquitinating proteins for the degradation by the proteasome. In this study, we investigated the phosphorylation status of Cyclin F and the effect of the serine mutation at site 621 to glycine on E3 ligase Lys48-specific ubiquitylation activity. We identified seven phosphorylation sites on Cyclin F, of which five were unique including Ser621. These phosphorylation sites were mostly identified within the PEST sequence of Cyclin F at the C-terminus. Additionally, we determined that Casein Kinase II (CK2) was responsible for phosphorylating Ser621 and controls the E3 ligase activity of the SCF(Cyclin F) complex. Thus, the glycine mutation at this site on Cyclin F prevents phosphorylation by CK2 and confers elevated Lys48-ubiquitylation activity, a hallmark of ALS pathogenesis. These findings highlight the convergence of post-translational modifications (ubiquitylation and phosphorylation) to sustain cellular homeostasis, and aberrations such as a single missense mutation can affect downstream cellular processes and lead to aberrant motor neuron development, neuron degeneration and ultimately ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide fractions were injected onto a 2 cm desalting trap column packed with YMC C18 material (75 μm ID, 5–15 μm, 120 A) at 5 l/min for 6 min before being eluted onto an analytical column packed with Michrom Magic C18 (75 μm × 15 cm, 5 μm, 120 A) using a nanoLC system (Thermo) with a nanoflow solvent delivery of 300 nl/min. Each sample was separated on a 60 min gradient (2%–50% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The peptides were eluted and ionized into a Q-Exactive or LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The electrospray source was fitted with an emitter tip 10 μm (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 2.5 kV electrospray voltage. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent “Top 10” method operating in FTMS acquisition mode with HCD (Q-Exactive) or CID (Orbitrap) fragmentation. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent “Top 10” method operating in FT-FT acquisition mode with CID or HCD fragmentation. IT-MS and FT-MS on the Orbitrap Velos was carried out with a survey scan range between m/z 350 – 1800 Da with MS/MS threshold of 500 ions for CID, and MS/MS threshold of 5000 ions for HCD, with an isolation width of 2.0 Da and normalized collision energy of 35%. FT-MS analysis on the Q-Exactive was carried out with a 35,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS; and MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x105 ions. Maximum injection times were set to 120 and 60 milliseconds respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 25,000 counts and an isolation width of 1.9 Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 27 %.

### Data Protocol
Spectra files (*.RAW) were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Finnigan, CA, USA) incorporating the Mascot search algorithm (Matrix Sciences, UK). Peptide identifications were determined using a 10-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.05 Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine, acetyl modification on N-terminal residues, and phosphate on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched through Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific) using the Mascot algorithm against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (sequences 15742024, May 7 2012).  The protein sequence for the mutated Cyclin F(S621G) was added manually to a custom database which included the UniProt sequences. The data was processed through the Xtract and MS2 Processor nodes together with a direct search and the combined searches were sent to Percolator (Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington) for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01 (1% false discovery rate (FDR)) within the Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) software. Phosphosite occupancy was validated using the PhosphoRS 3.1 node within the PD 1.4 with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder that is characterized by progressive weakness, paralysis and muscle loss often resulting in patient death within 3-5 years of diagnosis. Recently, we identified disease-linked mutations in the <i>CCNF</i> gene, which encodes the cyclin F protein, in cohorts of patients with familial and sporadic ALS and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (Williams KL <i>et al</i> 2016 <i>Nat. Commun.</i><b>7</b>, 11253. (doi:10.1038/ncomms11253)). Cyclin F is a part of a Skp1-Cul-F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complex and is responsible for ubiquitylating proteins for degradation by the proteasome. In this study, we investigated the phosphorylation status of cyclin F and the effect of the serine to glycine substitution at site 621 (S621G) on E3 ligase activity. This specific mutation (S621G) was found in a multi-generational Australian family with ALS/FTD. We identified seven phosphorylation sites on cyclin F, of which five are newly reported including Ser621. These phosphorylation sites were mostly identified within the PEST (proline, glutamic acid, serine and threonine) sequence located at the C-terminus of cyclin F. Additionally, we determined that casein kinase II (CK2) can phosphorylate Ser621 and thereby regulate the E3 ligase activity of the SCF<sup>(cyclin F)</sup> complex. Furthermore, the S621G mutation in cyclin F prevents phosphorylation by CK2 and confers elevated Lys48-ubiquitylation activity, a hallmark of ALS/FTD pathology. These findings highlight the importance of phosphorylation in regulating the activity of the SCF<sup>(cyclin F)</sup> E3 ligase complex that can affect downstream processes and may lead to defective motor neuron development, neuron degeneration and ultimately ALS and FTD.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, E3 ligase, Ubiquitylation, Als

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109, Australia


