### Accession
PXD022153

### Title
A potential role of Gsdf-eEF1 complex in inhibiting germ cell proliferation: A protein interaction analysis in medaka (Oryzias latipes) from a proteomics perspective

### Description
Gonadal soma-derived factor (gsdf) has been demonstrated as essential for testicular differentiation in medaka (Oryzias latipes). To understand the protein dynamics of Gsdf in spermatogenesis regulation, we used a His-tag “pull-down” assay coupled with shotgun LC-MS/MS to identify a group of potential interaction partners for Gsdf, which included cytoplasmic dynein light chain 2, eukaryotic polypeptide elongation factor 1 alpha (eEF1), and actin filaments in mature medaka testis. Alike the interaction with TGF-dynein critical for spermatogonial division in Drosophila melanogaster, the physical interaction of Gsdf & dynein and Gsdf & eEF1 were identified through a yeast 2-hybrid (Y2H) screening of an adult testis cDNA library using Gsdf as bait, and were verified by a paired Y2H assay. Co-immunoprecipitation of Gsdf and eEF1was defined in adult testes, as supporting the requirement of Gsdf and eEF1 interaction in testis development. Proteomics analysis and ultrastrutural observation showed that Gsdf deficiency activated eEF1-mediated protein synthesis and ribosome biogenesis, which in turn led to the differentiation of undifferentiated germ cell. Thus, our results provide a framework and new insight into the coordination of Gsdf (TGF and eEF1complex in the basic processes of germ cell proliferation, and transcriptional and translational control of sexual RNA, which may be fundamentally conserved across phyla during sex differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free proteomic analysis Wild-type XX female and XY male gonads and gsdf-deficient XY ovaries were collected from three adult individuals (3–4 months old) per group and mixed to minimize the influence of individual variants. Details of the label-free proteomic analysis have been described previously [16]. In brief, Label-free proteomics was performed by the Beijing Bangfei Bioscience Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China) and Jinjie Co., Ltd (Hangzhou, China). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 parts per million (ppm) in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search; and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. A carbamidomethyl group on cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, while oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. Protein abundance among the samples was determined using label-free quantification (LFQ), with the false discovery rate (FDR; calculated as N(decoy)*((N(decoy)+N(target))) threshold set to <1 %, and the expected ion score cut-off set to <0.05 (95% confidence). Raw data were converted to Mascot generic peak lists using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against O. latipes sequence database (UP000001038, 26,094 entries) using mascot 2.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered using a cutoff of 1% for the peptide false identification rate (FDR). The minimum and maximum peptide lengths were set to 6 and 144 amino acids, respectively. Proteins containing more than one unique peptide were considered unique.  Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was performed using the DAVID classification tool. Cluster membership was visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots.” Functional network analysis of the identified differential expression of proteins (DEPs) was performed by STRING (version 8.3, http://string.embl.de/).

### Publication Abstract
Gonadal soma-derived factor (gsdf) has been demonstrated to be essential for testicular differentiation in medaka (Oryzias latipes). To understand the protein dynamics of Gsdf in spermatogenesis regulation, we used a His-tag "pull-down" assay coupled with shotgun LC-MS/MS to identify a group of potential interacting partners for Gsdf, which included cytoplasmic dynein light chain 2, eukaryotic polypeptide elongation factor 1 alpha (eEF1&#x3b1;), and actin filaments in the mature medaka testis. As for the interaction with transforming growth factor &#x3b2;-dynein being critical for spermatogonial division in Drosophila melanogaster, the physical interactions of Gsdf-dynein and Gsdf-eEF1&#x3b1; were identified through a yeast 2-hybrid screening of an adult testis cDNA library using Gsdf as bait, which were verified by a paired yeast 2-hybrid assay. Coimmunoprecipitation of Gsdf and eEF1&#x3b1; was defined in adult testes as supporting the requirement of a Gsdf and eEF1&#x3b1; interaction in testis development. Proteomics analysis (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022153) and ultrastructural observations showed that Gsdf deficiency activated eEF1&#x3b1;-mediated protein synthesis and ribosomal biogenesis, which in turn led to the differentiation of undifferentiated germ cells. Thus, our results provide a framework and new insight into the coordination of a Gsdf (transforming growth factor &#x3b2;) and eEF1&#x3b1; complex in the basic processes of germ cell proliferation, transcriptional and translational control of sexual RNA, which may be fundamentally conserved across the phyla during sexual differentiation.

### Keywords
Gsdf; eef1; 42sp50

### Affiliations
Shanghai Ocean University

### Submitter
Guijun Guan

### Lab Head
Dr Guijun Guan
Shanghai Ocean University


