### Accession
PXD004436

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of mouse CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells and CD4+Foxp3- conventional T cells

### Description
In this study, we compared the proteomes of mouse CD4+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Treg) and CD4+Foxp3- conventional T cells (Tconv) in order to build a data set of proteins differentially regulated in these two cell populations. The data set contains mass spectrometry results from the analysis of 7 biological replicates of Treg/Tconv cell samples purified by flow cytometry, each experiment performed from a pool of 4-5 mice. Global proteomic analysis of each sample was performed by single-run nanoLC-MS/MS, using chromatographic separation of peptides on 50cm C18 reverse-phase columns, with either a 480min gradient on LTQ-Velos orbitrap mass spectrometer (replicates 1 and 2) or a 300min gradient on Q-Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (replicates 3-7). Several MS injection replicates were performed for some experiments, leading to 27 raw files composing the data set. The detailed description of each analysis (file name, sample type, biological replicate number, MS technical replicate number, MS instrument used, sample name in MaxQuant ouput) is given in the table “Files list.txt”.

### Sample Protocol
To isolate T cells subpopulations, we used the DEREG mouse model expressing a diphtheria toxin receptor-enhanced green fluorescent fusion protein (DTR-eGFP) under control of the endogenous Foxp3 promoter. In this model, Treg specifically express DTR-eGFP, allowing fluorescent detection and very efficient purification of Foxp3+ Treg cells by FACS sorting, independently of CD25 expression. Cell samples were lysed with a strong detergent concentration (4% SDS) combined to sonication. Protein concentrations in each sample were determined using a detergent-compatible assay (DC assay, Bio-Rad) and total protein amounts from Treg and Tconv cell populations were normalized. Cysteine residues were reduced by addition of 25 mM final of dithiothreitol for 5 min at 95°C, and alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 90 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. For each protein sample, 10-15 µg were loaded onto 1D SDS-PAGE gel. No fractionation was performed, and the electrophoretic migration was stopped as soon as the protein sample entered the separating gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue, and a single band, containing the whole sample, was cut. Samples were in-gel digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 17 µl of 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA before being subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an LTQ-Velos Orbitrap or a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on a C-18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm; in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). The peptides were eluted using a 5 to 50% gradient of solvent B at 300 nl/min flow rate, with gradient length of either 480min (runs performed on the LTQ-Velos Orbitrap) or 300min (runs performed on the Q-Exactive Orbitrap). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. For LTQ-Velos Orbitrap runs, MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300-2000 m/z range with a resolution of 60000 and the 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for CID fragmentation and analysis in the linear trap. For Q-ExactivePlus runs, survey MS scan were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 350-2000 m/z range with a resolution of 70000, the 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation and resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 17500 in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Data were searched with the Andromeda search engine against Mouse entries of the Swissprot protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Knowledgebase release 2014_09, Mouse taxonomy, 16699 entries). The search included methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Validation was performed through a false discovery rate set to 1% for proteins and peptides determined by target-decoy search in MaxQuant (with a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a minimum Andromeda score of 20 as additional filters for peptide validation). Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after lysine or arginine, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 0.8 Da for LTQ-Velos data and 20 ppm for Q-Exactive data. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 10 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs. The minimal ratio count was set to 1 for calculation of LFQ intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Regulatory T cells (Treg) represent a minor subpopulation of T lymphocytes that is crucial for the maintenance of immune homeostasis. Here, we present a large-scale quantitative mass spectrometry study that defines a specific proteomic "signature" of Treg. Treg and conventional T lymphocyte (Tconv) subpopulations were sorted by flow cytometry and subjected to global proteomic analysis by single-run nanoLC-MS/MS on a fast-sequencing Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Besides "historical" proteins that characterize Treg, our study identified numerous new proteins that are up- or downregulated in Treg <i>versus</i> Tconv. We focused on Themis1, a protein particularly under-represented in Treg, and recently described as being involved in the pathogenesis of immune diseases. Using a transgenic mouse model overexpressing Themis1, we provided <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> evidence of its importance for Treg suppressive functions, in an animal model of inflammatory bowel disease and in coculture assays. We showed that this enhanced suppressive activity <i>in vitro</i> is associated with an accumulation of Tregs. Thus, our study highlights the usefulness of label free quantitative methods to better characterize the Treg cell lineage and demonstrates the potential role of Themis1 in the suppressive functions of these cells.

### Keywords
['Mouse primary t cell', 'Expression proteomics', 'Regulatory t cells', 'Label-free', 'Foxp3']

### Affiliations
['CNRS/IPBS', 'Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, France']

### Submitter
['Anne Gonzalez de Peredo']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, France', 'email': 'gonzalez@ipbs.fr', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Anne Gonzale de Peredo', 'id': '48540100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['mus musculus']
characteristics[organism part]: ['not applicatble']
characteristics[cell type]: ['regulatory T cell' 'conventional T cell']
characteristics[disease]: ['none']
comment[label]: ['label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['LTQ Velos' 'Q Exactive Plus']

