### Accession
PXD030805

### Title
Identification of nascent peptides of peptidyl-tRNA dissociated from ribosome in the early elongation stage in Escherichia coli pthts cells

### Description
Accurate translation of mRNAs into functional proteins is a fundamental process in all living organisms. In bacteria, in the early stage of translation elongation, peptidyl-tRNAs (pep-tRNAs) with short nascent chains frequently dissociate from the ribosome (pep-tRNA drop-off). The dissociated pep-tRNAs are deacylated and recycled by peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase (PTH), which is an essential enzyme in bacteria. Here, we establish a highly sensitive method for direct profiling of pep-tRNAs using RNA isolation method and mass spectrometry. We isolated each tRNA species with peptide from Escherichia coli pthts cells using reciprocal circulating chromatography and precisely analyzed their nascent peptides. As a result, we successfully detected 703 peptides consisted of 402 cognate peptides and 301 non-cognate peptides with single amino-acid substitution.  Detailed analysis of individual pep-tRNAs revealed that most of the substitutions in the miscoded peptides take place at the C-terminal drop-off site. We further examined this observation using a reporter construct and found that the non-cognate pep-tRNAs produced by mistranslation rarely participate in the next round of elongation but dissociate from the ribosome, suggesting that pep-tRNA drop-off is an active mechanism by which the ribosome rejects miscoded pep-tRNAs in the early elongation, thereby contributing to quality control of protein synthesis after peptide bond formation.

### Sample Protocol
Individual pep-tRNA species analyzed in this study were isolated from total RNA of the E. coli strains by reciprocal circulating chromatography (Miyauchi et al., 2007). To minimize the dissociation of peptide from the tRNA and prevent the oxidation of methionine, we optimized the binding buffer consisted of 1.2 M NaCl, 30 mM MES-NaOH (pH 6.0), 15 mM EDTA, and 2.5 mM DTT. The number of pipetting steps was set to 17. In this study, we isolated 42 out of a total of 46 elongator tRNA species in E. coli. Only a few bases differ among pairs of isodecoders in three tRNAs for Leu1, Ile2, and Tyr, so these were not isolated separately. In addition, tRNASec was not isolated. The isolated pep-tRNAs were hydrolyzed into peptides and tRNA by incubation in 0.3% ammonia water at 50°C for 30 min, and then the ammonia was completely evaporated. The hydrolysate dissolved in water was mixed with Q-Sepharose Fast Flow resin to capture tRNAs. The peptides in the flowthrough fraction were dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides prepared as described above were subjected to the capillary LC/nanoESI MS system (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by capillary LC using a linear gradient from 2−80% solvent B (v/v) in a solvent system consisting of 0.1v/v% formic acid (solvent A) and 70v/v% acetonitrile (solvent B). The ionized peptide with proton adduct was decomposed by CID in the instrument.

### Data Protocol
To determine peptide sequences of the isolated pep-tRNAs, we made two reference lists for initial sequences of E. coli ORFs. Nascent Peptide Database 2 CX is a list of nascent peptides covering 10–16 aa. from the initiation sites of E. coli ORFs. For C0X non-cognate peptides, the C-terminus of each peptide was substituted with the “X” residue, which represents any of the amino-acids. To search for C-1X, C-2X, and C-3X peptides, the corresponding residues in the peptide listed in the reference are substituted with “X”. The MS data for the peptides of the isolated pep-tRNAs were submitted to MASCOT MS/MS ions search (Matrix Science, ver2.6.0) against Nascent Peptide Database 2 CX. Search parameters used in this analysis were set as follows: no enzyme, fixed modifications to Lys acetylation, N-terminal acetylation and Cys carbamidomethylation with a variable modification set for Met oxidation, and fixing fragment monoisotopic mass with peptide mass tolerances of ±5 ppm and fragment mass tolerances of ±0.8 Da. The MS data are also searched against a decoy database of the original databases. The significance threshold was set at p <0.05 with a 5% false discovery rate (FDR). For each isolated pep-tRNA, a mass difference of the nascent peptide relative to its theoretical value (Δppm) < 5, peptide score > 30, and pepExpect < 0.05 were extracted from the MASCOT search. Assignment of each peptide to a specific E. coli ORF was carried out as follows. If there was only one candidate gene, the peptide is assigned. If there were multiple candidate genes, the list of candidates was narrowed down based on the following selection criteria: higher peptide score, preference of cognate pep-tRNA over non-cognate pep-tRNA, and higher TPM from the RNA-seq analysis. If there were still multiple candidate genes after this process, the peptide was not assigned to any genes and was not included in the list.

### Publication Abstract
In the early stage of bacterial translation, peptidyl-tRNAs frequently dissociate from the ribosome (pep-tRNA drop-off) and are recycled by peptidyl-tRNA hydrolase. Here, we establish a highly sensitive method for profiling of pep-tRNAs using mass spectrometry, and successfully detect a large number of nascent peptides from pep-tRNAs accumulated in Escherichia coli pth<sup>ts</sup> strain. Based on molecular mass analysis, we found about 20% of the peptides bear single amino-acid substitutions of the N-terminal sequences of E. coli ORFs. Detailed analysis of individual pep-tRNAs and reporter assay revealed that most of the substitutions take place at the C-terminal drop-off site and that the miscoded pep-tRNAs rarely participate in the next round of elongation but dissociate from the ribosome. These findings suggest that pep-tRNA drop-off is an active mechanism by which the ribosome rejects miscoded pep-tRNAs in the early elongation, thereby contributing to quality control of protein synthesis after peptide bond formation.

### Keywords
Translation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.
The university of Tokyo

### Submitter
Asuteka Nagao

### Lab Head
Dr Tsutomu Suzuki
Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.


