### Accession
PXD014608

### Title
PCT-assisted mass spectrometric quantification of gingival tissue reveals dynamics of protein synthesis during initiation and progression of inflammatory disease

### Description
Understanding the progression of periodontal destruction is at the forefront of periodontal research. Therefore, we aimed to capture the dynamics of gingival tissue proteome during initiation and progression of an experimental periodontitis developed by placing silk ligatures on the second molars of the specific pathogen-free C57BL/6 mice. Pressure cycling technology (PCT), a recently developed platform that uses ultra-high pressure to disrupt tissues, was utilized to achieve an efficient and reproducible protein extraction for quantitative shotgun proteomics. Lysis and protein digestion of gingival tissue was performed using PCT and analysed by Orbitrap Fusion. The proteomics data were quantitatively assessed with the Progenesis QI software.

### Sample Protocol
All gingival tissues were lysed and digested using a Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure BioSciences) at 33 °C. In brief, gingival tissue (typically 0.5±0.1 mg) was transferred into an individual PCT Micro Cape (Pressure BioSciences) loaded with 30 μl of lysis buffer (8M urea (Sigma), 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche). These samples were lysed with a 60–cycle barocyling process, each cycle consisting of 50 seconds at 45000 pounds per square inch (PSI) following with 10 seconds at ambient pressure. Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Simga) and iodoacetamide (Sigma) were added to a solution at final concentrations of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively. These solutions were incubated in the dark at thermomixer at 33 °C 1000rpm for 30 minutes, followed by diluting urea concentration in samples from 8M to 6 M with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. The diluted samples were first digested using Lys-C (Wako) at an enzyme-to-protein (protein estimated to be 10% of wet sample weight) at ratio 1:45 in the barocycler with a 45 –cycle barocyling process, each cycle consisting of 50 seconds at 20000 PSI following with 10 seconds at ambient pressure. Subsequently, the urea concentration of the lys-C samples was further diluted from 6M to 1.6M using 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Then, trypsin (Promega) was used with an enzyme to protein ratio at 1:45. Tryptic digestion was performed with a 90 –cycle barocyling process, each cycle consisting of 50 seconds at 20000 PSI following with 10 seconds at ambient pressure. After the digestion, the solution was acidified by trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.8 % w/v to stop the reaction. The peptide mixtures were desalted using reverse phase cartridges Finisterre SPE C18 (Wicom International AG) and dried with vacuum centrifuge. Samples were kept in -20 ̊C freezer. The desalted samples were reconstituted with 3% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid right before randomized loaded on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled with a EASY-Spray™ LC column (Thermo Scientific). A pooled sample from all groups was prepared as a reference for quantification purposes.

### Data Protocol
All raw files from LC-MS/MS were aligned with a pooled sample for peak picking and creating Mascot files (.mgf). These .mgf files were searched with Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) against a mouse database (contains 103119,566,351 sequences and 4954,431692,590 468 residues). The database, included isoforms and reversed sequence as a decoy, was downloaded from Uniprot in SepJuly 20164. Following search parameters were set for the search: precursor tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment ion tolerance: ± 0.6Da; enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 2; fixed medication: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification: deamidated (NQ), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M) and acetylation on protein N-termini. The resulting .dat file was imported into Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.2.1, Proteome software) to solve protein conflicts, with protein false discovery rate (proFDR) of 10%, minimal 1 peptide and peptide false discovery rate (pepFDR) of 5%. Then, the Scaffold spectrum report was imported back into Progenesis QI software V4.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics) for quantifying proteins. Only proteins (2 unique quantified peptides) with normalized abundance changes between two groups at minimal 2-fold and p<0.05 were considered as “regulated”.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the progression of periodontal tissue destruction is at the forefront of periodontal research. The authors aimed to capture the dynamics of gingival tissue proteome during the initiation and progression of experimental (ligature-induced) periodontitis in mice. Pressure cycling technology (PCT), a recently developed platform that uses ultra-high pressure to disrupt tissues, is utilized to achieve efficient and reproducible protein extraction from ultra-small amounts of gingival tissues in combination with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (MS). The MS data are processed using Progenesis QI and the regulated proteins are subjected to METACORE, STRING, and WebGestalt for functional enrichment analysis. A total of 1614 proteins with &#x2265;2 peptides are quantified with an estimated protein false discovery rate of 0.06%. Unsupervised clustering analysis shows that the gingival tissue protein abundance is mainly dependent on the periodontitis progression stage. Gene ontology enrichment analysis reveals an overrepresentation in innate immune regulation (e.g., neutrophil-mediated immunity and antimicrobial peptides), signal transduction (e.g., integrin signaling), and homeostasis processes (e.g., platelet activation and aggregation). In conclusion, a PCT-assisted label-free quantitative proteomics workflow that allowed cataloging the deepest gingival tissue proteome on a rapid timescale and provided novel mechanistic insights into host perturbation during periodontitis progression is applied.

### Keywords
Gingival inflammation, Pct, Pressure cycling technology, Periodontitis, Experimental periodontitis, Gingival tissue, Proteome, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Department of Dental Medicine (DENTMED), OF, Karolinska Institutet
postdoctoral researcher

### Submitter
Kai Bao

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Nagihan Bostanci
Department of Dental Medicine (DENTMED), OF, Karolinska Institutet


