### Accession
PXD032269

### Title
Lung cancer biomarkers in sputum samples using diaPASEF LC-MS proteomics

### Description
In this study, we aim to identify sputum proteins that can classify individuals with lung cancer, and to build a classification model with potential clinical utility based on the panel of proteins that can identify lung cancer patients and even different lung cancer subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
Sputum was collected from lung cancer patients and controls. The protein extract was obtained, precipitated and resuspenden in RapiGest, and 40 ug of total protein content was subjected to trypsin digestion in two steps (2 h and 15 h). Samples (200 ng protein digest on column) were analyzed on a timsTOF Pro by nLC-MS (45 min gradient), using a 250mm x 75 um id IonOpticks column and a diaPASEF acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
The directDIA workflow in Spectronaut (v15.5) was used for processing the diaPASEF LC-MS runs directly with no need to previous identify proteins and build a library from DDA runs. The UP000005640 human isoform reference database, together with a fasta with 112 common contaminant sequences, were used in Spectronaut module Pulsar. Deault factory settings were used except for calibration MS1 and MS2 tolerances in DIA analysis, that were set to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
The high mortality, the presence of an initial asymptomatic stage and the fact that diagnosis in early stages reduces mortality justify the implementation of screening programs in the populations at risk of lung cancer. It is imperative to develop less aggressive methods that can complement existing diagnosis technologies. In this study, we aimed to identify lung cancer protein biomarkers and pathways affected in sputum samples, using the recently developed diaPASEF mass spectrometry (MS) acquisition mode. The sputum proteome of lung cancer cases and controls was analyzed through nano-HPLC-MS using the diaPASEF mode. For functional analysis, the results from differential expression analysis were further analyzed in the STRING platform, and feature selection was performed using sparse partial least squares discriminant analysis (sPLS-DA). Our results showed an activation of inflammation, with an alteration of pathways and processes related to acute-phase, complement, and immune responses. The resulting sPLS-DA model separated between case and control groups with high levels of sensitivity and specificity. In conclusion, we showed how new-generation proteomics can be used to detect potential biomarkers in sputum samples, and ultimately to discriminate patients from controls and even to help to differentiate between different cancer subtypes.

### Keywords
Sputum; lung cancer; diapasef

### Affiliations
IMIBIC
Spanish National Research Council & INiBICA

### Submitter
Ignacio Ortea

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Ortea
Spanish National Research Council & INiBICA


