### Accession
PXD006125

### Title
ARPE19 proteome and phosphoproteome

### Description
One of the major biological functions accomplished by the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) is the clearance of shed photoreceptor outer segments (POS) through a multistep process referred to as phagocytosis. Phagocytosis helps maintain the viability of photoreceptors which otherwise could succumb to the high metabolic flux and photo-oxidative stress associated with visual processing. Regulatory mechanisms underlying phagocytosis in the RPE are not fully understood, although dysfunction of this process contributes to the pathogenesis of multiple human retinal degenerative disorders, including age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Here we present an integrated analysis of phagocytosing ARPE19 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Both unlabeled (light) and SILAC-labeled (heavy) ARPE-19 cells were grown in 15 cm dishes to achieve confluence in about 7 days under standard growth conditions. POS membranes from bovine retinas for phagocytosis induction were isolated as described previously, re-suspended in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0, containing 150 mM NaCl and 2.5% sucrose and kept at -80 °C prior to use. ARPE-19 cells were washed three times with ice-cold DPBS and challenged with POS at a density of ~10 POS/ARPE-19 cell for the periods indicated (15 min, 30 min, 60 min, 90 min and 120 min, n=3). Unchallenged APRE19 cells (denoted as 0 min) were used as controls for the downstream proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic data were analyzed and quantified with MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) using Andromeda as a search engine against the UniProt database restricted to Human (Homo sapiens, released at 2014 August) taxonomy concatenated with a decoy of reversed sequences for ARPE19 data. The precursor ion mass tolerance was 6 ppm and fragment mass deviation was 0.5 Da for MS/MS spectra. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation and a fixed modification of Cys carbamidomethylation. Trypsin/P (cleavage after Lys/Arg residues, including Lys/Arg-Pro residues) was set as the cleavage specificity with two missed cleavages. For peptide and protein identification, the cutoff false discovery rates (FDRs) were both set to 0.01 and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. Identification across different replicates and adjacent fractions was achieved by enabling a match between runs within a time window of 2 min. Default settings were used for all other parameters in MaxQuant. The protein group files (proteomic analysis) and phospho (STY) sites files (phosphoproteomic analysis) from ARPE19  experiments were imported into Perseus (version 1.5.2.4) for their respective analyses.

### Publication Abstract
One of the major biological functions of the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) is the clearance of shed photoreceptor outer segments (POS) through a multistep process resembling phagocytosis. RPE phagocytosis helps maintain the viability of photoreceptors that otherwise could succumb to the high metabolic flux and photo-oxidative stress associated with visual processing. The regulatory mechanisms underlying phagocytosis in the RPE are not fully understood, although dysfunction of this process contributes to the pathogenesis of multiple human retinal degenerative disorders, including age-related macular degeneration. Here, we present an integrated transcriptomic, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic analysis of phagocytosing RPE cells, utilizing three different experimental models: the human-derived RPE-like cell line ARPE-19, cultured murine primary RPE cells, and RPE samples from live mice. Our combined results indicated that early stages of phagocytosis in the RPE are mainly characterized by pronounced changes in the protein phosphorylation level. Global phosphoprotein enrichment analysis revealed involvement of PI3K/Akt, mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), and MEK/ERK pathways in the regulation of RPE phagocytosis, confirmed by immunoblot analyses and <i>in vitro</i> phagocytosis assays. Most strikingly, phagocytosis of POS by cultured RPE cells was almost completely blocked by pharmacological inhibition of phosphorylation of Akt. Our findings, along with those of previous studies, indicate that these phosphorylation events allow the RPE to integrate multiple signals instigated by shed POS at different stages of the phagocytic process.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteome, Arpe19

### Affiliations
university of ottawa
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada

### Submitter
kerwin chiang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada


