### Accession
PXD003427

### Title
Mitotic chromatin proteomics -  Proteomics analysis with a nano Random Forest approach reveals novel functional interactions regulated by SMC complexes on mitotic chromosomes

### Description
we used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) to compare the proteomes of mitotic chromosomes isolated from cell lines harboring conditional knockouts of members of the condensin (SMC2, CAP-H, CAP-D3), cohesin (Scc1/Rad21), and SMC5/6 (SMC5) complexes.

### Sample Protocol
DT40 cells were incubated with nocodazole for 13 h, resulting in a mitotic index of 70%–90%. Mitotic chromosomes were isolated using a polyamine-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffer system optimized for chicken DT40 cells. Five OD260 units were obtained from pooling the material of 4 independent preparations totaling 1.0 × 109 DT40 cells and solubilized in sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) sample buffer.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were separated into high- and low-molecular weight fractions by SDS-PAGE, in-gel digested using trypsin, and fractionated into 30 fractions each using strong cation-exchange chromatography (SCX). The individual SCX fractions were desalted using StageTips and analyzed by liquid chromatography-MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to high-performance liquid chromatography via a nanoelectrospray ion source. The 6 most intense ions of a full MS acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer were fragmented and analyzed in the linear-ion trap. The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.4.0.3 for generating peak lists, searching peptides, protein identification, and protein quantification against the UniProt database (release 2013_07).

### Publication Abstract
Packaging of DNA into condensed chromosomes during mitosis is essential for the faithful segregation of the genome into daughter nuclei. Although the structure and composition of mitotic chromosomes have been studied for over 30 years, these aspects are yet to be fully elucidated. Here, we used stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture to compare the proteomes of mitotic chromosomes isolated from cell lines harboring conditional knockouts of members of the condensin (SMC2, CAP-H, CAP-D3), cohesin (Scc1/Rad21), and SMC5/6 (SMC5) complexes. Our analysis revealed that these complexes associate with chromosomes independently of each other, with the SMC5/6 complex showing no significant dependence on any other chromosomal proteins during mitosis. To identify subtle relationships between chromosomal proteins, we employed a nano Random Forest (nanoRF) approach to detect protein complexes and the relationships between them. Our nanoRF results suggested that as few as 113 of 5058 detected chromosomal proteins are functionally linked to chromosome structure and segregation. Furthermore, nanoRF data revealed 23 proteins that were not previously suspected to have functional interactions with complexes playing important roles in mitosis. Subsequent small-interfering-RNA-based validation and localization tracking by green fluorescent protein-tagging highlighted novel candidates that might play significant roles in mitotic progression.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Mitosis, Smc

### Affiliations
Kochi university
kochi university

### Submitter
Shinya Ohta

### Lab Head
Dr SHINYA OHTA
kochi university


