### Accession
PXD035344

### Title
Exploiting trogocytosis by Immunopeptidomics to profile tumor associated antigens (TAA) actively targeted by tumor specific T cells in leukemia.

### Description
We employed PeptiCHIP Immunopeptidomics to profile tumor associated antigens (TAA) actively targeted by tumor specific T cells by exploiting the trogocytosis effect, whereby antigen presenting cells (APCs) nibble portions of the cognate T cell containing the TCR. The antigen presenting cells were then processed by Immunoaffinity purification by peptiCHIP to identify the relevant HLA-I peptides by LCMS on the Bruker Tims TOF Pro instrument.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer and the lysate cleared by centrifugation. Next, HLA-I complexes were immunoaffinity purified from the cleared lysate with anti-human HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C biotin-streptavidin bound to the micropillars of the biotinylated thiol-ene CHIP. Then, the HLA molecules were eluted at room temperature by adding acetic acid 7% in 50% MetOH. Eluted HLA peptides and the subunits of the HLA complexes were desalted using SepPac-C18 cartridges and finally the samples were dried using vacuum centrifugation. Each dry sample was dissolved in 10 μL of LCMS solvent A (0.1% formic acid) by dispensing/aspirating 20 times with the micropipette. The nanoElute LC system (Bruker) injected and loaded the 10 μl of sample directly onto the analytical column (Aurora C18, 25 cm long, 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm bead size, Ionopticks) constantly kept at 50℃ by a heating oven (PRSO-V2 oven, Sonation). After washing and loading sample at a constant pressure of 800 bar, the LC system started a 30 min gradient from 0 to 32% solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by increase to 95% B in 5 min, and finally a wash of 10 min at 95% B, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Online LC-MS was performed using a Tims TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) with the CaptiveSpray source, capillary voltage 1500V, dry gas flow of 3L/min, dry gas temperature at 180℃. MS data reduction was enabled. Mass Spectra peak detection maximum intensity was set to 10. Mobilogram peak detection intensity threshold was set to 5000. Mass range was 300-1100 m/z, and mobility range was 0.6-1.30 V.s/cm2. MS/MS was used with 3 PASEF (Parallel Accumulation – Serial Fragmentation) scans (300ms each) per cycle with a target intensity of 20000 and intensity threshold of 1000, considering charge states 0-5. Active exclusion was used with release after 0.4 min, reconsidering precursor if current intensity is >4 fold the previous intensity, and a mass width of 0.015 m/z and a 1/k0 width of 0.015 V.s/cm2. Isolation width was defined as 2.00 m/z for mass 700 m/z and 3.00 m/z for mass 800 m/z. Collision energy was set as 10.62 eV for 1/k0 0.60 V.s/cm2 and 51.46 eV for 1/k0 1.30 V.s/cm2. Precursor ions were selected using 1 MS repetition and a cycle overlap of 1 with the default intensities/repetitions schedule.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched by PEAKS Studio X+ (v10.5 build 16 October 2019) using a target-decoy strategy. The database used was the Uniprot Human reference proteome database (including isoforms, 98 997 entries, downloaded from uniprot.org on 20210129). A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for CID-ITMS2 were used. Enzyme was none, digest mode unspecific, and oxidation of methionine was used as variable modification, with max three oxidations per peptide. An FDR cutoff of 1% was employed at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hla-i, Human, Immunopeptidomics, Tcr, Taa, T cell, Leukemia, Peptichip, Mhc-i, Trogocytosis, Ligandomics

### Affiliations
Dep. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dep. of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


