### Accession
PXD025486

### Title
Mouse brain MALDI-imaging proteomics profiling

### Description
We developed and validated ‘HIT-MAP’ (High-resolution Informatics Toolbox in MALDI-MSI Proteomics), an open-source bioinformatics workflow using peptide mass fingerprint analysis and a dual scoring system to computationally assign peptide and protein annotations to high mass resolution MSI datasets, and generate customisable spatial distribution maps. The uploaded files are an example dataset for the HiTMaP proteomics search engine, designed for MALDI-imaging proteomics annotation. The example data files contain one bovine lens tissue section and one mouse brain tissue section. The ID folder contains the protein/peptide identification result for each tissue segment, and the summary folder contains the protein cluster images.

### Sample Protocol
For tissue imaging sample preparation, full sample preparation information for the bovine lens data is available in doi:10.1016/j.exer.2020.108134. Mouse brain was sectioned to 10 µm thickness. The section was washed sequentially as follows:  50mM ammonium formate wash for 1 min twice, dried, water wash for 1 min, dried, Carnoy’s solution wash for 2 min, dried and 95% ethanol wash for 2 min, dried. On-tissue digestion was performed as described previously21 using trypsin. After air-drying, the slide was coated with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA, 5 mg/mL) in 90%ACN/0.1% TFA for bovine lens sections or 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (15 mg/mL DHB) for mouse brain sections using a TM-sprayer (HTX Technologies, NC, USA). The sprayer settings were 700mm/min velocity, 2mm track spacing, 8 passes, 0.1ml/min flow rate. Following air drying, the sample was stored in a vacuum desiccator until MALDI-MSI analysis.Tissue imaging experiments were performed using a Bruker SolariX 15T FT-ICR mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) equipped with a dual MALDI/ESI source and a dynamically harmonized ParaCell (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA) and operated using ftmsControl v.2.2. The MALDI source employs a Smartbeam II Nd:YAG laser system (2 kHz, 355 nm). Data were collected in positive ion mode from m/z 500-3000 with a resolving power (m/Δm) of 80,000 at m/z 1046.542 for bovine lens data and m/z 500-3000 with a resolving power of 60,000 for mouse brain data A raster step size of 150μm was used for lens data and 50 µm was used for brain data.

### Data Protocol
The imzML files were exported from SCiLS software (Bruker) with blank region trimmed off. The spatial-awared data-driven segmentation was employed to cluster the pixels into several regions (n=4 for bovin lens sample, n=9 for mouse brain sample. The signal was smoothed using gaussian method, and peaks were picked via adaptive (from Cardinal R package) method. The resulting peaks were further aligned region-widely using 10 ppm tolerance. The Proteomics identification were done by HiTMaP package (available at https://github.com/MASHUOA/HiTMaP). The databases were downloaded from the uniport. For bovin lens dataset, an uniprot FASTA file, download date is 12th August 2019, was used for search. For the mouse brain dataset, an uniprot FASTA file, download date is 7th January 2021, was used for search. The search tolerance was set as 5 ppm for bovin lensdata, and 10 ppm for mouse brain data. No modification was selected. Up to one miscleavage was allowed. The peptide level FDR was set as 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Spatial proteomics has the potential to significantly advance our understanding of biology, physiology and medicine. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI) is a powerful tool in the spatial proteomics field, enabling direct detection and registration of protein abundance and distribution across tissues. MALDI-MSI preserves spatial distribution and histology allowing unbiased analysis of complex, heterogeneous tissues. However, MALDI-MSI faces the challenge of simultaneous peptide quantification and identification. To overcome this, we develop and validate HIT-MAP (High-resolution Informatics Toolbox in MALDI-MSI Proteomics), an open-source bioinformatics workflow using peptide mass fingerprint analysis and a dual scoring system to computationally assign peptide and protein annotations to high mass resolution MSI datasets and generate customisable spatial distribution maps. HIT-MAP will be a valuable resource for the spatial proteomics community for analysing newly generated and retrospective datasets, enabling robust peptide and protein annotation and visualisation in a wide array of normal and disease contexts.

### Keywords
Mouse brain, Proteomics, Maldi-imaging, Bovin lens

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology,  the University of Auckland
The University of Auckland

### Submitter
George Kwok

### Lab Head
Dr GUS GREY
Department of Physiology,  the University of Auckland


