### Accession
PXD040089

### Title
Selectivity profiling of SLC16A3/MCT4 inhibitor slCeMM1 using photoaffinity probe

### Description
To assess the selectivity of SLC16A3/MCT4 inhibitor slCeMM1, we derived diazirine-alkyne photoaffinity probe (slCeMM1-PAP). We next used HAP1 and MDAMB231 cell lines for MS experiment, comparing the enrichment of proteins by slCeMM1-PAP and conditions where slCeMM1-PAP was competed with slCeMM1 or it’s structurally related inactive control (S1_007). We found that among proteins enriched by slCeMM1-PAP, only SLC16A3 was competed by slCeMM1, but not S1_007, confirming the SLC16A3 engagement by slCeMM1 and suggesting overall good selectivity of slCeMM1.

### Sample Protocol
HAP1 or MDAMB231 were pre-treated with 5 µM slCeMM1 (Parental compound) or S1_007 (inactive control) for 30 min at 37°C. slCeMM1-PAP was added (final concentration 1 µM) and cells were further incubated for 5 min, followed by UV crosslinking. Pellets were lysed (30 min, 37°C in 1% SDS, 2 mM MGCl2, inhibitor cocktail and Benzonase). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and protein concentration was assessed for normalization purpose. 545 µg of protein per sample was used for CuACC conjugation of biotin-reporter (Biotin-N3, THPTA, Aminoguanidine hydrochloride, CuSO4 and L(+)-ascorbic acid sodium salt were added and the reaction was incubated for 1 h at 25 °C). Proteins were precipitated by ice-cold acetone. Obtained pellets were re-solubilized in 1% SDS and reduction and alkylation were performed by TCEP and IAA. Next, samples were then mixed with 100 μl Streptavidin Agarose and incubated at 25°C for 1 h. After removal of FT, beads were resuspended in PBS with 0.2% SDS and transferred to bio-spin columns for washing (16x 0.5 ml PBS with 8 M Urea and 4x PBS). Beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2M guanidine hydrochloride and 1 mM CaCl2, washed, and resuspended again in the same buffer in addition with 10 μl trypsin (ON, 37°C). The peptide containing supernatant was desalted by SPE clean-up (C18 disk). Samples were labelled with TMTpro 16plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific): 15 μl HEPES (pH 8.5), 4 μl of 0.01 mg/ μl TMTpro labels for 1 h at 25 °C; stopped by 1.5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine solution for 15 min at 25°C. Samples were then pooled and cleaned up again, and separated into 5 fractions by reversed phase C18. All fractions were dried in vacuum centrifuge and stored in -20°C. MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After switching to in-line flow, peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap nanoHPLC C18 analytical column (2.0 μm particle size, 75μm IDx500mm, catalogue number 164942, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column was heated to 50 °C. Running buffer A consisted of 0.4% FA in H2O and buffer B 0.4% FA in 10% H2O and 90% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated over a 151 min gradient at constant flow rate of 230 nL/min. As gradient an intal increase from 6% to 9% B within 1 min, followed by an increase from 9% to 30% buffer B over 146 min was used. Column cleaning was achieved by backflushing the column with a gradient from 30% to 65% solvent B within 8 min, 65% to 100% solvent B within of 1 minute and 100% solvent B for 6 minutes before equilibrating to 6% solvent B for 23 minutes. Electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 1.8 kV and a non-coated silica emitter was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a DDA and used a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) approach. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120’000 resolution (FTMS1) for MS2 and MS3 levels, with a AGC target set to “standard” allowing for an maximum injection time of the iontrap of 50 ms. Only monoisotopic precursors with a charge state of +2 to +6 were allowed. The dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s allowing a 10 ppm window. For precursor ion selection the ddMSn was set to 10 dependent scans. In ddMS2 analysis, spectra were obtained using one charge state per branch (from z=2 to z=5) in a dual-pressure linear ion trap (ITMS2). Peptides were fragemented by CID with a normalized energy of 35% and a quadrupole isoltuion window of 0.7 Da. The AGC target was set to 200% with a maximum time of 35 ms. During the ddMS3 analyses, precursors were isolated using SPS waveform and different MS1 isolation windows (1.3 m/z for z=2, 1.2 m/z for z=3, 0.8 m/z for z= 4 and 0.7 m/z for z = 5). The MS2 fragment ions were further garmented by HCD followed by an MS3 orbitrap analysis. The normalized HCD collision energy was set to 45% and the normalized AGC target was set to 300% with a maximum IT of 100ms. The MS3 resolution was set to 50 000 with a defined scanning range of 100 to 500 m/z. Xcalibur Version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 3.4.3072.18 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer v.2.4.1.15 platform, with a TMT16plex quantification method selected. As search engine the Sequest HT with the Percolator validation software was removed. Peptide and protein FDR was set to 1%. The search was performed with full tryptic digestion against the human proteome (Canonical, reviewed, 20 304 sequences downloaded on the 20201112) supplemented with the sequences of known lab contaminants and streptavidin, with a maximum of two allowable miscleavage sites. Methionine oxidation (+15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), as well as methionine loss (-131.040 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation with methionine loss (-89.030 Da) were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine residues and tandem mass tag (TMT) 16-plex labeling of peptide N termini and lysine residues (+304.207 Da) were set as fixed modifications. Data were searched with mass tolerances of +/- 10 ppm and +/- 0.6 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of larger then or equal to 1 and high peptide confidence assigned by Percolator. MS3 signal-to-noise (S/N) values of TMTpro reporter ions were used to calculate peptide/protein abundance values. Peptide spectrum matches with precursor isolation interference values of larger or equal to 70%, SPS mass matches lower or equal to 65%, and average TMTpro reporter ion S/N lower or equal to 10 were excluded from quantification. For TMT-quantification unique and razored peptides were considered, applying a correction of isotopic impurities. Data were normalized to total peptide abundance and scaled “to all average”. Protein ratios are directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances using an ANOVA hypothesis test.

### Publication Abstract
Despite being considered druggable and attractive therapeutic targets, most of the solute carrier (SLC) membrane transporters remain pharmacologically underexploited. One of the reasons for this is a lack of reliable chemical screening assays, made difficult by functional redundancies among SLCs. In this study we leveraged synthetic lethality between the lactate transporters SLC16A1 and SLC16A3 in a screening strategy that we call paralog-dependent isogenic cell assay (PARADISO). The system involves five isogenic cell lines, each dependent on various paralog genes for survival/fitness, arranged in a screening cascade tuned for the identification of SLC16A3 inhibitors. We screened a diversity-oriented library of &#x223c;90,000 compounds and further developed our hits into slCeMM1, a paralog-selective and potent SLC16A3 inhibitor. By implementing chemoproteomics, we showed that slCeMM1 is selective also at the proteome-wide level, thus fulfilling an important criterion for chemical probes. This study represents a framework for the development of specific cell-based drug discovery assays.

### Keywords
Photoaffinity probe; ap-ms; tmt; chemoproteomics

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Fabian Frommelt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Giulio Superti-Furga
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria


