### Accession
PXD048455

### Title
Establishment and Characterization of Turtle Liver Organoids Provides a Potential Model to Decode their Unique Adaptations

### Description
Raw proteomic dataset from liver-derived organoids associated with Zdyrski et al. 2024 Communications Biology article (https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-024-05818-1) entitled "Establishment and Characterization of Turtle Liver Organoids Provides a Potential Model to Decode their Unique Adaptations". Files 05032023_2.raw, 05032023_2_f2.raw, 05032023_2_f3.raw, ..... , 05032023_5_r3.raw correspond to samples F4-F15 from Chrysemys picta turtles, as described in the text.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed to extract proteins using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure of the FASP protein extraction kit (ab270519, Abcam) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, protein extract was mixed with 200 µL of urea sample solution in a spin filter, centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min, and the flow-through was discarded. Next, 10 µL of iodoacetamide solution (10x) and urea sample solution at a 1:9 ratio was added to the mixture, which was vortexed for 1 min and then incubated for 20 min in the dark without mixing. The sample was then centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes. Then, 100 µL of urea sample solution were added to the spin filter followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes. Digestion solution (enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:100) was added and vortexed for 1 min and incubated overnight at 37°C. Next, 50 µM of ammonium bicarbonate solution was added to the spin filter followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes. After this, 500 µM sodium chloride solution was added to the spin filter followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes. The filtrate was then acidified with 1 mL of 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA). The extract was then fractionated by using the C18 cartridge solid phase extraction (SPE) for MS analysis. Briefly, the cartridge was conditioned by passing conditioning solution (90/10 MeOH/water with 0.1% TFA v/v/v) through the packing bed. Then, the cartridge was equilibrated by passing equilibration/load solution (0.1% TFA in water v/v) though the packing bed. This was followed by slowly loading the sample into the cartridge packing and passing an additional 1 mL of equilibration/load solution into the cartridge packing. The sample was then desalted by passing desalting solution (5% MeOH/water with 0.1% TFA v/v/v) through the packing bed. The sample was eluted by passing 1 mL of elution solution (50/50 Acetonitrile/water with 0.1% TFA v/v/v) through the packing bed in a new centrifuge tube after allowing complete flow-through of the sample. Lastly, the samples were dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at −80°C. 

### Data Protocol
After proteomic analysis, all data were quantified using the label-free quantitation node of Precursor Ions Quantifier through the Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland). 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Turtle, Liver, Organoid

### Affiliations
Iowa State University

### Submitter
Nicole Valenzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Valenzuela
Iowa State University


