### Accession
PXD041344

### Title
The CdbS PilZ domain protein, together with two PilZ-DnaK proteins, perturbs chromosome organization and accelerates cell death during heat stress in Myxococcus xanthus

### Description
C-di-GMP is a bacterial second messenger that regulates diverse processes in response to environmental or cellular cues. The nucleoid-associated protein (NAP) CdbA in Myxococcus xanthus binds DNA and c-di-GMP in a mutually exclusive manner in vitro. CdbA is essential for viability, and CdbA depletion causes defects in chromosome organization, leading to a block in cell division and, ultimately, cell death. Most NAPs are not essential; therefore, to explore the paradoxical cdbA essentiality, we isolated suppressor mutations that restored cell viability without CdbA. Most mutations mapped to cdbS, which encodes a stand-alone c-di-GMP binding PilZ domain protein, and caused loss-of-function of cdbS. Cells lacking CdbA and CdbS or only CdbS were fully viable and had no defects in chromosome organization. CdbA depletion caused post-transcriptional upregulation of CdbS accumulation, and this CdbS over-accumulation was required and sufficient to disrupt chromosome organization and, ultimately, cause cell death. CdbA depletion also caused increased accumulation of CsdK1 and CsdK2, two unusual PilZ-DnaK chaperones. During CdbA depletion, CsdK1 and CsdK2, in turn, stabilized CdbS, thereby enabling its increased accumulation and toxicity. CdbS accumulation also increased in response to heat stress at 37°C in a CsdK1- and CsdK2-dependent manner, possibly also involving an increased cellular c-di-GMP concentration, causing disrupted chromosome organization and accelerated cell death. Thus, increased CdbS accumulation caused by either CdbA depletion or heat stress results in disrupted chromosome organization and cell death. Collectively, our results suggest that the CdbA/CsdK1/CsdK2/CdbS system represents a new system for regulated cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially growing cultures were harvested by centrifugation of 2,500 g at 20°C for 10min. The pellet was resuspended in 10ml HNN buffer (50mM HEPES pH 7.2, 150mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA, cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics GmbH), 0.5% (v/v) NP40) and sonicated for 1min with a UP200St sonifier (60% pulse, 50% amplitude; Hielscher) on ice. To each sample, 10µl anti-FLAG® M2 magnetic beads (Merck) were added. Next, the samples were placed in an overhead rotor for 90min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed with HNN buffer followed by four times washing with 100mM ammoniumbicarbonate to remove all detergent and protease inhibitors. Further sample processing was carried out as described in detail previously (Gómez-Santos et al., 2019). Briefly, enriched proteins were eluted by adding 1µg trypsin (Promega) and incubation for 30min at 30°C, and further incubated overnight in the presence of 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphin (TCEP). Following, acetylation using 10mM iodoacetamide for 30min at 25°C in the dark, the peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of the peptide samples were carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a C18 reverse phase HPLC column (75μm × 42cm; 2.4 µm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were loaded onto a PepMap 100 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and eluted by a linear ACN gradient from 6-35% solvent B over 30min (solvent A: 0.15% formic acid; solvent B: 99.85% ACN in 0.15% formic acid) with 300nl/min flow rate. The spray voltage was set to 2.5kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 300°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 375-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200) after accumulation a maximum of 3×106 ions in the Orbitrap. Up to 10 most intense ions were subjected to fragmentation using high collision dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy. Fragment spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution. The ion accumulation time was set to 50ms for both MS survey and MS/MS scans. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30sec.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification of the samples was performed using MaxQuant (Version 1.6.10.43) (Cox and Mann, 2008). For Andromeda database searches implemented in the MaxQuant environment, a M. xanthus Uniprot protein databases (downloaded in 10/2016) was used. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) as variable modification. MaxQuant was operated in default settings without the “Match-between-run” options. For protein quantification, iBAQ values (intensity-based absolute quantification) were calculated within MaxQuant (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011). Calculated iBAQ values were normalized to iBAQ-protein sum of all detected proteins. Student t-test was performed within Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) with the following parameters (FDR: 0.01, s0: 0.5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myxococcus xanthus

### Affiliations
MPI Marburg
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Insitute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


