### Accession
PXD015470

### Title
Calretinin is a novel candidate marker for adverse ovarian effects of early life exposure to mixtures of endocrine disruptors in the rat

### Description
The effect of prenatal and lactational exposure to 4 mixtures of endocrine-didsrupting compounds (Antiandrogen mix, AA; Estrogenic mix, E; Paracetamol, P, and Totalmix, TM) on the early postnatal ovary.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins extracted using Qiagen's all-prep DNA-RNA-protein kit. Proteins were resuspended in minimul amount of buffer containing urea (0.414g/ml), thiourea (0.152g/ml),CHAPS detergent (4% w/v), and DTT(0.003g/ml). Ten micrograms of fetal plasma proteins were diluted to a final volume of 100 µL in 50 mM NH4HCO3 (BioUltra grade, Sigma Aldrich). Proteins were digested in solution according to the PRIME-XS protocol (http://www.primexs.eu/protocols/Public-Documents/04%2D%2D-Protocols/PRIME-XS-Protocol-NPC-In-Solution-Digestion.pdf/). Briefly, proteins were reduced in 2 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, >?99%) for 25 min at 60 °C and S-xalkylated in 4 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, >?99%) for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark, then digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Southampton, UK, cat.no. V5111) at a 1:10 ratio of trypsin:protein overnight at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by freezing at -?80 °C. Samples were then thawed, dried by vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac Plus SC110A, Savant), and dissolved in 10 µL 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The equivalent of 2 µg of peptides (assuming no losses) were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The LC-MS system included a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-LC configured for pre-concentration onto a nano-column, coupled to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-Spray nano-ESI source (Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were injected onto a C18 PepMap 100 pre-column (300 µm i.d. × 5 mm) in loading pump solvent (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min for 5 min. The pre-column was then reverse-flushed to the analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18; 50 µm i.d. × 15 cm; Nano pump solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, Nano pump solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 0.3 µL/min using the nano-pump. Peptides were separated using a gradient of acetonitrile (LC gradient: 3–10% solvent B in 5 min, 10–40% solvent B in 50 min, 40–80% solvent B in 5 min, hold at 80% solvent B for 8 min, 80–3% solvent B in 1 min, hold at 3% solvent B for 15 min) while MS/MS data were acquired by the Q Exactive in data-dependent mode (Top10 method). Parameters for the full scan/data-dependent MS2 (Top10) method were as follows: full scan range 375–1750 m/z, resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms; MS2 scan resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, maximum IT 100 ms, loop count 10, isolation window 1.6 m/z, NCE 26, underfill ratio 4%, charge states 2–5 included, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, and dynamic exclusion 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant runs against the rat proteome retrieved from Uniprot. Data were normalised usin MaxLFQ. Min peptides of 1 were used for protein identification, quantification and normalisation.4 Maxquant runs were performed: control vs TMix, control vs AAmix, control vs Emix, and control vs paracetamol

### Publication Abstract
Disruption of sensitive stages of ovary development during fetal and perinatal life can have severe and life-long consequences for a woman's reproductive life. Exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals may affect ovarian development, leading to subsequent reproductive disorders. Here, we investigated the effect of early life exposure to defined mixtures of human-relevant endocrine disrupting chemicals on the rat ovary. We aimed to identify molecular events involved in pathogenesis of ovarian dysgenesis syndrome that have potential for future adverse outcome pathway development. We therefore focused on the ovarian proteome. Rats were exposed to a mixture of phthalates, pesticides, UV-filters, bisphenol A, butyl-paraben, and paracetamol during gestation and lactation. The chemicals were tested together or in subgroups of chemicals with anti-androgenic or estrogenic potentials at doses 450-times human exposure. Paracetamol was tested separately, at a dose of 360&#xa0;mg/kg. Using shotgun proteomics on ovaries from pup day 17 offspring, we observed exposure effects on the proteomes. Nine proteins were affected in more than one exposure group and of these, we conclude that calretinin is a potential key event biomarker of early endocrine disruption in the ovary.

### Keywords
Ovary, Rat, Proteomics, Prenatal edc exposure

### Affiliations
The University of Aberdeen
University of Aberdeen

### Submitter
Panagiotis Filis

### Lab Head
Dr Panagiotis Filis
University of Aberdeen


