### Accession
PXD020632

### Title
Identification of bacteriolytic lysosomal proteins in Dictyostelium discoideum by LC-MSMS

### Description
In order to identify new D. discoideum proteins involved in the intracellular destruction of ingested bacteria, the amoeba cell lysate was fractionated, and the obtained fractions were screened for their bacteriolytic activity. The few fractions presenting a bacteriolytic activity were analyzed by mass spectrometry in order to identify the microbicidal effectors.

### Sample Protocol
Purification procedures: Two successive purification procedures were performed in this study: the first consisted of pelleting, washing and lysing 109 D. discoideum cells in lysis buffer at pH3 (50 mM of sodium phosphate buffer, pH3, 0.5% Triton X‐100) to a final volume of 1.7 mL. Nucleus were pelleted and the supernatant was recovered and mix with 200 µL of anion exchange resin (Q Sepharose Fast Flow; Sigma #17-0510-10) pre-washed in lysis buffer at pH3. After 1 hour of incubation at 4°C on a wheel, the anionic resin was recovered and washed 5 times with 1 mL of lysis buffer at pH3. Negatively charged proteins attached to the resin were then eluted with 500 µL of NaP buffer at pH3 with increasing concentration of NaCl from 0.05 to 0.5 M of NaCl with an increment of 50 mM. Fractions 0.10, 0.25 and 0.40 M were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Fractions presenting the highest bacteriolytic activity were subjected to a second purification process: these fractions (e.g. fractions 0.15, 0.20, 0.25 and 0.30 M of NaCl) were mixed, buffered at pH7 and loaded on a size-exclusion chromatographic (SEC) column (Superdex 200 10/300 GL; Sigma #17-5175-01). The column was equilibrated with sodium phosphate buffer at pH7 and eluted with the same buffer at a rate of 18 mL/h and 0.5 mL by fraction. Fractions 13.5, 15 and 16.5 mL were analyzed by mass spectrometry.  Sample preparation: Protein samples were concentrated and purified by 1D gel electrophoresis (SDS- PAGE; stacking gel method) using a home-made 4% bis-acrylamide stacking gel and a 12% bis- acrylamide resolving gel. Briefly, samples were loaded and migration was performed at 70 V until the proteins enter the resolving gel from around 5mm. Protein gel was then stained with coomassie blue G-250. Bands of interest were cut and in-gel digested as follow. Gel pieces were destained by incubation in 200 μl of 50% acetonitrile (AcN) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were reduced by incubation of gel pieces for 30 min. at 50°C in 100 μl of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM AB. DTT solution was then replaced by 100 μl of 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM AB and protein were alkylated by incubation of the gel pieces for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Gel pieces were then washed for 15 min with 100 μl of 50mM AB and for 15 min with 100 μl of 100% AcN. Gel pieces were then air dried for 15 min at room temperature. Dried pieces of gel were rehydrated for 45 min at 4°C in 40 μl of a solution of 50 mM AB containing trypsin at 10 ng/μl and 0.01% of Protease Max (PM) Surfactant trypsin enhancer (Promega). Subsequently, 10 μl of 0.01% of PM was added before incubating the samples for 1 hours at 50°C. Supernatant was transferred to a new polypropylene tube and an additional peptide extraction was performed with 50 μl of 20% TFA for 15 min at room temperature with occasional shaking. Extractions were pooled, completely dried under speed vacuum and stored at -20°C.  ESI-LC-MSMS: Samples were diluted in 15 μl of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 4 μl were injected on column. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm, C18, 2μm, 100 Å Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 90 min using a gradient of H2O/0.1 % Formic acid (solvent A) and CH3CN/0.1 % Formic acid (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0-5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B for 60 min, then to 10 % A and 90 % B for 10 min and finally stay 15 min at 10 % A and 90 % B. Flow rate was of 250 nL/min for a total run time of 90 min. For MS survey scans, the resolution was set to 70’000 and the ion population was set to 3 × 106 with an m/z window from 400 to 2000. For data dependant analysis, up to fifteen precursor ions were isolated and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation HCD at 27% NCE. For MS/MS detection, the resolution was set to 17’500, the ion population was set to 1 × 105 with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z units.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (MGF file format) were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched against the Dictyostelium discoideum Reference Database (Uniprot, release 2018-10, 12746 entries) combined with an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. The Mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.8.4 (Proteome Software). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 12.0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.1 % by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 60.0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0 % and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded 01 oct. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysosomal proteins, Dictyostelium, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Centre Médical Universitaire Dpt of Cell Physiology and Metabolism 1 rue Michel Servet CH 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine, Dpt of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Centre Médical Universitaire, 1 rue Michel Servet, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland

### Submitter
Cyril Guilhen

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Cosson
Centre Médical Universitaire Dpt of Cell Physiology and Metabolism 1 rue Michel Servet CH 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland


