### Accession
PXD013399

### Title
Deciphering the protein dynamics and molecular determinants of iPSC-derived neurons.

### Description
Neuronal development is a multistep process with different regulatory programs that shapes neurons to form dendrites, axons and synapses. To date, knowledge on neuronal development is largely based on murine data and largely restricted to the genomic and transcriptomic level. Advances in stem cell differentiation now enable the study of human neuronal development, and here we provide a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic signature, at high temporal resolution, of human stem cell-derived neurons. To reveal proteomic changes during neuronal development we make use of two different differentiation approaches, leading to glutamatergic induced neurons (iN) or small molecule-derived patterned motor neurons. Our analysis revealed key proteins that show significant expression changes (FDR <0.001) during neuronal differentiation. We overlay our proteomics data with available transcriptomic data during neuronal differentiation and show distinct, datatype-specific, signatures. Overall, we provide a rich resource of information on proteins associated with human neuronal development, and moreover, highlight several signaling pathways involved, such as Wnt and Notch.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected at indicated time points for MS analysis as follows. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and one complete mini protease inhibitor (Roche). The lysate was sonicated on ice using Bioruptor-Diagenode and centrifuged at 2500 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatant with the proteins was reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 8 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in darkness. The lysate was enzymatically pre-digested with Lys-C (1:75; Wako) incubation for 4 h at 37 °C. The mixture was fourfold diluted with ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (1:100; Promega) at 37 °C. The sample was quenched by acidification with formic acid (FA, final concentration 10%) and peptides were desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters). Peptides were dried in vacuum and resuspended in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 5 mg/mL. Aliquots of ~ 100 µg of each sample were chemically labeled with TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resuspended in 80 µl resuspension buffer containing 50 mM HEPES buffer and 12.5 % acetonitrile (ACN, pH 8.5). TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 80 µl anhydrous ACN of which 20 µl was added to the peptides. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hour, the reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine in HEPES buffer for 15 min at room temperature. The TMT-labeled samples were pooled at equal protein ratios followed by vacuum centrifuge to near dryness and desalting using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges.  Off-line basic pH fractionation We fractionated and pooled samples using basic pH Reverse Phase HPLC. Samples were solubilized in buffer A (5% ACN, 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) and subjected to a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 45% ACN in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at flow rate of 0.8 ml/min. We used an Agilent 1100 pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector and Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm i.d., and 20 cm in length). The peptide mixture was fractionated into 96 fractions and consolidated into 24. Samples were acidified with 10% formic acid and vacuum-dried followed by redissolving with 5% formic acid/5% ACN for LC-MS/MS processing.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1290 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies). Peptides were separated on a double frit trap column of 20 mm x 100 µm inner diameter (ReproSil C18, Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). This was followed by a 40 cm x 50 µm inner diameter analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Both columns were packed in-house. Trapping was done at 5 µl/min in 0.1 M acetic acid in H2O for 10 min and the analytical separation was done at 100 nl/min for 2 h by increasing the concentration of 0.1 M acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile (v/v). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS2 for patterned MNs or MS and MS3 for iN cells. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap from m/z 350-1500 with a resolution of 60,000 FHMW, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. For the MS2 analysis, the ten most intense precursors at a threshold above 5,000 were selected with an isolation window of 1.2 Th after accumulation to a target value of 30,000 (maximum injection time was 115 ms). Fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with collision energy of 38% and activation time of 0.1 ms. Fragment ion analysis was performed on Orbitrap with resolution of 60,000 FHMW and a low mass cut-off setting of 120 Th. For the MS3 analysis, first MS2 analysis was performed with CID fragmentation on top 10 most intense ions with AGC target of 10 000 and isolation window of 0.7 Th, followed by MS3 scan for each MS2 scan with HCD fragmentation with 35% collision energy. The MS isolation window was set to 2 m/z and AGC target to 100,000 and maximum injection time was 120 ms.  Data processing Mass spectra were processed using Proteome Discover (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Peak list was searched using Swissprot database (version 2014_08) with the search engine Mascot (version 2.3, Matrix Science). The following parameters were used. The enzyme was specified as trypsin and allowed up to two missed cleavages. Taxonomy was chosen for Homo sapiens and precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm with 0.05 Da fragment mass tolerance for MS2 analysis or 0.6 Da for MS3 analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini and oxidation of methionine residues were set as dynamic modifications, while carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as static modification. For the reporter ion quantification, integration tolerance was set to 20 ppm with the most confident centroid method. Results were filtered with a Mascot score of at least 20 and Percolator was used to adjust the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) to a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1%. Finally, peptides lower than 6 amino-acid residues were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal development is a complex multistep process that shapes neurons by progressing though several typical stages, including axon outgrowth, dendrite formation, and synaptogenesis. Knowledge of the mechanisms of neuronal development is mostly derived from the study of animal models. Advances in stem cell technology now enable us to generate neurons from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Here we provide a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic signature of human iPSC-derived neurons, i.e., iPSC-derived induced glutamatergic neurons and iPSC-derived motor neurons, throughout neuronal differentiation. Tandem mass tag 10-plex labeling was carried out to perform proteomic profiling of cells at different time points. Our analysis reveals significant expression changes (FDR &lt; 0.001) of several key proteins during the differentiation process, e.g., proteins involved in the Wnt and Notch signaling pathways. Overall, our data provide a rich resource of information on protein expression during human iPSC neuron differentiation.

### Keywords
Ipsc; human; neuron differentiation; quantitative mass spectrometry; tmt-10plex

### Affiliations
S
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.

### Submitter
Suzy Varderidou

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.


