### Accession
PXD014864

### Title
Deciphering Differential Gut Bacterial Drug Metabolism with Activity-Based Protein Profiling

### Description
Gut bacterial β-glucuronidases (GUS) promote the toxic side effects of therapeutics by reactivating drugs from their inactive glucuronide conjugates. It is increasingly clear that the interindividual variability of bacterial GUS-producing species in the gut microbiota contributes to differential drug responses. Indeed, the anticancer drug irinotecan exhibits variable clinical toxicity outcomes that have been linked to interindividual differences in the composition of the gut microbiota. However, identification of the specific GUS enzymes responsible for drug metabolism in the context of the complexity of the human fecal microbiota has not been achieved. Here we pinpoint the specific bacterial GUS enzymes that reactivate SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan, from complex human fecal microbiota samples with activity-based protein profiling (ABPP). We identify and quantify gut bacterial GUS enzymes from human feces with ABPP-enabled proteomics and then integrate this information with ex vivo kinetics to reveal the specific GUS enzymes responsible for the reactivation of SN-38. The same ABPP approach also reveals the molecular basis for differential gut bacterial GUS inhibition between human fecal samples. Taken together, this work provides an unprecedented pipeline to identify the specific bacterial GUS enzymes responsible for drug-induced GI toxicity from the complexity of human feces, which may serve as highly precise biomarkers of clinical outcomes for irinotecan and other therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Human fecal samples were purchased from a commercial vendor, BioIVT. Approximately 5 g of thawed fecal material in a solution containing 25 mL of cold extraction buffer (pH 6.5, 25 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaCl with Roche cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail) and 500 mg of autoclaved garner beads was vortexed vigorously to break up dense, fibrous material. The suspended sample was centrifuged at low speed (300xg, 5 min., 4°C) to separate out any insoluble fecal material. After decanting the microbial supernatant, an additional 25 mL of cold extraction buffer was added to the remaining fibrous material and the extraction process was repeated. The combined microbial supernatant (~40-45 mL) was centrifuged at low speed to remove any remaining insoluble debris. This process was repeated again with the decanted microbial supernatant. The microbial supernatant was ultrasonicated for 1.5 min. while on ice. The lysate was mixed by inversion and the sonication repeated. The lysed cells were centrifuged at high speed (17,000xg, 20 min., 4°C) to remove cellular debris. The decanted lysate was concentrated, and metabolites were removed by buffer exchanging with fresh extraction buffer. The concentration of total protein in the fecal extract was calculated using a standard Bradford Assay protocol. The human fecal extract was aliquoted and snap frozen using liquid nitrogen. The aliquots were stored at -80°C until further use.  Proteomics. All buffers used for GUS enrichment from fecal extracts contain Roche cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail. Human fecal extracts (3.5 mg) were incubated at 37°C for 60 min. with either 10 µM biotin-ABP (3) or 10 µM biotin only in 500 uL (pH 6.5, 25 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaCl, and 1% DMSO, final). Reactions were quenched by adding 125 µL 10% SDS and heating at 95°C for 5 min. After cooling on ice, the samples were washed 3 times with 0.05% SDS buffer (pH 6.5, 25 mM HEPES, and 25 mM NaCl) using 1.5 mL Amicon 10K cutoff spin concentrators to remove unreacted probe. The samples were centrifuged at (14,000xg, 5 min., 4°C). The volume in each sample was adjusted to 1 mL using 0.05% SDS buffer (pH 6.5, 25 mM HEPES, and 25 mM NaCl). To each sample, 15 µL streptavidin sepharose beads (GE) were added and incubated at room temperature for 60 min. The beads were subsequently washed with 300 µL 0.1% SDS buffer (pH 6.5, 25 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaCl), 3 times with 300 µL buffer (pH 6.5, 25 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaCl), and 3 times with 300 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3. The samples were centrifuged at (400xg, 2 min., 4°C) between wash steps. The beads in each sample were re-suspended in 100 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 and stored at -20°C until further analysis. Proteins were eluted using 0.5% RapiGest (Waters) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at 65°C for 30 min. Proteins were alkylated using 2-chloroacetamide for 20 min. at room temperature in the dark. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (200xg, 2 min., room temperature). The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and trypsinized overnight for 18 hr. at 37°C with 2.5 μg of trypsin. RapiGest surfactant was quenched using 250 mM HCl for 45 min. at 37°C. Samples were then concentrated to 100 μL using a speedvac followed by C18 desalting columns in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocols (ThermoScientific; 89870). Samples were then concentrated using a speedvac and resolubilized in 100 μL of LC-Optima MS grade water. Ethyl acetate extraction followed by speedvac was performed to remove residual detergents. Peptides were quantified and normalized using the Pierce QFP assay in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. Reverse-phase liquid chromatography on an nanoACQUITY ultraperformance liquid chromatography was used to separate trypsinized peptides. Trapping and separation of peptides were performed in a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100; 3-m particle size and 100-Å pore size), and a 25-cm EASYspray analytical column (75-m inside diameter, 2.0-m C18 particle size, and 100-Å pore size) at 300 nL/min and 35°C, respectively. Analysis of a 60-min. gradient of 2% to 25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion source was operated at 2.4kV. The ion transfer tube was set to 300°C. Full MS scans (350-2000 m/z) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 and 1e6 AGC target.  The MS2 spectra were collected using a 1.6 m/z isolation width and were analyzed either by the Orbitrap or the ion trap based on peak charge and intensity using a 3s TopSpeed CHOPIN method. Orbitrap MS2 scans were acquired at 7500 resolution, with a 5e4 AGC, and 22 ms max injection time after HCD fragmentation with a normalized energy of 30%. Rapid linear ion trap MS2 scans were acquired using an 4e3 AGC, 250 ms maximum injection time after CID 30 fragmentation. Precursors were chosen based on intensity thresholds (>1e3) from the full scan as well as on charge states (2-7) with a 30-s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC/MS data processing. Peptides and protein groups were identified by an iterative database strategy within MetaLab (version 1.1.1), which used MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3). The database search was performed using the integrated reference catalog of the human gut microbiome (IGC) database combined with the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human sequence database (downloaded 1 Feb. 2017) with a total of 9,920,788 sequences. Search parameters were: static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, specific trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, match between runs, and label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum ratio count of 2. Protein identifications were filtered for a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and potential contaminants and decoys were removed.

### Publication Abstract
It is increasingly clear that interindividual variability in human gut microbial composition contributes to differential drug responses. For example, gastrointestinal (GI) toxicity is not observed in all patients treated with the anticancer drug irinotecan, and it has been suggested that this variability is a result of differences in the types and levels of gut bacterial &#x3b2;-glucuronidases (GUSs). GUS enzymes promote drug toxicity by hydrolyzing the inactive drug-glucuronide conjugate back to the active drug, which damages the GI epithelium. Proteomics-based identification of the exact GUS enzymes responsible for drug reactivation from the complexity of the human microbiota has not been accomplished, however. Here, we discover the specific bacterial GUS enzymes that generate SN-38, the active and toxic metabolite of irinotecan, from human fecal samples using a unique activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) platform. We identify and quantify gut bacterial GUS enzymes from human feces with an ABPP-enabled proteomics pipeline and then integrate this information with <i>ex vivo</i> kinetics to pinpoint the specific GUS enzymes responsible for SN-38 reactivation. Furthermore, the same approach also reveals the molecular basis for differential gut bacterial GUS inhibition observed between human fecal samples. Taken together, this work provides an unprecedented technical and bioinformatics pipeline to discover the microbial enzymes responsible for specific reactions from the complexity of human feces. Identifying such microbial enzymes may lead to precision biomarkers and novel drug targets to advance the promise of personalized medicine.

### Keywords
Drug metabolism, Activity-based protein profiling, Gut microbiome

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Department of Chemistry Center for Gastrointestinal Biology and Disease Integrated Program for Biological and Genome Sciences University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Redinbo
Department of Chemistry Center for Gastrointestinal Biology and Disease Integrated Program for Biological and Genome Sciences University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


