### Accession
PXD017826

### Title
PBRM1 deficiency is synthetic lethal with PARP inhibitors in human cancers

### Description
Polybromo-1 (PBRM1), which encodes a specific subunit of the pBAF chromatin remodeling complex, is inactivated in multiple malignancies including 50% of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. At present, a therapeutic strategy that selectively targets PBRM1 defects does not exist. PBRM1 is involved in multiple cellular processes including transcription, replication and DNA repair. Using high-throughput screens and multiple isogenic and non-isogenic models, we found that PBRM1 defects cause synthetic lethality with several clinical PARP inhibitors, both in vitro and in vivo. This effect was enhanced using combinations with either small molecule ATR or BET inhibitors. Mechanistically, PBRM1 defects caused increased replication stress, R-loop formation and genomic instability that was exacerbated by PARP inhibitors. We also found that PARP and ATR inhibitors activate the cGAS-STING innate immunity pathway in PBRM1-deficient but not in PBRM1-proficient cells. These data provide the pre-clinical rationale for assessing PARP inhibitors as a monotherapy or in combination with ATR inhibitors or immune checkpoint inhibitors, in patients with PBRM1-deficient cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in 150 μL lysis buffer of 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% isopropanol, 50mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442) on ice with pulsed probe sonication for 15 sec followed by boiling at 90 °C for 5 min and re-sonication for 5 sec. Protein concentration was measured with the Coomassie Plus Bradford Protein Assay (Pierce) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein aliquots of 100 μg were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min. Proteins were finally digested with trypsin (Pierce) at 75 ng/μL O/N. The peptides were labelled with the TMT-11plex reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were fractionated with the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system at high-pH. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. The TMT labelled peptide mixture was fractionated using a multi-step gradient elution at 0.2 mL/min. The separation method was: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 30 sec and vacuum dried. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide fractions were reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and 10 μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate. The samples were then analysed with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) C18 capillary column at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient method at flow rate 300 nL/min was: for 90 min gradient from 5%-38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 10% B. Precursor ions within 375-1,500 m/z were selected at mass resolution of 120 k in top speed mode (3 sec cycle) and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th, collision energy 35% and max IT 50 ms. MS3 spectra were obtained with further HCD fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). Collision energy was applied at 65% with 105 ms IT and 50 k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were submitted to SequestHT for database search in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) using reviewed UniProt human protein entries. The precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for fully tryptic peptides. TMT6plex at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were selected as static modifications. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered for q-value<0.01 based on decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT 11plex quantification method with an integration window of 15 ppm at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parp inhibitors, Msms, Tmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer research
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer research


