### Accession
PXD022401

### Title
Nicotiana benthamiana AP-MS for TSWV NSs

### Description
Despite the advancement of structural and functional research on TSWV NSs, its protein-interacting targets in host plants are still largely unknown. In this research, we investigated the NSs-interacting proteins in Nicotiana benthamiana via affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP-MS) analysis.

### Sample Protocol
NSs-GFP was transiently expressed in N. benthamiana leaves by agroinfiltration. Leave samples were collected two days after infiltration and the expression of NSs-GFP was verified by Western blot. AP-MS was carried out using the GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek, Germany) as previously described. Briefly, infiltrated leaves were ground into fine powder in liquid nitrogen, mixed with protein extraction buffer (1 mL per 500 mg of tissue) and then thawed on ice. After incubation and centrifugation at 4°C, extract supernatant was cleaned by filtration and then mixed with the GFP-Trap beads. After 1 h incubation at 4°C, the mixture was subsequently washed with wash buffer for 3–5 times. Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of immunoprecipitated proteins was performed at the BGI Americas MS Service Center.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were searched against the most updated Uniprot N. benthamiana database (2020_05) using SEQUEST HT 2013.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Tswv nss, Ap-ms

### Affiliations
Washington State University

### Submitter
Ying Zhai

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Zhai
Washington State University


