### Accession
PXD010414

### Title
thymus mouse LC-MSMS -  Thymic Microenvironment Is Modified by Malnutrition and Leishmania infantum Infection

### Description
The thymus is one of the most affected organs during malnutrition, exhibiting atrophy and thymocyte depletion, characteristics that are also observed in several infectious diseases. The detrimental effects of malnutrition on immune responses to pathogens have long been recognized and it is considered a main risk factor for various infectious diseases, including visceral leishmaniasis (VL). However, the thymus has been barely studied during malnutrition and Leishmania infantum infection association. Protein malnutrition modifies intrathymic communication in L. infantum infected BALB/c mice by altering the abundance of proteins secreted to the thymic interstitial fluid (IF). We identified and compared protein abundance in the thymic IF samples from BALB/c mice that were fed with control protein (14%, CP) or low protein (4%, LP) isocaloric diets, followed by infection with L. infantum. By means of a quantitative proteomics approach using iTRAQ we identified 280 proteins of which 81% were reported as secreted by exosomes and 42% were previously described as secreted by thymic epithelial cells. LP-infected (LPi) animals showed a significant decrease in exosomal proteins, suggesting that exosomal carrier system is dysregulated in malnourished animals. LPi mice also exhibited an increase in the relative abundance of proteins involved in lipid metabolism and tricarboxylic acid cycle, suggestive of a non-proliferative microenvironment. Accordingly, flow cytometry analysis revealed that protein malnutrition decreases the proliferation of single positive and double positive T cells. Proteins engaged in glycolysis, protein ubiquitination and mRNA processing were significantly decreased. In addition, a significant decrease in the abundance of galectin-1 and increase of plasminogen were observed in malnourished animals. Together, the reduced cortical area, decreased proliferation, increased abundance of lipid- and tricarboxylic acid cycle-related proteins, and altered abundance of galectin-1 and plasminogen indicate a dysfunctional thymic microenvironment, where T cell migration, proliferation and maturation are compromised, contributing for the thymic atrophy observed in malnourished animals. All these alterations affect the control of the local and systemic infection, resulting in an impaired response to L. infantum infection.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of interstitial fluid from the thymus  Interstitial fluid (IF) was obtained by injection of PBS and gentle wash of the thymus with sterile needle syringes. Intact cells were pelleted by centrifugation and supernatants were recovered for proteomic analysis, these supernatants are considered as enriched IF from the thymus. The collected fluids were concentrated to a final volume of 100 μL using Amicon Centrifugal Filters 3K (Millipore). To each fluid sample was added 0.1% of Rapigest (Waters) for protein denaturation and rupture of exosomes membrane. ITRAQ Labelling In order to adjust the study within a single multiplex experiment, pools of samples from different mice were used instead of individual samples. Equal amounts of fluid samples from three animals within each experimental condition were mixed to produce one sample pool (Figure 1). Three sample pools of each group (P1, P2, P3) were used for a total of nine different animals in each experimental condition. Therefore, three biological replicates and two technical replicates for each treatment were incorporated into the multiplex iTRAQ design.  Pooled samples were digested with lysyl endopeptidase mass spectrometry grade (Wako) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). After digestion, Rapigest was precipitated and peptides were desalted using Spin Column C18 (Harvard Apparatus, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Peptides were labeled with iTRAQ 4-plex (Reagents iTRAQ Applications 4-plex Kit; AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) and mixed as follows: iTRAQ114 for sample pools of animals fed 14% protein diet); iTRAQ115 for sample pools of animals fed 4% protein diet; iTRAQ116 for sample pools of animals fed 14% protein diet and infected; and iTRAQ117 for sample pools of animals fed 4% protein diet and infected. Labeled peptides were further mixed (Figure 1), fractionated by strong cation exchange using Macro Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus, USA) and desalted using Spin Column C18 (Harvard Apparatus, USA). Mass spectrometry analysis  Tagged and desalinated fractions were subjected to nano-liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry in tandem (nLC-MS/MS) in the mass spectrometry facility of the Carlos Chagas Institute – Fiocruz-Paraná. The nano-liquid chromatography system used was the Easy NLC-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Injections were made in duplicate. In this system, peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase column packed in house with a flow of 500 nL/min with stationary phase ReprosilPur C18 Acqua (beads 1.9 m in diameter, Dr. Maisch) with a length of 30 cm and inner diameter of 75 µm. The elution of these peptides occurred with a flow of 250 nL/min applying a chromatographic gradient of 5 - 40% of phase B (5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 180 min. Phase A was 5% DMSO in 0.1% formic acid. Spectra were acquired in a LTQ Orbitrap XL-ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by data dependent acquisition (DDA), automatically switching between full scan MS (m/z 300-2000) at resolution of 60,000 (m/z 100) and MS/MS with dynamic exclusion of 90s. The five most intense ions with +2 and +3 charges were isolated and fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) using normalized collision energy of 45 and 30 ms of activation time. All scan functions of the mass spectrometer and the gradients in the nLC were controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification Protein identification was performed with PatternLab for Proteomics version 3.2.0.3 (http://patternlabforproteomics.org/) using the Comet PSM as search engine (21). Mus musculus protein sequences were download from UniProt database in February 2015 (http://www.uniprot.org/) with 83.653 entries. For estimation of false discovery rate (FDR), we subsequently generated a target-decoy database including the sequences of common mass spectra contaminants using the PatternLab’s Search Database Generator (22). A cutoff score was established for accept a FDR of 1% based on the marked decoys from the database. The search parameters were tryptic and semi-tryptic peptide candidates, three missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, fixed iTRAQ (+144.1 Da) at the N-terminal and in lysine (K) side chain with a 40 ppm mass tolerance of the precursor. Validation of the peptide-spectrum matches was done using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) integrated in the PatternLab for proteomics (22). The results were processed to accept only sequences with less than 5 ppm and two or more independent evidence of the presence of the protein in the sample (e.g. identifying a peptide with a different charge state, the same modified version of the unmodified peptide, or two different peptides for the same protein).  Relative quantification was performed using PatternLab’s ‘Isobaric Analyzer’ module. The SEPro file was used to produce a report of quantified peptides (23) A paired comparison analysis between the CP group and each of the other groups (LP, CPi or LPi) was made, accepting at least 2 unique peptides per protein, 0.30 of “peptide Log Fold Change Cutoff" and 0.05 of "Peptide p-value Cutoff" for the t-paired test or p binomial value (24). Finally, corrected p-value was calculated according to the Benjamin–Hochberg procedure (24). The final report of quantification, containing only proteins with an absolute fold change ≥ 1.5 and p ≤ 0.05, was exported to Microsoft Excel. Ontological classification on cellular component, molecular function, and biological process was made through Gene Ontology database (http://geneontology.org/) using the Gene Ontology Explorer tool (GOEx) from the PatternLab (23). Interactome network analysis was mapped to KEGG pathways using the web-accessible program IIS- Integrated Interactome system (http://www.lge.ibi.unicamp.br/lnbio/IIS/) (25). The enriched biological processes of the Gene Ontology database were calculated in each network using the hypergeometric distribution (25). The interaction network was viewed using Cytoscape version 2.8.3 (http://www.cytoscape.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Detrimental effects of malnutrition on immune responses to pathogens have long been recognized and it is considered a main risk factor for various infectious diseases, including visceral leishmaniasis (VL). Thymus is a target of both malnutrition and infection, but its role in the immune response to <i>Leishmania infantum</i> in malnourished individuals is barely studied. Because we previously observed thymic atrophy and significant reduction in cellularity and chemokine levels in malnourished mice infected with <i>L. infantum</i>, we postulated that the thymic microenvironment is severely compromised in those animals. To test this, we analyzed the microarchitecture of the organ and measured the protein abundance in its interstitial space in malnourished BALB/c mice infected or not with <i>L. infantum</i>. Malnourished-infected animals exhibited a significant reduction of the thymic cortex:medulla ratio and altered abundance of proteins secreted in the thymic interstitial fluid. Eighty-one percent of identified proteins are secreted by exosomes and malnourished-infected mice showed significant decrease in exosomal proteins, suggesting that exosomal carrier system, and therefore intrathymic communication, is dysregulated in those animals. Malnourished-infected mice also exhibited a significant increase in the abundance of proteins involved in lipid metabolism and tricarboxylic acid cycle, suggestive of a non-proliferative microenvironment. Accordingly, flow cytometry analysis revealed decreased proliferation of single positive and double positive T cells in those animals. Together, the reduced cortical area, decreased proliferation, and altered protein abundance suggest a dysfunctional thymic microenvironment where T cell migration, proliferation, and maturation are compromised, contributing for the thymic atrophy observed in malnourished animals. All these alterations could affect the control of the local and systemic infection, resulting in an impaired response to <i>L. infantum</i> infection.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Fluid, Malnutrition, Thymus

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Leishmanioses, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil
Dr

### Submitter
Monica Losada

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Cuervo Escobar
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Leishmanioses, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil


