### Accession
PXD016846

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based characterization of Toxoplasma gondii MORC interactome

### Description
T. gondii has a complex life cycle typified by an asexual development taking place in vertebrate, and a sexual reproduction which occurs exclusively in felids and thereby is less studied. The developmental transitions rely on changes in gene expression patterns, and recent studies have assigned roles for chromatin shapers, including histone modifications, in establishing specific epigenetic programs for each given stage. Here, we identified T. gondii microrchidia (MORC) protein as an upstream transcriptional repressor of sexual commitment. We performed affinity purification coupled to tandem mass spectrometry analyses to identify its binding partners.

### Sample Protocol
T. gondii extracts from RHΔku80 or PruΔku80 cells stably expressing HAFlag-tagged MORC, were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 4°C. Beads were washed with 10-column volumes of BC500 buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl, 20% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% NP-40, and protease inhibitors). Bound polypeptides were eluted stepwise with 250 μg/ml FLAG peptide (Sigma Aldrich) diluted in BC100 buffer. For size-exclusion chromatography, protein eluates were loaded onto a Superose 6 HR 10/30 column equilibrated with BC500. Flow rate was fixed at 0.35 ml/min, and 0.5-ml fractions were collected. Protein bands (11 for RH strain and 19 for Pru strain) were excised from colloidal blue stained gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) as previously described (Salvetti A et al., 2016, J Proteom Res). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000 and UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific, for respectively RH and Pru strains) coupled to tandem MS (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific, for respectively RH and Pru strains). Peptides were sampled on a 300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 PepMap column (Thermo Scientific) using 25-min gradients.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6) through concomitant searches against the Toxoplasma gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, version 30 downloaded from ToxoDB, the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, March 2019 version), classical contaminant database and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 PSMs, PSM homology threshold ≤ 0.01, PSM score ≥ 25, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline (www.profiproteomics.fr/proline) was then used to perform a compilation and grouping of the protein groups identified in the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii has a complex life cycle that is typified by asexual development that takes place in vertebrates, and sexual reproduction, which occurs exclusively in felids and is therefore less studied. The developmental transitions rely on changes in the patterns of gene expression, and recent studies have assigned roles for chromatin shapers, including histone modifications, in establishing specific epigenetic programs for each given stage. Here, we identified the T. gondii microrchidia (MORC) protein as an upstream transcriptional repressor of sexual commitment. MORC, in a complex with Apetala 2 (AP2) transcription factors, was shown to recruit the histone deacetylase HDAC3, thereby impeding the accessibility of chromatin at the genes that are exclusively expressed during sexual stages. We found that MORC-depleted cells underwent marked transcriptional changes, resulting in the expression of a specific repertoire of genes, and revealing a shift from asexual proliferation to sexual differentiation. MORC acts as a master regulator that directs the hierarchical expression of secondary AP2 transcription factors, and these transcription factors potentially contribute to the unidirectionality of the life cycle. Thus, MORC plays a cardinal role in the T. gondii life cycle, and its conditional depletion offers a method to study the sexual development of the parasite in vitro, and is proposed as an alternative to the requirement of T. gondii infections in cats.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Co-immunoprecipitation, Nanolc-ms/ms, Tgme49_305340

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


