### Accession
PXD042183

### Title
Identification of the proteins that are associated with ALKBH5 by an affinity purification and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis in human 293T cells.

### Description
Our proteomics analysis is for characterization of ALKBH5 protein interactions in 293T cells. We expressed HA-tagged ALKBH5 in 293T cells, prepared nuclear extracts, and subjected them to affinity purification using an anti-HA antibody, followed by mass spectrometry analysis of the purified protein.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells expressing HA-tagged ALKBH5 were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 1% (v/v) penicillin streptomycin and 10% (v/v) fetal bovine sreum. Cells were harvested and 100mg nuclear extracts were prepared. After the nuclear extracts were incubated with anti-HA antibody overnight at 4℃ withrotation, 30 μl protein A/G beads were added and incubated for 3 h. The beads were collected by centrifugation at 500 g for 5 min and washed 3 times with cell lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, PH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.3% NP-40, 0.2 mM PMSF). The beads were then boiled in SDS loading buffer and run shortly into a SDS gel. A gel slice containing the purified proteins was isolated for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were searched using the PD 1.4 algorithm with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da. Proteins indentifications were filtered with score ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
Paraspeckles (PS) are nuclear structures scaffolded by the long noncoding RNA NEAT1 and protein components such as NONO and SFPQ. We previously found that the upregulation of RNA N6-methyl-adenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) demethylase ALKBH5 facilitates hypoxia-induced paraspeckle assembly through erasing m<sup>6</sup>A marks on NEAT1, thus stabilizing it. However, it remains unclear how these processes are spatiotemporally coordinated. Here we discover that ALKBH5 specifically binds to proteins in PS and forms phase-separated droplets that are incorporated into PS through its C-terminal intrinsically disordered region (cIDR). Upon exposure to hypoxia, rapid ALKBH5 condensation in PS induces m<sup>6</sup>A demethylation of NEAT1, which further facilitates PS formation before the upregulation of ALKBH5 expression. In cells expressing ALKBH5 lacking cIDR, PS fail to be formed in response to hypoxia, accompanied with insufficient m<sup>6</sup>A demethylation of NEAT1 and its destabilization. We also demonstrate that ALKBH5-cIDR is indispensable for hypoxia-induced effects such as cancer cell invasion. Therefore, our study has identified the role of ALKBH5 in phase separation as the molecular basis of the positive feedback loop for PS formation between ALKBH5 incorporation into PS and NEAT1 stabilization.

### Keywords
Human, Alkbh5, Ap-ms

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University
State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, The Province and Ministry Cosponsored Collaborative Innovation Center for Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Inmune Microenviroment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Department of Cell Biology, Tianjin Medical University, Qixiangtai Road 22, Tianjin 300070, China

### Submitter
Qin Xiao yang

### Lab Head
Dr Qin Xiaoyang
State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, The Province and Ministry Cosponsored Collaborative Innovation Center for Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Inmune Microenviroment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Department of Cell Biology, Tianjin Medical University, Qixiangtai Road 22, Tianjin 300070, China


