### Accession
PXD028378

### Title
Hypothyroidism symptoms in LT4-euthyroid thyroidectomized patients reflect an alteration of the serum proteome

### Description
In patients undergoing thyroidectomy one of the goals of post-surgical follow-up is the correct maintenance of thyroid hormone (TH) levels by replacement therapy with levo-thyroxine (LT4). Nevertheless, some patients complain of symptoms of hypothyroidism (memory loss, weight gain, fatigue, depression, and reduced quality of life) despite values of thyroid hormones get the physiological range. Since this recurrent issue, we aim to compare serum proteomic profiles of LT4-euthyroid thyroidectomized patients with stable or reduced post-operative quality of life. Proteomic analysis highlights a different protein profile in serum of patients with reduced quality of life compared to the other although both resulted euthyroid. Differential proteins are involved in coagulation processes, complement system activation and in lipoprotein particles remodeling, that together lead to a pro-inflammatory response. Moreover, a particular protein isoform pattern of apolipoprotein A1 and alpha 1 antitrypsin, was also detected. This study suggests that LT4 replacement therapy might restore euthyroid conditions in thyroidectomized patients but in some cases without re-establish body tissues euthyroidism. This condition is reflected by the serum protein profile that shows a behavior similar to overt hypothyroidism.

### Sample Protocol
Blood was collected directly into serum tubes (BD vacutainer, SST II Advance, Plymouth UK) and centrifuged for 10 min at 1690 xg. The serum was recovered and stored at −80 °C until proteomic analysis. Samples were prepared and resolved by two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE), according to Landi C et al (Landi, C. et al. Proteome analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage in pulmonary langerhans cell histiocytosis. J Clin Bioinforma 1, 31 (2011)).MALDI-ToF mass spectrometry by Peptide Mass Fingerprint (PMF) was considered for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis of relative percentage of spot volume was carried out using the Differential Analysis tool in XLStat software (XLSTAT-lifeScience—Paris, France). Then, % Vol differences among matched spots, from the three investigated groups (i.e., Control, reduced Ft3 and Stable Ft3), were evaluated by statistical non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test (p ≤ 0.05). The mean rank of significant results was then compared by Dunn’s multiple comparison test. Statistically significant differences were then processed according to the ratio value ≥1.5 of corresponding % Vol means. Spots presenting p-value lower than 0.05 were considered as significant and were submitted to Heatmap and Principal Component Analysis (PCA). In particular, spots and samples were clustered in the Heatmap according Euclidean distance. The UniProt accession numbers of the identified proteins were used to perform enrichment analysis by MetaCore software (https://portal.genego.com date access 07.06.2021) (Clarivate analytics, Boston, MA).

### Publication Abstract
The monotherapy with levo-thyroxine (LT4) is the treatment of choice for patients with hypothyroidism after thyroidectomy. However, many athyreotic LT4-treated patients with thyroid hormones in the physiological range experience hypothyroid-like symptoms, showing post-operative, statistically significant lower FT3 levels with respect to that before total thyroidectomy. Since we hypothesized that the lower plasmatic FT3 levels observed in this subgroup could be associated with tissue hypothyroidism, here we compared, by a preliminary proteomic analysis, eight sera of patients with reduced post-surgical FT3 to eight sera from patients with FT3 levels similar to pre-surgery levels, and six healthy controls. Proteomic analysis highlights a different serum protein profile among the considered conditions. By enrichment analysis, differential proteins are involved in coagulation processes (PLMN-1.61, -1.98 in reduced vs. stable FT3, p &lt; 0.02; A1AT fragmentation), complement system activation (CFAH + 1.83, CFAB + 1.5, C1Qb + 1.6, C1S + 7.79 in reduced vs. stable FT3, p &lt; 0.01) and in lipoprotein particles remodeling (APOAI fragmentation; APOAIV + 2.13, p &lt; 0.003), potentially leading to a pro-inflammatory response. This study suggests that LT4 replacement therapy might restore biochemical euthyroid conditions in thyroidectomized patients, but in some cases without re-establishing body tissue euthyroidism. Since our results, this condition is reflected by the serum protein profile.

### Keywords
Reduced ft3, Proteomics, Hypothyroidism, Lt4, Quality of life

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab. Life Sciences Department, University of Siena
Dept. Life Sciences, Functional Proteomics Lab, Siena University, Italy.

### Submitter
Enxhi Shaba

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Bini
Dept. Life Sciences, Functional Proteomics Lab, Siena University, Italy.


