### Accession
PXD039425

### Title
Characterization of L1 ORF1p macromolecular complexes from Mael-/- mouse testes

### Description
piRNA-deficient Maelstrom (Mael) null mice are characterized by a strong upregulation of retrotransposon LINE-1 (L1) in meiotic spermatocytes. This defect turns out in the accumulation of L1 RNA and ORF1p in their cytoplasm and the formation of prominent ribonucleoprotein aggregates. We used 3-months-old Mael-/- male mice to characterize the protein composition of those ORF1p aggregates.

### Sample Protocol
We performed anti-ORF1p co-immunoprecipitations from Mael-/- testicular extracts using a rabbit monoclonal anti-ORF1p antibody (Abcam) coupled to dynabeads M-270 Epoxy (Invitrogen) followed by LC/MS/MS analyses of precipitated proteins. Results from two independent experiments (E1, E2) are reported. IP_aORF1 are anti-ORF1p co-immunoprecipitation samples obtained after four washes of dynabeads in near-physiological conditions (wash buffer containing 100 mM KCl); IP_aORF1_300 samples were washed twice with the same buffer containing 100 mM KCl and twice with a higher stringency buffer containing 300 mM KCl; IP_aORF1_RNase samples were generated from testicular extracts treated with a cocktail of RNases (A, T1 and I) before the anti-ORF1p co-immunoprecipitation to test for the RNA-dependency of interactions. 
The following LC/MS/MS analysis was performed at Poochon Scientific (Frederick, MD, USA) as follows. Dynabeads were dissolved in 2% SDS, 25 mM NH4HCO3, 10 mM DTT in water. Samples were denatured at 95°C and then processed for in-solution trypsin digestion. The digested peptide mixture was then concentrated and desalted. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid, of which 16 μl were analyzed by LC/MS/MS. The LC/MS/MS analysis of samples was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer and a Thermo Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System. Peptide mixtures from each sample were loaded onto a peptide trap cartridge at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The trapped peptides were eluted onto a reversed-phase PicoFrit column (New Objective, MA) using a linear gradient of acetonitrile (3-36%) in 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides from the PicoFrit column were ionized and sprayed into the mass spectrometer, using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source ES071 (Thermo) under the following settings: spray voltage 1.8 kV; capillary temperature 250°C. Other settings were empirically determined.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files acquired from each sample were searched against a database of mouse protein sequences using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) based on the SEQUEST algorithm. The Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas Oxidation Met and Deamidation Q/N-deamidated (+0.98402 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 5 amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm, whereas fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. The resulting Peptide Spectrum Match (PSM) counts were used to determine the abundance of the corresponding protein in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Germ cell, Ribonucleoprotein, Mouse, Retrotransposon line-1, Meiosis

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution for Science Dept. of Embryology 3520 San Martin Dr Baltimore, MD 21218
Carnegie Institution for Science Embryology

### Submitter
Chiara De Luca

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Bortvin
Carnegie Institution for Science Dept. of Embryology 3520 San Martin Dr Baltimore, MD 21218


