### Accession
PXD002724

### Title
Analysis of proteins that rapidly change upon mTORC1 repression identifies Park7 as a novel protein aberrantly expressed in Tuberous Sclerosis Complex

### Description
Many biological processes involve the mechanistic/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Thus, the challenge of deciphering mTORC1-mediated functions during normal and pathological states in the central nervous system is steep. Because mTORC1 is at the core of translation, we have investigated mTORC1 function in global and regional protein expression. Activation of mTORC1 has been generally regarded to promote translation.  Few but recent works have demonstrated that suppression of mTORC1 can promote local protein synthesis. Moreover, excessive mTORC1 activation during disease states represses basal and activity-induced protein synthesis.  To determine the role of mTORC1 activation in protein expression, we have used an unbiased, large scale proteomic approach. We provide evidence that a brief repression of mTORC1 activity in vivo by rapamycin has little affect globally, yet leads to a significant remodeling of synaptic proteins, in particular those proteins that reside in the postsynaptic density (PSD). We have also found that curtailing the activity of mTORC1 bidirectionally alters the expression of proteins associated with epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD)—neurological disorders that exhibit elevated mTORC1 activity. Through a protein-protein interaction network analysis, we have identified common proteins shared among these mTOR-related diseases. One such protein is Parkinson protein 7 (PARK7) which has been implicated in Parkinson’s disease, yet not associated with epilepsy, AD, or ASD. To verify our finding, we provide evidence that the protein expression of PARK7, including new protein synthesis, is sensitive to mTORC1 inhibition. Using cultured neurons from a mouse model of tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), a disease that displays both epilepsy and ASD phenotypes and has overactive mTOR signaling, we show that PARK7 protein is elevated in the dendrites. Our work offers a comprehensive view of mTORC1 and its role in regulating regional protein expression in normal and diseased states.

### Sample Protocol
The gels were cut into 1mm cubes after washing gels with water for 15min. Gel pieces were transferred in clean Eppendorf tube followed by adding 100ul of water and incubating for 15min. All the water was removed. This washing step was repeated with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100% ACN by two times. A 100ul of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added followed by incubation for 5min. All the liquid was removed and the samples were subjected to drying in speed-vacuum until they were completely dried. For reduction/alkylation, 100ul of 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) suspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added into the dried samples. This was followed by the incubation in water bath at 55°C for 45min. After removing the alkylation solution, 100ul of 55mM iodoacetamide (IAA) suspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added into the reduced samples followed by incubating at 37.5°C for 30min. The alkylated samples were then washed with 100ul of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with incubation for 5min. A 100ul of acetonitrile was added to make one to one ratio of solutions with incubation for 15min. All the solutions were removed. The samples were then dried before digestion. Trypsin digestion solution was prepared with trypsin 4ul in 96ul of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The amount of trypsin was determined using enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 w/w since 200ug of proteins were loaded into the gel. A 100 ul of trypsin digestion solution was added into the alkylated samples and then incubated for 45 min on ice. This allows the gels absorb the trypsin digestion solution. The solution was removed if it is excessive. The samples were incubated at 37.5°C overnight. The addition of 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) acidified the digestion. The tryptic digests were extracted from the gel by adding 0.1%TFA and incubating in ice water bath with sonication. The solutions were then collected in a separate clean Eppendorf tube. This extraction step was repeated with 30% ACN/0.1% TFA and 60% ACN/0.1% TFA by three times. The collected peptides were then dried in speed-vacuum and re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The identification of proteins/peptides was achieved using MASCOT database. Proteome Discoverer version 1.2 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used to generate a mascot generic format file (*.mgf) which was subsequently employed for database searching using MASCOT version 2.3.2 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA) Parent ions were selected from a mass range of 350-10000Da with a minimum peak count of 1. The parameters from Mascot Daemon were set to search against the UniProt Rattus database (UniProt release 2013_11). Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was as a fixed modification. The formation of propionamide adducts on cysteine, N-terminus and C-terminus of peptides was added as variable modification due to the use of polyacrylamide gels. Trypsin was selected with missed cleavages up to two. Peptides were searched with a precursor ion mass tolerance of 6ppm or better and fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.5Da. The MASCOT results were imported to Scaffold version 3.6.3 (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR). Scaffold probabilistically validates the identification of peptides and proteins assigned by MASCOT using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms, respectively. Peptide identifications were accepted with a MASCOT ion score greater than 20, while protein identifications were accepted with a probability greater than 99%. The accepted proteins should contain at least two identified peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.2% for identification of peptides and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Many biological processes involve the mechanistic/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Thus, the challenge of deciphering mTORC1-mediated functions during normal and pathological states in the central nervous system is challenging. Because mTORC1 is at the core of translation, we have investigated mTORC1 function in global and regional protein expression. Activation of mTORC1 has been generally regarded to promote translation. Few but recent works have shown that suppression of mTORC1 can also promote local protein synthesis. Moreover, excessive mTORC1 activation during diseased states represses basal and activity-induced protein synthesis. To determine the role of mTORC1 activation in protein expression, we have used an unbiased, large-scale proteomic approach. We provide evidence that a brief repression of mTORC1 activity in vivo by rapamycin has little effect globally, yet leads to a significant remodeling of synaptic proteins, in particular those proteins that reside in the postsynaptic density. We have also found that curtailing the activity of mTORC1 bidirectionally alters the expression of proteins associated with epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, and autism spectrum disorder-neurological disorders that exhibit elevated mTORC1 activity. Through a protein-protein interaction network analysis, we have identified common proteins shared among these mTORC1-related diseases. One such protein is Parkinson protein 7, which has been implicated in Parkinson's disease, yet not associated with epilepsy, Alzheimers disease, or autism spectrum disorder. To verify our finding, we provide evidence that the protein expression of Parkinson protein 7, including new protein synthesis, is sensitive to mTORC1 inhibition. Using a mouse model of tuberous sclerosis complex, a disease that displays both epilepsy and autism spectrum disorder phenotypes and has overactive mTORC1 signaling, we show that Parkinson protein 7 protein is elevated in the dendrites and colocalizes with the postsynaptic marker postsynaptic density-95. Our work offers a comprehensive view of mTORC1 and its role in regulating regional protein expression in normal and diseased states.

### Keywords
Lc-ms

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Rui Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


