### Accession
PXD027155

### Title
Search for the interactors of Arabidopsis thaliana myosin receptor MRF7

### Description
This project aims at identifying the binding partners of the Arabidopsis thaliana MRF7 protein and of its truncated form ΔMRF7, which lacks a potential protein binding domain DUF593 at the N-terminus. A.thaliana plants stably overexpressing GFP-MRF7 and GFP-ΔMRF7 were generated by ﬂoral dipping of Col-0 plants.  Co-immunoprecipitation was carried out using the GFP-Trap®_A beads technology (Chromotek) and samples thus obtained were analysed through Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Samples were separated using SDS-PAGE, with electrophoresis carried out until the dye front had moved approximately 1cm into the separating gel (in these circumstances, SDS-PAGE was effectively used as a clean-up step, rather than as a way of separating out individual protein bands).  The 1cm gel lane containing the entire GFP-Trap sample was then excised, digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides analysed using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) as described previously in "Calvopiña, K., Dulyayangkul, P., Heesom, K. J. & Avison, M. B. TonB-dependent uptake of β-lactam antibiotics in the opportunistic human pathogen Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. Mol. Microbiol. 113, 492–503 (2020)".

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana database (77374 sequences; downloaded May 2018) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.8Da. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled, and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. Data thus obtained from wild-type, GFP-MRF7 and GFP- ΔMRF7 samples were pairwise analysed as follows: wild-type/GFP-MRF7 and wild-type/GFP-ΔMRF7. All hits detected in the wild-type, but not in the transgenics samples were excluded. Of the ones detected only in the transgenics or in both the transgenic and the wild-type, only those with a #PSM value higher than 5 were included. Hits thus filtered were then compared between the two pairwise analysis to highlight potential binding partners of GFP-MRF7 and GFP-ΔMRF7.

### Publication Abstract
Plant cell organelles are highly mobile and their positioning play key roles in plant growth, development and responses to changing environmental conditions. Movement is acto-myosin dependent. Despite controlling the dynamics of several organelles, myosin and myosin receptors identified so far in Arabidopsis thaliana generally do not localise to the organelles whose movement they control, raising the issue of how specificity is determined. Here we show that a MyoB myosin receptor, MRF7, specifically localises to the Golgi membrane and affects its movement. Myosin XI-K was identified as a putative MRF7 interactor through mass spectrometry analysis. Co-expression of MRF7 and XI-K tail triggers the relocation of XI-K to the Golgi, linking a MyoB/myosin complex to a specific organelle in Arabidopsis. FRET-FLIM confirmed the in vivo interaction between MRF7 and XI-K tail on the Golgi and in the cytosol, suggesting that myosin/myosin receptor complexes perhaps cycle on and off organelle membranes. This work supports a traditional mechanism for organelle movement where myosins bind to receptors and adaptors on the organelle membranes, allowing them to actively move on the actin cytoskeleton, rather than passively in the recently proposed cytoplasmic streaming model.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Myosin, Lcms

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Chiara Perico

### Lab Head
Dr Imogen Sparkes
University of Bristol


