### Accession
PXD011526

### Title
Ultraviolet Photodissociation of ESI and MALDI generated protein ions on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer

### Description
UVPD was implemented on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus equipped with a ESI/EP-MALDI. UVPD of MALDI generated ions was benchmarked against MALDI-ISD, MALDI-HCD and ESI-UVPD. MALDI UVPD outperformed MALDI HCD and ISD efficiently sequencing small proteins ions.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were performed using a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen) equipped with a combi ion source that includes an elevated pressure MALDI source and an orthogonal ESI interface (Spectroglyph LLC, Kennewick WA, USA). UVPD was performed using a 193 nm ArF laser (Excistar XS 500, Coherent, Santa Clara CA, USA) aligned coaxially with the HCD cell.Electrospray was performed using standard protein solutions prepared at 10 µM in 49.5/49.5/1 ACN/H2O/Formic Acid, infused at 5 µL/min and sprayed at 4 kV. MALDI samples were prepared using the dried droplet method (CHCA matrix, 1000:1 molar excess).

### Data Protocol
The raw tandem mass spectra were visualized and processed with the Xcalibur 3.0 package and deisotoping using the Xtract algorithm. ProsightLite was used for assignment of a/a+1/b/c/x/x+1/y/z fragments and Protein Prospector for the assignment of d/w/z fragments and internal fragments

### Publication Abstract
The identification of molecular ions produced by MALDI or ESI strongly relies on their fragmentation to structurally informative fragments. The widely diffused fragmentation techniques for ESI multiply charged ions are either incompatible (ECD and ETD) or show lower efficiency (CID, HCD), with the predominantly singly charged peptide and protein ions formed by MALDI. In-source decay has been successfully adopted to sequence MALDI-generated ions, but it further increases spectral complexity, and it is not compatible with mass-spectrometry imaging. Excellent UVPD performances, in terms of number of fragment ions and sequence coverage, has been demonstrated for electrospray ionization for multiple proteomics applications. UVPD showed a much lower charge-state dependence, and so protein ions produced by MALDI may exhibit equal propensity to fragment. Here we report UVPD implementation on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with an ESI/EP-MALDI. UVPD of MALDI-generated ions was benchmarked against MALDI-ISD, MALDI-HCD, and ESI-UVPD. MALDI-UVPD outperformed MALDI-HCD and ISD, efficiently sequencing small proteins ions. Moreover, the singly charged nature of MALDI-UVPD avoids the bioinformatics challenges associated with highly congested ESI-UVPD mass spectra. Our results demonstrate the ability of UVPD to further improve tandem mass spectrometry capabilities for MALDI-generated protein ions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011526.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Maldi, Ms/ms, Uvpd

### Affiliations
Fondazione Pisana per la Scienza - ONLUS
Fondazoine Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS - Via ferruccio Giovannini 13, 56107 San Giuliano Terme (PI) - Italy

### Submitter
Marialaura Dilillo

### Lab Head
Dr Liam A. McDonnell
Fondazoine Pisana per la Scienza ONLUS - Via ferruccio Giovannini 13, 56107 San Giuliano Terme (PI) - Italy


