### Accession
PXD004453

### Title
Comparison of Protein Extraction Methods in Tendon Mass Spectrometry Analysis

### Description
Tendons play a fundamental role in the musculoskeletal system and locomotion by transferring forces generated from muscles to the skeleton. Tendon injuries can occur due to sports related incidents, as a result of trauma to overuse or during disease or ageing. Using proteomic techniques tendon protein profiles could be defined under different conditions. The aim of this study was to optimise tendon sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis, which will be valuable for future tendon studies.

### Sample Protocol
Tendon samples were collected from equine superficial digital flexor tendons (SDFT).  The samples were divided in four parts and subjected to 4 M guanidine-HCL, 0.1% Rapigest, a combination of 4 M guanidine and 0.1% RapiGest and 4 M guanidine-HCL followed by RapiGest extraction on the insoluble pellet. Soluble extracts were reduced, alkylated, trypsin digested and desalted. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Ultimate Nanosystem(Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) couple online to Q-exactive. Aliquots of (equivalent to 50 ng protein per samples) were loaded onto 170µm x 20mm C18 trap column at 5 µl/min with aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/V) TFA. After 3 minutes, the trap columns was set in-line with analytical column (C18, 75µm x 15 cm x 2um) using a linear gradient of solvent B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) of 3.8% to 50% at 300 nL/min. Data dependents acquisition consistent of 70,000 resolution (m/Z 200 after accumulation of ion to 1x 106 target value based on AGC values from previous full scan. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiple charged ions (>2) were fragments by HCD with fixed injection time of 100ms and 35,000 resolution. Typical mass spectromic condition was as followed: spray voltage 1.9kV, no sheat or auxillarry gas flow, heat temperature, 250 °C normalised to HCD collision energy of 30%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 counts and a 2 m/z isolation width was set.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification- Proteins within each group were identified using PEAKS software (Version 6, Bioinformatic solution, Waterloo, Canada), searching against Unihorse data base with false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, a minimum of 2 peptides per protein and a confidence score of > 50. For label-free quantification of proteins between different extraction methods was analysed by the PrognesisQI software (version 4, Water, UK) where the top 5 spectra were exported to Mascot (Version 2.3.01) and utilized  for protein identification against  UnitProt horse database. Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.01 Da fragment mass tolerance; one missed cleavage allowed; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, methionine oxidation. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, and greater than 2 fold changes with FDR adjusted p values < 0.05 were considered to be significant

### Publication Abstract
Exploring the tendon proteome is a challenging but important task for understanding the mechanisms of physiological/pathological processes during ageing and disease and for the development of new treatments. Several extraction methods have been utilised for tendon mass spectrometry, however different extraction methods have not been simultaneously compared. In the present study we compared protein extraction in tendon with two chaotropic agents, guanidine hydrochloride (GnHCl) and urea, a detergent, RapiGest&#x2122;, and their combinations for shotgun mass spectrometry. An initial proteomic analysis was performed following urea, GnHCl, and RapiGest&#x2122; extraction of equine superficial digital flexor tendon (SDFT) tissue. Subsequently, another proteomic analysis was performed following extraction with GnHCl, Rapigest&#x2122;, and their combinations. Between the two chaotropic agents, GnHCl extracted more proteins, whilst a greater number of proteins were solely identified after Rapigest&#x2122; extraction. Protein extraction with a combination of GnHCl followed by RapiGest&#x2122; on the insoluble pellet demonstrated, after label-free quantification, increased abundance of identified collagen proteins and low sample to sample variability. In contrast, GnHCl extraction on its own showed increased abundance of identified proteoglycans and cellular proteins. Therefore, the selection of protein extraction method for tendon tissue for mass spectrometry analysis should reflect the focus of the study.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tendon

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Yalda  Ashraf Kharaz

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy J Peffers
Musculoskeletal Biology, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool


