### Accession
PXD017757

### Title
activin A treated Th17 cells from mouse

### Description
Whole cell extracts from mouse Th17 cells treated with activin A were profiled with extensive fractionation and bottom-up proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extracts were reduced, alkylated, and digested with LysC/Trypsin, follwed by TMT labeling and offline C4 fractionation of resulting peptides prior to LC-MS analysis of all peptide fractions

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using the Bionic search algorithm

### Publication Abstract
In multiple sclerosis (MS), Th17 cells are critical drivers of autoimmune central nervous system (CNS) inflammation and demyelination. Th17 cells exhibit functional heterogeneity fostering both pathogenic and nonpathogenic, tissue-protective functions. Still, the factors that control Th17 pathogenicity remain incompletely defined. Here, using experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, an established mouse MS model, we report that therapeutic administration of activin-A ameliorates disease severity and alleviates CNS immunopathology and demyelination, associated with decreased activation of Th17 cells. In fact, activin-A signaling through activin-like kinase-4 receptor represses pathogenic transcriptional programs in Th17-polarized cells, while it enhances antiinflammatory gene modules. Whole-genome profiling and in vivo functional studies revealed that activation of the ATP-depleting CD39 and CD73 ectonucleotidases is essential for activin-A-induced suppression of the pathogenic signature and the encephalitogenic functions of Th17 cells. Mechanistically, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, along with STAT3 and c-Maf, are recruited to promoter elements on <i>Entpd1</i> and <i>Nt5e</i> (encoding CD39 and CD73, respectively) and other antiinflammatory genes, and control their expression in Th17 cells in response to activin-A. Notably, we show that activin-A negatively regulates the metabolic sensor, hypoxia-inducible factor-1&#x3b1;, and key inflammatory proteins linked to pathogenic Th17 cell states. Of translational relevance, we demonstrate that activin-A is induced in the CNS of individuals with MS and restrains human Th17 cell responses. These findings uncover activin-A as a critical controller of Th17 cell pathogenicity that can be targeted for the suppression of autoimmune CNS inflammation.

### Keywords
Activin a, Mouse, Th17 cells

### Affiliations
Caltech Proteome Exploration Lab
Proteome Exploration Laboratory Beckman Institute California Institute of Technology Pasadena, CA, USA

### Submitter
Brett Lomenick

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D. Garbis
Proteome Exploration Laboratory Beckman Institute California Institute of Technology Pasadena, CA, USA


