### Accession
PXD006128

### Title
Definition of a high-confidence mitochondrial proteome at quantitative scale_subcellular profiling

### Description
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism and signaling and their malfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative, quantitative MS-based experimental approach to define the high confidence proteome of yeast mitochondria and to identify new mitochondrial proteins. The analysis includes protein abundance under fermentable and non-fermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein analysis and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified novel mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) and coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster as well as new mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high confidence source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Sample Protocol
LC/MS sample preparation: Yeast were grown in 0.67% [w/v] yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 3% [v/v] glycerol and selected amino acids and nucleobases. Cell lysates and subcellular fractions including a non-mitochondrial fraction (post-mitochondrial supernatant, PMS), a crude mitochondrial fractions (cM), and gradient-purified mitochondria (pM) were prepared by differential centrifugation as described previously (Meisinger et al., Anal. Biochem. 287, 2000). Proteins (10 µg) of individual fractions (n=4 each) were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 8 M urea/50 mM NH4HCO3. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (30 min, 37°C) and free thiol groups were subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min at RT in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 25 mM. For tryptic digestion, urea concentration was adjusted to 1.6 M using 50 mM NH4HCO3. Trypsin was added at a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50 and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. Proteolysis was stopped by acidifying the samples with 100% TFA. Acidified peptides were cleared by centrifugation (5 min, 12,000 x g, RT) and one-fifth of each digest was analyzed by LC-MS. Please note: the subcellular fractions analyzed in this experiment were derived from SILAC-labeled yeast that were grown for a different, SILAC-based MS experiment (i.e. the comparison of protein abundances in mitochondrial fractions of different purity). The differential metabolic labeling of the proteins present in the subcellular fractions that were analyzed for the global profiling of subcellular protein localizations was not taken into account for further analysis of the data obtained in this experiment.      LC/MS analysis: Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analyzed by nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Peptides were washed and preconcentrated on a PepMap C18 precolumn (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific) and separated using an AcclaimPepMap RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter; pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 2 µm) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and 40°C. For peptide elution, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA)/4% (v/v) DMSO (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA/4% (v/v) DMSO/48% (v/v) methanol/30% (v/v) ACN (solvent B) were used. Peptides were separated by applying a gradient ranging from 1-25% solvent B in 115 min, 25-45% B in 110 min, 45-60% B in 50 min, 60-80% B in 20 min, 80-99% B in 10 min, and 5 min at 99% B. The Orbitrap Elite was externally calibrated using standard compounds and operated with the following parameters: MS survey scans ranging from m/z 370-1,700 were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 400). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 10E6 ions and the maximum injection (IT) time to 200 ms. A TOP25 method was used for low energy collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged precursor peptides in the linear ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 10E3, and a max. IT of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursors was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification and quantification, mass spectrometric raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.3.12) with its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against a custom-made protein database containing all entries of the Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/, downloaded  02/04/2016; 6,726 entries) and 47 entries for putative small open reading frames reported by Smith et al. (Cell Reports 7, 2014). Data were also correlated with a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. The database search was performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions and tryptic specificity (trypsin/P) allowing three missed cleavages. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy labels. The option 'requantify' was disabled, 'match between runs' (match from and to) was enabled. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a length of six amino acids and a maximum mass of  4,600 Da. Lists of peptides and proteins identified by MaxQuant were filtered applying a false discovery rate of 0.01. For SILAC-based protein quantification, at least one unique peptide and a minimum ratio count of one were required. Quantitative analysis of the data was based on MS intensities determined for proteins identified in cell lysates, PMS, crude, and gradient-purified mitochondria. MS intensities of proteins in distinct subcellular fractions were normalized to the total MS intensity per fraction. For each protein and fraction, the mean of the normalized intensities across all replicates (n = 2-4) was determined. For visualization (bar charts for individual proteins), the value of the subcellular fraction with the highest mean normalized intensity was set to one.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism, and signaling, and their dysfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome, and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative experimental approach to define the proteome&#xa0;of yeast mitochondria. We classified &gt; 3,300 proteins of mitochondria and mitochondria-associated fractions and defined 901 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins, expanding the set of mitochondrial proteins by 82. Our analysis includes&#xa0;protein abundance under fermentable and nonfermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein&#xa0;experiments, and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS), and the coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster, as well as mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high-confidence&#xa0;source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Keywords
Organellar proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
Universität Freiburg, Warscheid Lab

### Submitter
Christian D. Peikert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


