### Accession
PXD024995

### Title
Revealing the human cancer-associated mucinome

### Description
Mucin domains are densely O-glycosylated modular protein domains found in a wide variety of cell surface and secreted proteins. Mucin-domain glycoproteins are key players in a host of human diseases, especially cancer, but the scope of the mucinome remains poorly defined. Recently, we characterized a bacterial mucinase, StcE, and demonstrated that an inactive point mutant retains binding selectivity for mucins. In this work, we leveraged inactive StcE to selectively enrich and identify mucins from complex samples like cell lysate and crude ovarian cancer patient ascites fluid. Our enrichment strategy was further aided by an algorithm to assign confidence to mucin-domain glycoprotein identifications. This mucinomics platform facilitated detection of hundreds of glycopeptides from mucin domains and highly overlapping populations of mucin-domain glycoproteins from ovarian cancer patients. Ultimately, we demonstrate our mucinomics approach can reveal key molecular signatures of cancer from in vitro and ex vivo sources.

### Sample Protocol
Inactive point mutant of StcE is conjugated to beads using reductive amidation, then samples are added to beads and allowed to bind overnight at 4 degrees C. Mucins are eluted by boiling the beads in SDS, followed by an in-gel digestion. Samples were desalted using a 96 well C18 plate. Samples were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A portion of the sample was loaded via autosampler isocratically onto a C18 nano pre-column using 0.1% formic acid in water (Solvent A). For all cell lysate samples and enriched ascites fluid, 6.5 µL of sample was injected onto the column; for unenriched ascites fluid, 0.5-6.5 µL of sample was loaded onto the column as determined by peptide BCA. For pre-concentration and desalting, the column was washed with 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water (loading pump solvent). Subsequently, the C18 nano pre-column was switched in line with the C18 nano separation column (75 µm x 250 mm EASYSpray containing 2 µm C18 beads) for gradient elution. The column was held at 45 °C using a column heater in the EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were eluted at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µL/min using a 90 min gradient. The gradient profile was as follows (min:% solvent B, 2% formic acid in acetonitrile) 0:3, 3:5, 93:25, 103:35, 104:90, 109:90, 110:3, 140:3. The instrument method used an MS1 resolution of 60,000 at FWHM 400 m/z, an AGC target of 3e5, and a mass range from 350 to 1,500 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 3, repeat duration of 10 s, exclusion duration of 10 s. Only charge states 2-6 were selected for fragmentation. MS2s were generated at top speed for 3 s. HCD was performed on all selected precursor masses with the following parameters: isolation window of 2 m/z, 30% collision energy, orbitrap detection (resolution of 30,000), and an AGC target of 1e4 ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4, and tandem mass spectra were searched with the Andromeda search algorithm. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A precursor ion search tolerance of 20 ppm and a product ion mass tolerance of 0.3 Da were used for searches, and two missed cleavages were allowed for full trypsin specificity. Peptide spectral matches were made against a target-decoy human reference proteome database downloaded from Uniprot. Peptides were filtered to a 1% FDR and a 1% protein FDR was applied according to the target-decoy method. Proteins were identified and quantified using at least one peptide (razor + unique), where razor peptide is defined as a non-unique peptide assigned to the protein group with the most other peptides (Occams razor principle). Proteins were quantified and normalized using MaxLFQ68 with a label-free quantification (LFQ) minimum ratio count of 1. LFQ intensities were calculated using the match between runs feature, and MS/MS spectra were required for LFQ comparisons. For quantitative Article comparisons, protein intensity values were log2-transformed before further analysis, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with width 0.3 and downshift value of 1.8 (that is, default values) using the Perseus software suite. A Boolean value IsAMucin was also appended to each protein, with the value set as true if the Mucin Score was greater than 1. Mucin Scores and IsAMucin were input manually into MQ protein groups txt files for manipulation in Perseus. Significance testing was performed in Perseus using a two-tailed t-test with 250 randomizations, an FDR of 0.01, and an S0 value of 2 (all volcano plots), or in Microsoft Excel using a two-tailed t-test with heteroscedastic variance. Proteins were sorted by their Mucin Score and highlighted in red if the score was higher than 2 (high probability mucin), orange if between 2-1.5 (medium probability mucin), and yellow if between 1.5 and 1 (low probability mucin). Upset plots and the 5-sample Venn diagram were generated using the Intervene Shiny app (https://intervene.shinyapps.io/intervene/). GO term enrichments were performed using DAVID, with the human proteome as a background.

### Publication Abstract
Mucin domains are densely O-glycosylated modular protein domains found in various extracellular and transmembrane proteins. Mucin-domain glycoproteins play important roles in many human diseases, such as cancer and cystic fibrosis, but the scope of the mucinome remains poorly defined. Recently, we characterized a bacterial O-glycoprotease, StcE, and demonstrated that an inactive point mutant retains binding selectivity for mucin-domain glycoproteins. In this work, we leverage inactive StcE to selectively enrich and identify mucin-domain glycoproteins from complex samples like cell lysate and crude ovarian cancer patient ascites fluid. Our enrichment strategy is further aided by an algorithm to assign confidence to mucin-domain glycoprotein identifications. This mucinomics platform facilitates detection of hundreds of glycopeptides from mucin domains and highly overlapping populations of mucin-domain glycoproteins from ovarian cancer patients. Ultimately, we demonstrate our mucinomics approach can reveal key molecular signatures of cancer from in vitro and ex vivo sources.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Mucin, Proteomics, Mucinome, O-glycosylation, Mucinase, Mass spectrometry, Cancer

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University, Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Stacy Malaker

### Lab Head
Dr Stacy Malaker
Yale University, Department of Chemistry


