### Accession
PXD002172

### Title
miR-625-3p regulates oxaliplatin resistance by targeting MAP2K6-p38 signaling in human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells

### Description
Oxaliplatin (oxPt) resistance in colorectal cancers (CRC) is a major unsolved problem. Consequently, predictive markers and a better understanding of resistance mechanisms are urgently needed. To investigate if the recently identified predictive miR-625-3p is functionally involved in oxPt resistance, stable and inducible models of miR-625-3p dysregulation were analyzed. Ectopic expression of miR-625-3p in CRC cells led to increased resistance towards oxPt. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase 6 (MAP2K6/MKK6) – an activator of p38 MAPK - was identified as a functional target of miR-625-3p, and, in agreement, was down-regulated in patients not responding to oxPt therapy. The miR-625-3p resistance phenotype could be reversed by anti-miR-625-3p treatment and by ectopic expression of a miR-625-3p insensitive MAP2K6 variant. Transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome profiles revealed inactivation of MAP2K6-p38 signaling as a possible driving force behind oxPt resistance. We conclude that miR-625-3p induces oxPt resistance by abrogating MAP2K6-p38 regulated apoptosis and cell cycle control networks. Experimental design for mass spectrometry SILAC experiments can be found at https://figshare.com/s/8e79f008e0e58ec6efc2 or https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.4888139

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in SILAC RPMI 1640 medium. The proteins were pre-digested with LysC (Wako) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 3 h followed by dilution with 50 mM ABC pH 8.0 to 2 M urea and further digested overnight with trypsin 1:100 (w/w). Phospho enrichment were done using following protocol http://link.springer.com/protocol/10.1007%2F978-1-4939-3049-4_17. The peptide mixture was separated on an in-house made 50 cm capillary column packed with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Denmark). The column temperature was maintained at 50 °C using a column oven and the LC system was interfaced online with the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Formic acid 0.1% was used to buffer the pH in the two running buffers used. The total gradient was 250 min followed by a 15 min washout and re-equilibration. In detail, the flow rate started at 250 nL/min and 5% ACN with a linear increase to 25% ACN over 220 min followed by 30 min linear increase to 60% ACN. The washout followed with 60% ACN for 5 min followed by re-equilibration with a 5 min linear gradient back down to 5% ACN which were maintained for the last 5 min. For phosphopeptide enriched samples the Q Exactive was operated with a data dependent method using Top10. Full scan resolutions were set to 70 000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3 × 106 and a maximum fill time of 20 ms. Mass range was set to 300–1750 m/z. Fragment scan resolution were set to 35 000 with target value 1 × 105 and maximum fill time 108 ms. Proteome data was acquired with a Top12 method and fragment scan resolution 17 500 and 44 ms fill time. Isolation width was 2 m/z and normalized collision energy (NCE) 28 for phospho enriched samples and 2.2 m/z and 25 NCE for proteome samples.

### Data Protocol
All raw LC–MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.4.1.4 65, and searched against the human Uniprot database (April 2012 release). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification for both groups. For the proteome data, variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and pyro-glutamate formation from glutamine. The phosphoproteome data was additionally searched with phosphorylation as a variable modification of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. The match between run option was enabled, and the minimum score for both modified and unmodified peptides were set to 25, we used false discovery rate limit of 1% on peptide level.


### Publication Abstract
Oxaliplatin resistance in colorectal cancers (CRC) is a major medical problem, and predictive markers are urgently needed. Recently, miR-625-3p was reported as a promising predictive marker. Herein, we show that miR-625-3p functionally induces oxaliplatin resistance in CRC cells, and identify the signalling networks affected by miR-625-3p. We show that the p38 MAPK activator MAP2K6 is a direct target of miR-625-3p, and, accordingly, is downregulated in non-responder patients of oxaliplatin therapy. miR-625-3p-mediated resistance is reversed by anti-miR-625-3p treatment and ectopic expression of a miR-625-3p insensitive MAP2K6 variant. In addition, reduction of p38 signalling by using siRNAs, chemical inhibitors or expression of a dominant-negative MAP2K6 protein induces resistance to oxaliplatin. Transcriptome, proteome and phosphoproteome profiles confirm inactivation of MAP2K6-p38 signalling as one likely mechanism of oxaliplatin resistance. Our study shows that miR-625-3p induces oxaliplatin resistance by abrogating MAP2K6-p38-regulated apoptosis and cell cycle control networks, and corroborates the predictive power of miR-625-3p.

### Keywords
Kf

### Affiliations
Univesity of Copenhagen, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Rosa Jersie-Christensen

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Univesity of Copenhagen, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program


