### Accession
PXD002445

### Title
Reprocessed: Chick utricle hair bundles and utricular epithelium—Orbitrap

### Description
This is a reanalysis of PXD000104. Purified hair bundles and utricular epithelium from E19-E20 chick inner ears were analyzed by LC-MS/MS to determine the abundant and enriched proteins of the hair bundle. This dataset used a Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer for protein detection.

### Sample Protocol
Hair bundles were purified from biological-replicate sets of 100 chick ears each using the twist-off method, which captures bundles in agarose. The utricular epithelium was prepared by peeling the sensory cell layer off of the stroma of a chick utricle; ~10 ears were used for each biological replicate. Proteins of bundle and epithelium replicates were separated by a short SDS-PAGE run, and six gel slices were prepared for each replicate. Proteins in the gel slices were reduced, alkylated, and subjected to trypsin digestion. Peptides were recovered and subjected to LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Quantitation using MS1. MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 software was used for protein identification and quantitation. The default contaminants file associated with the MaxQuant download was edited to remove entries known to be present in hair bundles (e.g., actin) and to add additional impurities that entered the bundle-purification workflow (keratins, hemoglobins, egg white components). Mass spectrometry data were searched against Ensembl version 77 (released October, 2014) using Andromeda; the Ensembl FASTA file was edited by replacing several sequences with longer or full-length sequences, including actin gamma 1 (NP_001007825.1), actin beta (NP_990849.1), fascin 1 (NP_001171603), fascin 2 (NP_001171209), ATP synthase beta (NP_001026562.1), peptidylprolyl isomerase A (NP_001159798.1), calbindin 2 (NP_990647.1), PDZD7 (XP_003641537.1), espin (XP_417532.3), and CACNA2D2 (XP_427707.3). Protein identifications were reported with an FDR of 1% or 5%. If a set of peptides for a protein was identical to or completely contained within that of another protein, MaxQuant groups those proteins together ("redundant groups"); the entry with the largest number of peptides was used to identify the redundant group. Redundant groups that shared more than 20% of their identified peptides were further grouped in our analysis ("shared-peptide groups"); the entry with the greatest intensity associated with it was used to identify the shared-peptide group.   Quantitation using MS2. Comet version 2014.02 rev 2 was used to match MS2 spectra from .RAW files to a FASTA file for the Gallus gallus Ensembl database. An in-house processing pipeline (PAW) was used to select peptides, match them to proteins, and group proteins with shared peptides. For each peptide identification, the total intensity of the top 50 most intense fragment ions were computed (MS2 intensity). The total sum of MS2 intensities of all peptides mapped to respective proteins were used as proxies for protein abundances (protein intensity). To determine the relative molar abundance (im) for each protein or protein group in each bundle or epithelium replicate, the protein intensity was first divided by molecular mass, and then was normalized by the sum of all protein intensity/mass values (excluding contaminant and decoy entries).

### Publication Abstract
Examination of multiple proteomics datasets within or between species increases the reliability of protein identification. We report here proteomes of inner-ear hair bundles from three species (chick, mouse, and rat), which were collected on LTQ or LTQ Velos ion-trap mass spectrometers; the constituent proteins were quantified using MS2 intensities, which are the summed intensities of all peptide fragmentation spectra matched to a protein. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD002410 (chick LTQ), PXD002414 (chick Velos), PXD002415 (mouse Velos), and PXD002416 (rat LTQ). The two chick bundle datasets compared favourably to a third, already-described chick bundle dataset, which was quantified using MS1 peak intensities, the summed intensities of peptides identified by high-resolution mass spectrometry (PXD000104; updated analysis in PXD002445). The mouse bundle dataset described here was comparable to a different mouse bundle dataset quantified using MS1 intensities (PXD002167). These six datasets will be useful for identifying the core proteome of vestibular hair bundles.

### Keywords
Stereocilia, Hair cells, Utricle, Vestibular

### Affiliations
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR, USA
Oregon Hearing Research Center

### Submitter
Peter Barr-Gillespie

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barr-Gillespie
Oregon Hearing Research Center Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR, USA


