### Accession
PXD026740

### Title
Capturing Salmonella SspH2 Host Targets in Virus-Like Particles

### Description
In the context of host-pathogen interactions, gram-negative bacterial virulence factors, such as effectors, may be transferred from bacterial to eukaryotic host cytoplasm by multicomponent Type III protein secretion systems (T3SSs). Central to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) pathogenesis is the secretion of over 40 effectors by two T3SSs encoded within pathogenicity islands SPI-1 and SPI-2. These effectors manipulate miscellaneous host cellular processes, such as cytoskeleton organization and immune signaling pathways, thereby permitting host colonization and bacterial dissemination. Recent research on effector biology provided mechanistic insights for some effectors. However, for many effectors, clearly defined roles and host target repertoires—further clarifying effector interconnectivity and virulence networks—are yet to be uncovered. Here we demonstrate the utility of the recently described viral-like particle trapping technology Virotrap as an effective approach to catalogue S. Typhimurium effector-host protein complexes (EH-PCs). Mass spectrometry-based Virotrap analysis of the novel E3 ubiquitin ligase SspH2 previously shown to be implicated in modulating actin dynamics and immune signaling, exposed known host interactors PFN1 and -2 and several putative novel, interconnected host targets. Network analysis revealed an actin(-binding) cluster among the significantly enriched hits for SspH2, consistent with the known localization of the S-palmitoylated effector with actin cytoskeleton components in the host. We show that Virotrap complements the current state-of-the-art toolkit to study protein complexes and represents a valuable means to screen for effector host targets in a high-throughput manner, thereby bridging the knowledge gap between effector-host interplay and pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Virotrap was essentially performed as described previously (Titeca et al., 2017). In brief, ten million HEK293T cells were seeded per 75 cm2 flask (T75) in complete DMEM and transfected in duplicate the next day using polyethylenimine (PEI) reagent (linear 25 kDa, Polysciences, Inc.). The transfected DNA/PEI mixture consisted of 0.71 μg pcDNA3-FLAG-VSV-G, 0.36 μg pMD2.G, 6.43 μg pMET7-GAG-SP1-sspH2 (bait samples) or 3.75 µg pMET7-GAG-SP1-eDHFR and 2.67 µg pSVsport (control samples) and 37.5 μL PEI (1 mg/mL solution in MQ, pH 7.0) per T75. The cellular supernatant was harvested 48 h after transfection, spun at 1500xg for 3 minutes at room temperature and filtered through a 0.45 μm Millex® filter (Millipore). Per sample (equivalent of T75), 20 μL MyOne Streptavidin T1 beads (10 mg/mL; Invitrogen), washed in 20 mM TRIS HCl pH 7.5 and 150 mM NaCl, was loaded with 2 μL anti-FLAG BioM2-biotin antibodies (1 mg/mL; ANTI-FLAG® BioM2, cat no. F9291, Sigma Aldrich) in 200 μL washing buffer by end-over-end rotation and incubation for 2 h. VLPs were allowed to bind the anti-FLAG-coated beads for 2 h by end-over-end rotation at room temperature. Bead-bound VLP complexes were washed once with washing buffer and eluted using 20 µL elution buffer (20 mM TRIS HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 200 µg/ml FLAG-peptide) and incubate for 30 minutes at 37°C. Subsequently, VLPs were lysed by addition of 2.2 µL amphipathic polymer solution (Amphipol A8-35, Anatrace; final concentration of 1 mg/mL) and incubation for 10 minutes. For protein concentration, proteins were pelleted from the lysates by acidification (0.2% final concentration formic acid) (Ning et al., 2014). After acidification, protein pellets were dissolved in 20 μL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 8.5), boiled and digested overnight using 0.5 μg of sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega). After a final acidification step (0.4% formic acid, final concentration), samples were separated on an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Scientific; 7.5 μL injected, 1.5 h long run) as described previously (Fijalkowska et al., 2017; Stes et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed using MaxQuant (Version 1.6.6.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the human SwissProt Proteome Database (Release 2020-06) complemented with streptavidin monomer, eDHFR, FLAG-VSV-G, VSV-G, Gag and SL1344 SspH2 protein sequences. In MaxQuant, multiplicity was set to one, indicating that no labels were used. Furthermore, we performed label-free quantification (LFQ) using MaxQuant's standard settings with a minimum of two ratio counts and only unique peptides considered for protein quantification. A decoy database of reversed protein sequences was used to estimate FDR, and 1% FDR threshold was applied. Matching between runs was implemented with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications and trypsin/P was set as the digestion enzyme.  N-terminal acetylation was included in protein quantification. The MaxQuant ProteinGroups data file was processed using R Studio (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, V1.3.959) and custom R scripts. Proteins exclusively identified in the Virotrap control samples were excluded from further downstream processing and statistical analysis. The dataset was further filtered based on reversed hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site. For identifications with LFQ values calculated for both Gag-SspH2 bait replicates (i.e. 2 valid values), LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed using the QRILC function with default parameters from the imputeLCMD package in R (Lazar, 2015). Significance was assessed using Limma in R (Ritchie et al., 2015) as previously demonstrated (Kammers et al., 2015). Replicate samples were grouped and compared to the control samples (Gag-eDHFR) in a pairwise analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In the context of host-pathogen interactions, gram-negative bacterial virulence factors, such as effectors, may be transferred from bacterial to eukaryotic host cytoplasm by multicomponent Type III protein secretion systems (T3SSs). Central to <i>Salmonella enterica</i> serovar Typhimurium (<i>S</i>. Typhimurium) pathogenesis is the secretion of over 40 effectors by two T3SSs encoded within pathogenicity islands SPI-1 and SPI-2. These effectors manipulate miscellaneous host cellular processes, such as cytoskeleton organization and immune signaling pathways, thereby permitting host colonization and bacterial dissemination. Recent research on effector biology provided mechanistic insights for some effectors. However, for many effectors, clearly defined roles and host target repertoires-further clarifying effector interconnectivity and virulence networks-are yet to be uncovered. Here we demonstrate the utility of the recently described viral-like particle trapping technology Virotrap as an effective approach to catalog <i>S</i>. Typhimurium effector-host protein complexes (EH-PCs). Mass spectrometry-based Virotrap analysis of the novel E3 ubiquitin ligase SspH2 previously shown to be implicated in modulating actin dynamics and immune signaling, exposed known host interactors PFN1 and-2 besides several putative novel, interconnected host targets. Network analysis revealed an actin (-binding) cluster among the significantly enriched hits for SspH2, consistent with the known localization of the <i>S</i>-palmitoylated effector with actin cytoskeleton components in the host. We show that Virotrap complements the current state-of-the-art toolkit to study protein complexes and represents a valuable means to screen for effector host targets in a high-throughput manner, thereby bridging the knowledge gap between effector-host interplay and pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Virotrap, Effector, Ssph2

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Belgium
Universiteit Gent, VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Margaux De Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Belgium


