### Accession
PXD017899

### Title
Separation of the Bioactive Exosomes from Extracellular Vesicles Derived from Murine CTLs

### Description
Recently, instead of ultracentrifugation, development of new preparation protocol is demanded for research of reliable bioactivity and drug discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs). In this study, we propose a novel method for large scale preparation of high-performance extracellular vesicles focusing on membrane negative charge.

### Sample Protocol
Unbiased lipidomics was performed as described previously (Tsugawa et al., 2017). Briefly, the dried EV fraction was re-dissolved in 320 µL of chloroform/methanol/water (1/2/0.2) and sonicated for 2 min. After 40 min incubation at 20 ˚C, the mixture was centrifuged at 1670 x g for 10 min at 20 ˚C, and the supernatant was transferred to a LC vial. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a quadruple time-of-flight (Q TOF)/MS (TripleTOF 6600; Sciex Co. Ltd.) coupled with an ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Co. Ltd,). LC separation was performed with a gradient elution of mobile phase A [methanol/acetonitrile/water (1/1/3, v/v/v) containing 5 mM ammonium acetate (Fujifilm Wako Chemicals) and 10 nM EDTA (Dojindo)] and mobile phase B (isopropanol containing 5 mM ammonium acetate and 10 nM EDTA). The flow rate was 300 µL/min at 45°C and the injection volume was 1 µL. Information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode was applied to confirm each of the lipid structures in negative-ion mode.

### Data Protocol
MS-DIAL and MS-FINDER softwares were used as extraction of sphingolipids and phospholipid, and quantified by multiQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
The development of a new large-scale purification protocol is required for research on the reliable bioactivity and drug discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs). To address this issue, herein, we propose an effective method for preparing high-performance exosomes (EXOs) by using an anion-exchange method. Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) EVs from 4 L of culture supernatant through a 220&#xa0;nm cut-off filter are divided into two populations at a deproteinization rate of over 99.97%, which are eluted at low (0.15&#xa0;M-0.3&#xa0;M) and high (0.3&#xa0;M-0.5&#xa0;M) NaCl concentrations (approximately 2&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10<sup>12</sup> and 1.5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10<sup>12</sup> particles, respectively) through the anion-exchange column chromatography. The former are abundant in EXO proteins, including late endosome-associated proteins and rab-family and integrin-family proteins, and functional micro (mi) RNAs, and have bioactivity for preventing tumour&#xa0;metastasis by depleting mesenchymal cell populations in the primary tumour&#xa0;lesions. By contrast, the latter is microvesicle (MV)-like particles including DNA, core histone and ribosomal proteins, and GC-rich miRNAs with unknown function, and are easily phagocytosed by mannose receptor<sup>+</sup> Kupffer cells. Thus, the anion-exchange method is suitable for the large-scale separation of bioactive EXOs and MV-like EVs as a cargo for dangerous nucleic acids at high-purity.

### Keywords
Lipidome, Exosome, Ctl

### Affiliations
Mie University Graduate School of Medicine

### Submitter
Naohiro Seo

### Lab Head
Dr Naohiro Seo
Mie University Graduate School of Medicine


