### Accession
PXD037344

### Title
The pupal molting fluid has evolved social functions in ants

### Description
Insect societies are tightly integrated, complex biological systems in which group-level properties arise from the interactions between individuals. However, these interactions have not been studied systematically and therefore remain incompletely known. Using a social isolation approach, we discovered that ant pupae extrude a secretion derived from the molting fluid that is rich in nutrients, hormones, and neuroactive substances. This secretion is consumed by adults, and leads to fungal infections and death of pupae if not removed. Analogous to mammalian milk, the secretion is also an important source of early larval nutrition, and young larvae exhibit stunted growth and decreased survival without access to the fluid. This secretion thus forms the basis of a central and hitherto overlooked interaction network in ant societies.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from pupal social fluid and whole-body wash were extracted with acetonitrile: methanol: formic acid. Protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC), and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and disulfide bonds were reduced for 1 hour at room temperature. Alkylation was performed by adding iodoacetamide (IAA) to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubating for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted using 50 mM AMBIC until the concentration of urea had reached 3.5 M, and proteins were digested with endopeptidase LysC overnight at room temperature. Samples were further diluted to bring the urea concentration to 1.5 M before sequencing-grade modified trypsin was added. Digestion proceeded for 6 hours at room temperature before being halted by acidification with TFA and samples were purified using in-house constructed C18 micropurification tips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex3000 nanoflow HPLC and a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. Peptides were separated on a 90-minute linear gradient at 300 nL/minute across a 75 µm*100 mm fused-silica column packed with 3 µm Reprosil C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Germany). The MS operated in positive ion Top20 DDA mode at resolution 60 k/30 k (MS1/MS2) and AGC targets were 3e6/2e5 (MS1/MS2).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched through Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and spectra were queried against the Ooceraea biroi proteome using MASCOT with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) applied. Oxidation of M and acetylation of protein N-termini were applied as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of C was applied as a static modification. The average area of the three most abundant peptides for a matched protein was used to gauge protein amounts within and between samples.

### Publication Abstract
Insect societies are tightly integrated, complex biological systems in which group-level properties arise from the interactions between individuals<sup>1-4</sup>. However, these interactions have not been studied systematically and therefore remain incompletely known. Here, using a reverse engineering approach, we reveal that unlike solitary insects, ant pupae extrude a secretion derived from the moulting fluid that is rich in nutrients, hormones and neuroactive substances. This secretion elicits parental care behaviour and is rapidly removed and consumed by the adults. This behaviour is crucial for pupal survival; if the secretion is not removed, pupae develop fungal infections and die. Analogous to mammalian milk, the secretion is also an important source of early larval nutrition, and young larvae exhibit stunted growth and decreased survival without access to the fluid. We show that this derived social function of the moulting fluid generalizes across the ants. This secretion thus forms the basis of a central and hitherto overlooked interaction network in ant societies, and constitutes a rare example of how a conserved developmental process can be co-opted to provide the mechanistic basis of social interactions. These results implicate moulting fluids in having a major role in the evolution of ant eusociality.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Molting fluid, Eusociality, Trophallaxis, Development, Evolution, Molting, Ant pupa, Parental care behavior, Social fluid

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Social Evolution and Behavior, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065
Research Support Specialist

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel J C Kronauer
Laboratory of Social Evolution and Behavior, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065


