### Accession
PXD026512

### Title
WASH pulldown proteomics analysis

### Description
Affinity pulldown-paired quantitative proteomic analysis of HA-YFP-NLS.WASH interactors.

### Sample Protocol
HEK-293T cells expressing HA-YFP-NLS.WASH were lysed, subjected to subsequent anti-HA affinity purification, and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification were performed with the Mascot against the uniprot20160315 Database.

### Publication Abstract
The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein and SCAR homolog (WASH), an actin nucleation-promoting factor, is present in the nucleus where it regulates gene transcription and maintains nuclear organization. Here, we show that WASH interacts with core non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) factors including Ku70/Ku80 and DNA-PKcs, and Ku70/Ku80 is involved in the recruitment of WASH to the sites of DNA double-stranded break (DSB). WASH depletion leads to increased cell sensitivity and impaired DNA repair capacity in response to etoposide-induced DSBs and reduces NHEJ efficiency. Mechanistically, we show that loss of WASH inhibits the phosphorylation of DNA-PKcs, H2AX, and KAP1 after DSB induction and reduces chromatin relaxation and the recruitment of several downstream NHEJ factors to DSBs. Moreover, WASH role in DSB repair depends on its conserved C-terminal VCA domain and Arp2/3 activation. Our findings reveal a function and mechanistic insight for WASH in DNA DSB repair by the NHEJ pathway.

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Wash, 293t

### Affiliations
Qiqihar medical university
Laboratory of Protein Structure and Function, Institute of Medicine and Pharmacy, Qiqihar Medical University, Qiqihar, Heilongjiang 161006, China.

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi-Hui Deng
Laboratory of Protein Structure and Function, Institute of Medicine and Pharmacy, Qiqihar Medical University, Qiqihar, Heilongjiang 161006, China.


