### Accession
PXD015759

### Title
Open-pFind Enhances the Identification of Missing Proteins from Human Testis Tissue

### Description
In recent years, high-throughput technologies have contributed to development a more precise picture of the human proteome. However, 2,129 proteins remain listed as missing proteins (MPs) in the newest neXtProt release (2019-02). The main reasons for MPs are a low abundance, low-molecular-weight (LMW), unexpected modifications, membrane characteristics, etc. Moreover, more than 50% of the MS/MS data have not been successfully identified in shotgun proteomics. Open-pFind, an efficient open search engine, recently released by the pFind group in China, presents an opportunity to identify these buried MPs in complex samples. Proteins and potential MPs were identified using Open-pFind and three other search engines to compare their performance and efficiency with three large-scale datasets digested by different enzymes. Our results demonstrated that Open-pFind identified 29.9-47.5% more peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), 48.0-63.9% more peptides sequences (with modifications) and 22.7-38.1% more peptide sequences (regardless of modifications) than those identified by the second-best search engine. As a result, Open-pFind detected 7.5-19.3% more candidate MPs than those by the second-best search engine. In total, 5 (PE2) of the 150 candidate MPs identified by Open-pFind were verified from two unique peptides containing more than 9 amino acids (AA) by using spectrum theoretical prediction with pDeep, and synthesized peptide matching with pBuild, after spectrum quality analysis, isobaric post-translational modification, and single amino acid variant (SAAV) filtering. These five verified MPs can be ranked in the PE1 level. In addition, three other candidate MPs were verified with two unique peptides (one peptide containing more than 9 AA) and the other containing only 8 AA), which were slightly lower than the criteria listed by C-HPP, and required additional verification information. More importantly, unexpected modifications were detected in these MPs. Another 141 MPs were listed as candidates, but required additional verification information.

### Sample Protocol
30 min and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature for 30 min. Total nine sample were then resolved by a 10% short SDS-PAGE, and stained with Coomassie Blue G250. Each individual samples were separately digested with proteases of Glu-C, Lys-C, Trypsin. The extracted peptides were separated by RP-HPLC.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained from each enzyme were, respectively, processed using Open-pFind (version 3.1.5, open search mode), pFind (version 3.1.5, restricted search mode), MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.0), and Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388, Sequest HT), against the PeptideAtlas (2019-01), Swiss-Prot reviewed database (2019-01) and neXtProt database (20,399, 2019-01). The detailed parameters of the three search engines (pFind, MaxQuant and Proteome Discoverer) are described in the Supplemental Table 1. Briefly, full cleavage with up to two missed cleavage sites was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was a variable modification. Both the tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions were set to 20 ppm. Peptide length ≥7 amino acids (AA) was included. In each datasets, the false discovery rates were set as ≤ 1% in the PSM, peptide and protein levels. For open search with Open-pFind, all modifications of Unimod22 were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
In recent years, high-throughput technologies have contributed to the development of a more precise picture of the human proteome. However, 2129 proteins remain listed as missing proteins (MPs) in the newest neXtProt release (2019-02). The main reasons for MPs are a low abundance, a low molecular weight, unexpected modifications, membrane characteristics, and so on. Moreover, &gt;50% of the MS/MS data have not been successfully identified in shotgun proteomics. Open-pFind, an efficient open search engine, recently released by the pFind group in China, might provide an opportunity to identify these buried MPs in complex samples. In this study, proteins and potential MPs were identified using Open-pFind and three other search engines to compare their performance and efficiency with three large-scale data sets digested by three enzymes (Glu-C, Lys-C, and trypsin) with specificity on different amino acid (AA) residues. Our results demonstrated that Open-pFind identified 44.7-93.1% more peptide-spectrum matches and 21.3-61.6% more peptide sequences than the second-best search engine. As a result, Open-pFind detected 53.1% more MP candidates than MaxQuant and 8.8% more candidate MPs than Proteome Discoverer. In total, 5 (PE2) of the 124 MP candidates identified by Open-pFind were verified with 2 or 3 unique peptides containing more than 9 AAs by using a spectrum theoretical prediction with pDeep and synthesized peptide matching with pBuild after spectrum quality analysis, isobaric post-translational modification, and single amino acid variant filtering. These five verified MPs can be saved as PE1 proteins. In addition, three other MP candidates were verified with two unique peptides (one peptide containing more than 9 AAs and the other containing only 8 AAs), which was slightly lower than the criteria listed by C-HPP and required additional verification information. More importantly, unexpected modifications were detected in these MPs. All MS data sets have been deposited into ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD015759.

### Keywords
Testis, Open-pfind，efficiency, Missing proteins, Chromosome-centric human proteome project

### Affiliations
Ping Xu, Ph.D. Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China. Tel: 0086-10-61777113, Fax: 0086-10-61777060
Student

### Submitter
Sun jinshuai

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Ping Xu, Ph.D. Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China. Tel: 0086-10-61777113, Fax: 0086-10-61777060


