### Accession
PXD006604

### Title
Cotton fiber LC-MS/MS -  Proteomic Analysis of Differences in Fiber Development between Wild and Cultivated Gossypium hirsutum L

### Description
Upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) is one of the world’s most important fiber crops, accounting for more than 90% of all cotton production. While their wild progenitors have relatively short and coarse, often tan-colored fibers, modern cotton cultivars possess longer, finer, stronger, and whiter fiber. In this study, the wild and cultivated cottons (YU-3 and TM-1) selected show significant differences on fibers at 10 day post-anthesis (DPA), 20 DPA and mature stages at the physiological level. In order to explore the effects of domestication, reveal molecular mechanisms underlying these phenotypic differences and better inform our efforts to further enhance cotton fiber quality, an iTRAQ-facilitated proteomic methods were performed on developing fibers. There were 6990 proteins identified, among them 336 were defined as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between fibers of wild versus domesticated cotton. The down- or up-regulated proteins in wild cotton were involved in Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, Zeatin biosynthesis, Fatty acid elongation and other processes. Association analysis between transcroptome and proteome showed positive correlations between transcripts and proteins at both 10 DPA and 20 DPA. The difference of proteomics had been verified at the mRNA level by qPCR, also at physiological and biochemical level by POD activity determination and ZA content estimation. This work corroborate the major pathways involved in cotton fiber development and demonstrate that POD activity and zeatin content have a great potential related to fiber elongation and thickening.

### Sample Protocol
we used a cultivated and wild accession from Gossypium hirsutum. The modern cultivated line chosen was TM-1. The wild accessions chosen was YU-3. TM-1 and YU-3 plants were grown in greenhouses at the south species breeding base of CAAS, Damao (E 109°37′, N 18°20′ ), Sanya, China. Cotton bolls were harvested at 10 DPA and 20 DPA. Fiber tissues were separated from ovules immediately and finely ground in liquid nitrogen. Three biological replicates of TM-1 fibers and one biological replicate of YU-3 fibers were performed. 1. Protein preparation:  A. Grind. Plant tissues were finely ground in liquid nitrogen.  B. Sonicate. The powders were suspended in lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA) and sonicated in ice.  C. Alkylate. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT (final concentration) at 56℃ for 1 h and then alkylated by 55 mM IAM in the darkroom for 1 h. The reduced and alkylated protein mixtures were precipitated by adding 4× volume of chilled acetone at -20℃ overnight.  D. Centrifuge. After centrifuging at 30000 g at 4℃, an aliquot of the supernatant was taken for determination of protein concentration by a spectrophotometer. 2. The program of iTRAQ labeling:  The TM-1 proteins were labeled with iTRAQ tags as follows: 113 (10 DPA_1), 114 (20 DPA_1), 115 (10 DPA_2), 116 (20 DPA_2), 117 (10 DPA_3), 118 (20 DPA_3); and the YU-3 proteins were labeled with tags 119 (10 DPA) and 121 (20 DPA).  A. Digest. Total protein (100 μg) was taken out of each sample solution and digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C for 16 hours with a protein : trypsin ratio of 30 : 1. B. Reconstitute. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, then reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL isopropanol. C. Label. The peptides were labeled with the isobaric tags, incubating at room temperature for 2 h. D. Dry. The labeled peptide mixtures were then pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 3. The program of SCX chromatography SCX chromatography was performed with a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). A. Load. The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 mL buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a 4.6×250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex). B. Elute. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1mL/min with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5-60% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.7) for 27 min, 60-100% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained at 100% buffer B for 1 min before equilibrating with buffer A for 10 min prior to the next injection. C. Collect. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. 4. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis based on Ttiple TOF 5600 Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20000 g for 10 min, resulting in a final peptide concentration of about 0.5 μg/μl on average. A. Load. 10 μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column. Peptides were eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. Samples were loaded at 8 μL/min for 4 min, then the 35 min gradient was run at 300 nL/min from 2 to 35% buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA), followed by 5 min linear gradient to 60% then 2 min linear gradient to 80%, then maintenance at 80% B for 4 min, and finally returned to 5% in 1 min. B. Data acquisition. Data acquisition was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and an interface heater temperature of 150℃. The MS was operated with a RP of greater than or equal to 30 000 FWHM for TOF MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms. As many as 30 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed to 3.3 s. Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulser frequency value of 11 kHz through monitoring of the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with four-anode channel detect ion. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35±5 eV coupled with iTRAQ adjust rolling collision energy was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (15 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo), [5600 msconverter] and the MGF files were searched. Protein identifications were performed by using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against an Upland cotton TM-1 database (Gossypium_hirsutum_v1.1, http://mascotton.njau.edu.cn/) containing 70478 protein sequences. The parameters setting in our search were as follows: a mass tolerance of 0.05 Da (ppm) was permitted for intact peptide masses and 0.1 Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavage in trypsin digests, Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ) as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. To reduce the probability of false identification, only peptides with significance scores (≥20) at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified. Each confident protein identification involved at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, it was required that a protein contained at least two unique peptides. Quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot. We only used ratios with p-values < 0.05, and only fold changes > 2 were considered significant. Protein ortholog classification was performed with Cluster of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG) database. Personalized GO and KEGG enrichment analysis was performed using the OmicShare tools, a free online platform for data analysis (www.omicshare.com/tools).

### Publication Abstract
Upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) is one of the world's most important fiber crops, accounting for more than 90% of all cotton production. While their wild progenitors have relatively short and coarse, often tan-colored fibers, modern cotton cultivars possess longer, finer, stronger, and whiter fiber. In this study, the wild and cultivated cottons (YU-3 and TM-1) selected show significant differences on fibers at 10 days postanthesis (DPA), 20 DPA, and mature stages at the morphological level. To explore the effects of domestication, reveal molecular mechanisms underlying these phenotypic differences, and better inform our efforts to further enhance cotton fiber quality, isobaric tags for relative and absolute protein quantification-facilitated proteomic methods were performed on developing fibers. There were 6990 proteins identified; among them, 336 were defined as differentially expressed proteins between fibers of wild versus domesticated cotton. The down- or up-regulated proteins in wild cotton were involved in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, zeatin biosynthesis, fatty acid elongation, and other processes. Association analysis between transcriptome and proteome showed positive correlations between transcripts and proteins at both 10 DPA and 20 DPA. Differences in proteomics have been verified at the mRNA level by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and have been validated at the physiological and biochemical levels by POD (peroxidase) activity assays and ZA (zeatin) content estimates. This work corroborates the major pathways involved in cotton fiber development and demonstrates that POD activity and zeatin content have a great potential related to fiber elongation and thickening.

### Keywords
Gossypium hirsutun, Domestication, Fiber development, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, No.38 Huanghe Road, Anyang, Henan 455000, China
State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, No.38 Huanghe Road, Anyang, Henan 455000, China. Phone: +86 18272203876

### Submitter
Yuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Shuxun Yu
Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, No.38 Huanghe Road, Anyang, Henan 455000, China


