### Accession
PXD032808

### Title
Proteome of extracellular vesicles from plasma of COVID-19 patients

### Description
Background: Extracellular vesicles are a valuable source of biomarkers and display the pathophysiological status of various diseases. In COVID-19, EVs are explored in several studies for their ability to reflect molecular changes caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection and impacts on disease progression. Methods: In this study, we used a label-free shotgun proteomics approach to identify and quantify any alterations in EVs proteins abundance in severe COVID-19 patients. We isolated plasma extracellular vesicles from healthy donors and patients with severe COVID-19 by size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Then, flow cytometry was performed to assess the origin of EVs and investigate the presence of circulating procoagulant EVs in COVID-19 patients. A total protein extraction was performed and samples were analyzed by nLC-MS/MS in a Q-Exactive HF-X. Finally, computational analyzes were applied to sign biological processes related to disease pathogenesis. Results: We report significant changes in the proteome of EVs from patients with severe COVID-19. Differently expressed proteins in the disease groups were associated with platelet degranulation, integrin cell surface interaction, and acute inflammatory response. Flow cytometry experiments indicated an increase in total circulating EVs and with TF-dependent procoagulant activity.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles were suspended at 100 μl of Rapigest SF (Waters) at 0.1% (w / v) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 minutes at 4 ° C. Supernatants were separated and protein concentration estimated by absorbance reading at 280 nm (NanoDrop 2000, Thermo Scientific). Aliquots of 50 μg of protein were reduced in dithiothreitol (3 hours at 37 ° C, 10 mM final concentration) and alkylated in iodoacetamide (30 minutes in the dark at room temperature, 25 mM final concentration). They were then incubated with trypsin (Promega) 1:50 (m / m) at 37 ° C for 19 hours and at 56 ° C for 45 minutes in a thermoblock (Eppendorff). The reaction was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% (v / v). The tryptic peptides were purified in reverse phase homemade microcolumns with POROS R2 resin (Applied Biosystems). The peptide concentration was estimated by absorbance reading at 280 nm, and samples were stored at -20 ° C for mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were subjected to nLC-nESI MS / MS analysis in an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) chromatographic system coupled to the HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbtrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were loaded with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile (eluent A) to a 2-cm long (100 μm internal diameter) trap column packed with 5 μm, 200 A Magic C18 AQ matrix (Michrom Bioresources, USA) at 2 μL/min. On chromatographic separation, peptides were loaded with 2 to 40% formic acid 0.1% and acetonitrile (eluent B) on a 25.5 cm long (75 μm internal diameter) separation column at 200 nL/min. The spray voltage was set to 1.9 kV with a capillary temperature of 250°C, tube lens voltage to 40V, and no sheath or auxiliary gas flow. Full scan MS were obtained on the Orbitrap analyzer at a 60,000 resolution (Full-Width Half Maximum, FWHM to m/z 200) with an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) set to 3x106 and maximum injection time 45 ms. The 20 most abundant ions of each survey (from m/z 350 to 1.400) were submitted to higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) followed by new Orbitrap analysis at resolution 15,000, using the following parameters: ACG at 1x105, normalized collision energy of 28, the minimum signal threshold of 20 counts and dynamic exclusion time of 20 s. Data were obtained in technical triplicate using the Xcalibur software (version 4.2.47). The mass spectrometer was calibrated externally according to manufacturer recommendations.

### Data Protocol
Quality control and statistical analysis were carried out individually for these comparisons. Quantification was performed using the quantification module in PEAKS X Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada). Changes observed among LC-MS/MS runs were compared according to different conditions. For this analysis was set 10 ppm for peptide mass tolerance and 0.5 Da / fragment mass tolerance. Trypsin as the enzyme with two missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and oxidation as variable modification. High confidence peptides were used for protein identifications by setting a target false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1% at the peptide level. Proteins which had at least one unique peptide were used for protein identifications. Database was downloaded from Uniprot (Reviewed Swiss-Prot) containing 20,375 entries available. Statistical analysis: Peptides abundances were exported from PEAKS after identification filters. Resulting data was imported to R environment and analyzed using pmartR package for quality control and statistical analysis. First, data was log2 transformed and peptides were filtered. Peptide filters were based on presence of degenerated peptides, presence of missing values (NA) and susceptibility to ANOVA and g-test. Filters resulted in removal of peptides identified to more than one protein, peptides with three or more NA values and peptides not susceptible to ANOVA or g-test. After filtering, individuals were submitted to outlier robust Mahalanobis distance (RMD) analysis, based on median absolute deviation (MAD), skewness, correlation and proportion of missing values. Then, abundance data was normalized according to SPANS tool present in pmartR. The highest score subset and normalization strategy was chosen for each comparison, in case of draws the approach with greater number of peptides was selected. Principal component analysis (PCA) and correlation plots were performed to visualize differences between groups and replicates reproducibility. Protein rollup was conducted with the Rrollup tool in pmartR with default parameters. Comparisons of biological groups were subjected to independence of missing data and ANOVA (IMD-ANOVA) statistical tests or by cluster analysis using VSClust. Networks were displayed by Cytoscape software (version 3.3.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Covid-19, Extracellular vesicles, Proteome

### Affiliations
Center for Technological Development in Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Center for Technological Development in Health (CDTS/FIOCRUZ)

### Submitter
Monique Trugilho

### Lab Head
Dr Monique Trugilho
Center for Technological Development in Health, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


