### Accession
PXD018269

### Title
Complementarity of different SDS-PAGE gel staining methods for the identification of short open reading frame-encoded peptides

### Description
Short open reading frame-encoded peptides (SEP) have been identified across all domains of life and are predicted to be involved in many biochemical processes, however, for the vast majority of SEP their biological function is still unknown. Special methodologies have to be used for the mass spectrometric analysis of SEP, because traditional methods of bottom-up proteomics show a bias against small proteins. Here, we investigated the influence of different staining methods for SDS-PAGE gels prior in-gel digestion following LC-MS/MS analysis for the identification of SEP in the archaeon Methanosarcina mazei. In total, we identified 82 SEP with at least one high confidence (FDR<1 %) unique peptide, of which 45 also met a stricter ion series-based quality criteria. The staining methods provided complementary data that allowed for a range of different SEP to be identified. The highest number of SEP were identified in the samples stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. However, the highest quality of the identified SEP was achieved in the samples without staining. These data demonstrate that in-gel digestion is amenable and well suited for the identification of SEP, and that this classical technique may provide further insights into the world of SEP.

### Sample Protocol
Samples  Methanosarcina mazei was cultivated under anaerobic conditions The cells were disrupted in lysis buffer (10 mM TRIS (pH=8.8), 1 % SDS, cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail) via freeze-thaw cycling and ultrasonic homogenizing.  SDS-PAGE and Staining Methods  M. mazei aliquots (200 µg) were separated in triplicate on discontinuous SDS-PAGE gels (4 % stacking gel, 16 % resolving gel) using Mini-PROTEAN Tetra Cell (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA). Prior to loading, the samples were mixed with Laemmli buffer (62 mM TRIS-HCl (pH 6.8), 25 % Glycerin (v/v), 5 % β-mercaptoethanol (v/v), 2 % SDS (w/v), 0.01 % bromophenol blue (w/v)) and heated 5 min at 95°C [Laemmli, 1970]. The separation was performed with a TRIS-glycine running buffer (0.3 % TRIS, 1.44 % glycine, 0.1 % SDS (w/v)) 15 min at 40 V and ca. 80 min at 120 V until the running front reached the end of the gel. After separation, for the non-stained condition the gel was incubated for 20 min in fixing solution (30 % methanol, 10 % acetic acid in MilliQ-water (v/v)). For Coomassie-staining [Bradford, 1976], the gel was first incubated 20 min in fixing solution and then incubated 20 min in staining solution (0.2 % (w/v) Coomassie R250, 0.005 % (w/v) Coomassie G250, 40 % methanol, 10 % ethanol, 2 % glycerin in MilliQ-water (v/v)). The gel was destained (10 % acetic acid, 5 % ethanol in MilliQ-water (v/v)) overnight until a clear background was observed. For negative-staining [Castellanos-Serra, 2006] the gel was incubated in an imidazole solution (0.2 M imidazole in MilliQ-water, 0.3 % SDS (w/v)) and then washed 1 min in MilliQ-water. The gel was developed 1-2 min in 0.2 M zinc sulfate until the background was stained white. In-gel digestion was performed directly after staining procedures were finished.  In-Gel Digestion  Eight bands below 30 kDa with approximately the same size were cut out. Negative-stained samples were washed 10 min with 150 µl reverting solution (25 mM TRIS, 300 mM glycine, pH 8.0). All samples were washed two times with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer (pH 8.0). Coomassie-stained samples were destained in 50 % ACN (in MilliQ-water (v/v)) with several exchanges of the solution until no blue color was observed. Afterwards, the proteins were reduced (200 µl of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 56°C, 30 min) and alkylated (200 µl 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), 20 °C, 20 min in darkness). Gel bands were washed with 100 mM ABC until no SDS were detected in the washing solution. Colorimetric determination of SDS concentration was performed by mixing 300 µl washing solution with 300 µl methylene blue solution (0.025 % methylene blue (w/v), 5 % sodium sulfate (w/v), 1 % H2SO4 (v/v) in MilliQ-water) and 1.2 ml chloroform. After vigorous shaking, it was incubated 10 min at room temperature and centrifuged with a table centrifuge. The lower chloroform-rich phase was transferred into a new reaction vial containing 50-100 mg sodium sulfate and after mixing and centrifugation the absorption of the supernatant at 651 nm was determined [Arand, 1992]. When SDS was no longer detectable in the washing solutions, the gel bands were washed 5 min in 400 µl 100 % ACN and dried via vacuum evaporation on a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, Germany). For digestion, 5 µl of 20 ng/µl trypsin in 50 mM ABC (10 min, RT) and 80 µl digestion buffer (50 mM ABC, 3 % ACN) was added to the gel bands and digested for 18 h at 37 °C. The supernatant was transferred into a new reaction vial and the peptides were extracted 20 min with extraction buffer (60 % ACN, 1 % TFA (v/v)) and with 100 % ACN. The peptides were concentrated to complete dryness, resuspended in 20 µl loading buffer (3 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA in MilliQ-water) and analyzed without further clean up.  LC-MS/MS Analysis  Peptides were separated with a Dionex U3000 UHPLC system (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm) coupled online to a QExactive™ Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). Separation was performed across a 2 h gradient: 4 % B for 2 min, followed by a linear gradient from 4 % to 20 % B over 80 min, and a linear gradient to 40 % B over 40 min, followed by an 8 min linear increase to 90 % B, and 10 min at 90 % B. An inter-run equilibration of the column was achieved by 10 min at 5 % Eluent B. Eluent A was 0.05 % formic acid (FA) and eluent B 80 % ACN, 0.04 % FA. 2 µl of the peptides were injected A full-scan MS acquisition was performed (resolution 70,000, automatic gain control (AGC) target 3e6, max injection time (IT) 50 ms), with subsequent MS/MS acquisition (resolution 17,500, isolation window 1.4 m/z, AGC target 1e5, max IT 100 ms) of the top 15 most intense ions (exclusion of +1 and >+6 ions). Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was performed with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27.5. Dynamic exclusion (30 s duration) and lock mass at 445.12003 m/z were enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS-raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (V2.2; Thermo, Germany). The files were searched individually using SequestHT algorithm node against a protein database containing genome-derived proteins of M. mazei strain Gö1 (Uniprot proteome ID UP000000595; 12.09.2019), an list of predicted SEP and the cRAP list of common laboratory contaminants. The percolator node was used for the calculation of the false discovery rate. It was searched for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm. Fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation (Cys). Variable modifications: methionine oxidation, deamidation (Asn, Gln, Arg), N-terminal cleavage of start methionine, N-terminal acetylation.  Protein identification criteria (i) relaxed: at least one high confidence (FDR<1 %) unique peptide; (ii) strict: at least two high confidence (FDR<1 %) unique peptides; (iii) ion series-based: at least one high confidence (FDR<1 %) unique peptide with at least five consecutive b- or y-ions in the MS2 spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Short open reading frame-encoded peptides (SEP) have been identified across all domains of life and are predicted to be involved in many biochemical processes, however, for the vast majority of SEP their biological function is still unknown. Optimized methodologies have to be used for the mass spectrometric analysis of SEP, because traditional methods of bottom-up proteomics show a bias against small proteins. Here, different staining methods for SDS-PAGE gels prior in-gel digestion following LC-MS/MS analysis for the identification of SEP in the archaeon Methanosarcina mazei are investigated. In total, 45&#xa0;SEP with at least one high confidence (FDR &lt;1%) unique peptide and five consecutive b- or y-ions in the MS2 spectrum are identified. The staining methods provide complementary data. The highest number of SEP are identified in the samples stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. However, the highest quality of the identified SEP is achieved in the samples without staining. These comprehensive data sets demonstrate that in-gel digestion is well suited for the identification of SEP.

### Keywords
Gelc-ms; microproteins; peptidomics; sorf; smorf

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel, Germany


