### Accession
PXD017216

### Title
Protective impact on the apoptotic pathway by suppressing DMT1 during inflammatory stress

### Description
We performed phosphoproteomics using our sequential enrichment strategy of mRNA, protein, and phosphopeptides, which enabled us to explore the concurrent molecular events in the same sample and at the same time in normal and DMT1 silencing insulin-producing β-cells stimulated by siRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the consistent results from the same sample at the same time, we used a sequential sample preparation and enrichment strategy, which enabled us to detect contemporaneous molecular events of mRNA, protein, and phosphopeptides in the β-cells.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data sets were processed for protein identification using the Proteome Discoverer (PD, v2.3, Thermo Scientific) and the Sequest HT algorithm with a peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment m/z tolerance of 0.05 Da, reporter ion m/z tolerance half-width of 2 mDa, and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for proteins and peptides. All peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (v2017-10-25, 34,352 entries) of murinae (taxonomy ID: 39107) sequences with a decoy using the following parameters: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT tags (K, peptide N-termini); variable modifications, oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y).

### Publication Abstract
Pro-inflammatory cytokines promote cellular iron-import through enhanced divalent metal transporter-1 (<i>DMT1</i>) expression in pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells, consequently cell death. Inhibition of &#x3b2;-cell iron-import by <i>DMT1</i> silencing protects against apoptosis in animal models of diabetes. However, how alterations of signaling networks contribute to the protective action of <i>DMT1</i> knock-down is unknown. Here, we performed phosphoproteomics using our sequential enrichment strategy of mRNA, protein, and phosphopeptides, which enabled us to explore the concurrent molecular events in the same set of wildtype and <i>DMT1</i>-silenced &#x3b2;-cells during IL-1&#x3b2; exposure. Our findings reveal new phosphosites in the IL-1&#x3b2;-induced proteins that are clearly reverted by <i>DMT1</i> silencing towards their steady-state levels. We validated the levels of five novel phosphosites of the potential protective proteins using parallel reaction monitoring. We also confirmed the inactivation of autophagic flux that may be relevant for cell survival induced by <i>DMT1</i> silencing during IL-1&#x3b2; exposure. Additionally, the potential protective proteins induced by <i>DMT1</i> silencing were related to insulin secretion that may lead to improving &#x3b2;-cell functions upon exposure to IL-1&#x3b2;. This global profiling has shed light on the signal transduction pathways driving the protection against inflammation-induced cell death in &#x3b2;-cells after <i>DMT1</i> silencing.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Signaling, Ros, Diabetes, Degradation pathway

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark.

### Submitter
Taewook Kang

### Lab Head
Dr Martin R. Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark.


