### Accession
PXD030538

### Title
Pytheas E. coli 16S rRNA sample analysis

### Description
Mass spectrometry remains an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. This dataset contains the analysis of 14N and 15N-labeled 16S RNA from E. coli, including all the known RNA modifications (excluding pseudouridines). The analysis has been performed using three different protocols and instruments: Agilent Q-TOF, Waters Synapt G2-S, and Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Sample Protocol
14N- and 15N-labeled 16S RNA was isolated from E. coli MRE-600 cells grown at 37°C in the M9 glucose minimal medium, supplemented with 1 g/L of either (14NH4)2SO4 or (15NH4)2SO4 as a sole source of nitrogen. 16S RNA was purified according to a previously published protocol29 using sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation at dissociating conditions. 14N-RNA and 15N-RNA were mixed in approximately 1:1 molar ratio, heat-denatured, and RNase T1 digested for 1 h at 55°C in 25 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 6). To test performance of Pytheas on data collected via different MS platforms, 16S RNA samples were analyzed using Agilent Q-TOF, Waters Synapt G2-S, and Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. All systems were equipped with ESI source and data acquired via negative ionization. Depending on the instrument used, 5-25 pmol of each 14N- and 15N-labeled rRNA were injected and analyzed.  Following nuclease digestion (when applicable), RNA MS data were acquired on an Agilent Q-TOF 6520-ESI instrument coupled to the Agilent 1200 LC system. Mixtures of nucleolytic RNA fragments were resolved on XBridge C18 column (3.5 µM, 1x150 mm, Waters) via a 40 min 1-15% of mobile phase B linear gradient elution with 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) as mobile phase A and 15 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 8.8) in 50% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Data were collected in the data-dependent acquisition mode using negative ionization. A typical duty cycle consisted of a single 0.33 s MS1 scan (400-1700 m/z) followed by 4-6 successive 1 s MS2 scans (100-1700 m/z and 4 m/z isolation window). Most intense precursor ions were used for isolation (4 m/z isolation window) and CID fragmentation. Fragmentation collision energies were optimized by direct infusion of 23 RNA oligonucleotide standards. For the MS2 data acquisition, precursor ion selection rules were as follows: absolute intensity threshold was 2000 counts; ions with assigned charge = 1 were excluded; and 0.35 min dynamic exclusion window was applied. Modified sequences from T1 digested tRNAs were analyzed using targeted acquisition and MS2 scans were averaged across chromatographic peak. MS2 data were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) files using Agilent Qualitative Analysis software, limiting number of peaks to 250-350 most intense, and using 20 counts as an absolute intensity threshold, unless scan averaging was used.  The Waters Synapt G2-S system was coupled to an Acquity UPLC using a BEH C18 column (1.7 µm, 0.3x150 mm, Waters), operated at 5 µl/min flow rate and column temperature maintained at 60°C. Mobile phase A (8 mM TEA and 200 mM HFIP, pH = 7.8 in water), and mobile phase B (8 mM TEA and 200 mM HFIP in 50% methanol) were used to elute RNA via a linear gradient (3-55 % of B over 70 min). The Synapt G2-S was operated in the sensitivity mode (V-mode), and MS1 (m/z: 545-2000) scans were recorded over 0.5 s, and MS2 (m/z: 250-2000) over 1 s period. The top three MS1 events were selected for MS2, based on abundance. Precursor m/z dependent collision energy ramp (20–23 V at m/z 545; 51–57 V at m/z 2000) was applied, and the accumulated TIC threshold was set to 3.5x105 counts. Dynamic exclusion was switched on to exclude precursors for the 60 s period. Raw data were processed via ProteinLynx Global Server using operator-specific settings for lock-spray correction, noise reduction, peak picking and centroiding. The resulting mzml file was converted to mgf format using MSConvert. The Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument was coupled to a Vanquish Flex quaternary UPLC using a HILICpak VN-50 column (5 μm, 2.0 x 150 mm, Shodex), operated at 220 µl/min flow rate. Mobile phase A contained 12.5 mM ammonium acetate in 75 % of acetonitrile in water, and mobile phase B contained 35 mM ammonium acetate in 30 % of acetonitrile in water. Nucleolytic RNA fragments were eluted off the column kept at 50 °C using a linear gradient: 30-56 % of B over 30 min. The following MS1 scan settings were used: 220-2000 m/z range; 30,000 resolution; S-Lens RF 30 %; automated gain control (AGC) was 2x105 counts, with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For MS2 scans, precursor ion intensity threshold was set to 1x105 counts, and a 1.6 m/z isolation window used. The top 12 precursor targets were selected for CID fragmentation at 35% of the normalized collision energies, using precursor dynamic exclusion over a 20 s period. The MS2 resolution was 30,000; AGC set to 1.0x105 counts with the maximum injection time of 300 ms. Profile data were centroided and converted to mgf via MSConvert.

### Data Protocol
The 16S rRNA in silico target-decoy library was generated from the K12 rrsA gene sequence with T1 digestion and allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. All known E. coli 16S modifications have been included, except for the pseudouridine. To account for possible variations in precursor and fragment ions charge states present in the Synapt and Orbitrap datasets, the charge tables initially derived for the Q-TOF have been expanded. Files specifying nucleotides elemental composition have been updated to include both 14N- and 15N-labeled RNA species in a single theoretical digest. As a result of uniform uptake of 15N isotope, mass between 15N-labeled cytidine and uridine residues differ by only ∆mass = 0.013 Da, that in some instances can be hard to resolve given larger molecular weight of the product or fragment ions. Thus, 15N-labeled targets (and 15N-labeled decoys) that are C/U positional substitutes were consolidated via SeqX using 16 ppm (MS1) and 40 ppm (MS2) thresholds, corresponding to ~2σ of m/z matching offset distribution for Agilent Q-TOF, as the least accurate instrument. For simplicity, a single 16S theoretical digest was generated and used for spectral identification, despite differences in the instrument’s accuracy. The matching and scoring were performed with standard parameters, except for the MS1 and MS2 matching tolerance windows which were set to 16 ppm and 40 ppm respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. The main features of Pytheas are flexible handling of isotope labeling and RNA modifications, with false discovery rate statistical validation based on sequence decoys. We demonstrate bottom-up mass spectrometry characterization of diverse RNA sequences, with broad applications in the biology of stable RNAs, and quality control of RNA therapeutics and mRNA vaccines.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Rna, Pytheas, 16s, Isotope labeling

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States

### Submitter
Luigi D'Ascenzo

### Lab Head
Dr James R. Williamson
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States


