### Accession
PXD027870

### Title
Discovering new peripheral plasma biomarkers to identify cognitive decline in type 2 diabetes

### Description
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is an independent risk factor of Alzheimer's disease (AD), thus, identifying who among the increasing T2DM populations may develop into AD is important for early intervention. By using TMT-labeling coupled high-throughput mass spectrometry, we conducted a comprehensive plasma proteomic analysis in none-T2DM people (Ctrl, n=30), and the age-/sex-matched T2DM patients with mild cognitive impairment (T2DM-MCI, n=30) or T2DM without MCI (T2DM-nMCI, n=25). The candidate biomarkers identified by proteomics and bioinformatics analyses were verified by ELISA, and their diagnostic capabilities were evaluated with machine learning. A total of 53 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in T2DM-MCI compared with T2DM-nMCI patients. These DEPs were significantly enriched in multiple biological processes, such as amyloid neuropathies, CNS disorders, and metabolic acidosis. Among the DEPs, alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1), major viral protein (PRNP), valosin-containing protein (VCP) showed strong collection with AD high-risk genes APP, MAPT, APOE, PSEN1, and PSEN2. And the levels of PP2A cancer inhibitor (CIP2A), PRNP, corticotropin releasing factor binding protein (CRHBP) were significantly increased, while the level of VCP was decreased in T2DM-MCI patients compared with the T2DM-nMCI, and these changes were correlated with the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score. Further machine learning data showed that increases of CIP2A, ratio of β-amyloid (rAβ42/40), and rGSK-3β(T/S9) (ratio of total to serine-9-phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase-3β) had the greatest power to identify mild cognitive decline in T2DM patients.

### Sample Protocol
The FASP Digestion was carried out by following a previous method [21]. Specifically, 200 μg of protein solution for each sample was added with dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) to a final concentration of 100 mM, boiled water bath for 5min, and then added with 200 μL UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) to mix, centrifuged 14000g for 15min with 10 kD ultrafiltration centrifuge tube, then incubated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 30 min in darkness. Then the above samples were washed twice with 100ul UA buffer and 100ul 100mM TEAB buffer. Finally, digestion with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl TEAB buffer for 12 h at 37 ºC, followed by determination the peptide concentration with a Nanodrop 2000c (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
To acquire MS data, running in positive ion mode, the scanning range of parent ion was 300-1800 m/z, the resolution of primary mass spectrometry was 70,000 at 200 m/z, and isolation width was 2 m/z with 30ev standardized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.2) with Proteome Discoverer 1.4. The value of protein ratio ≥1.2, p value<0.05 is defined as the difference protein.

### Publication Abstract
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is an independent risk factor of Alzheimer's disease (AD), and thus identifying who among the increasing T2DM populations may develop into AD is important for early intervention. By using TMT-labeling coupled high-throughput mass spectrometry, we conducted a comprehensive plasma proteomic analysis in none-T2DM people (Ctrl, <i>n</i> = 30), and the age-/sex-matched T2DM patients with mild cognitive impairment (T2DM-MCI, <i>n</i> = 30) or T2DM without MCI (T2DM-nMCI, <i>n</i> = 25). The candidate biomarkers identified by proteomics and bioinformatics analyses were verified by ELISA, and their diagnostic capabilities were evaluated with machine learning. A total of 53 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in T2DM-MCI compared with T2DM-nMCI patients. These DEPs were significantly enriched in multiple biological processes, such as amyloid neuropathies, CNS disorders, and metabolic acidosis. Among the DEPs, alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1), major viral protein (PRNP), and valosin-containing protein (VCP) showed strong correlation with AD high-risk genes APP, MAPT, APOE, PSEN1, and PSEN2. Also, the levels of PP2A cancer inhibitor (CIP2A), PRNP, corticotropin-releasing factor-binding protein (CRHBP) were significantly increased, while the level of VCP was decreased in T2DM-MCI patients compared with that of the T2DM-nMCI, and these changes were correlated with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score. Further machine learning data showed that increases in PRNP, CRHBP, VCP, and rGSK-3&#x3b2;(T/S9) (ratio of total to serine-9-phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase-3&#x3b2;) had the greatest power to identify mild cognitive decline in T2DM patients.

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Diagnostic biomarkers, Mild cognitive impairment, Proteomics, Cip2a, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Neurological Disorders, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Department of Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medicine and the Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education of China and Hubei Province for Neurological Disorders, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
haitao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-Zhi Wang
Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Neurological Disorders, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


