### Accession
PXD016595

### Title
Kinetic Analysis of DNA Dependent Protein Kinase Catalytic Subunit

### Description
We investigated the dynamics of  protein kinase DNA dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) through hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. Over 1100 peptides could be monitored throughout the kinetics experiment, showing the utility of our nanospray HX-MS configuration for ultra-large proteins such as DNA-PKcs. To match the structurally unassigned helices to sequence from the large disordered regions of DNA-PKcs (a.a 2577-2773), we used integrative modelling. Two sequence assignments were possible. The cluster of models with the helix assignment towards the N-terminal side was favored by reduced kinetics of exchange as measured by HX-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide Map DNA-Pkcs was digested with recombinant Nepenthesin II for 3 minutes 10°C in glycine HCl pH 2.5. Digested peptides was loaded onto a Pepmap100 C18 nanoviper trap column and then separated on a self packed ~7cm x 75um C18 column (New Objective Picofrit, Phenomenex Jupiter C18 3.6um beads) over 10 minutes (500 nL/min).  Loading and separation were done at 4°C. Data-dependent acquisition was performed on a Sciex Triple TOF 5600.   Deuteration Kinetics DNA-PKcs was labelled with 40% D2O at room temperature. At the specified time points (30 – 3600 sec)), an aliquot was removed and quenched with 100mM glycine-HCl pH 2.5 thenfrozen with liquid nitrogen. For LC-MS analysis, samples were thawed and digested with Nepenthesin II for 3 minutes at 10°C. Loading and separation proceeded as above. Data were collected on a Sciex Triple TOF 5600.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Map Runs were searched using Mascot against a limited database of 13 protein sequences (DNA-PKcs plus contaminants), parameterized with non-specific digestion, peptide tolerance ±20ppm, MS/MS tolerance ±0.06 Da.  Peptides with scores p < 0.05 were accepted.    Kinetics Deuterium uptake was quantified in a semi-automated fashion with the Mass Spec Studio (V1). Uptake plots were fitted in Matlab (R2016a) with a three component exponential equation. Intrinsic rates of exchange for each peptide were calculated using random coil rates for individual residues. Protection factors were determined for each peptide by dividing the intrinsic rate of exchange by the observed rate of exchange.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HX-MS) has made important contributions to the study of protein structure and function. Unfortunately, it is not known for low limits of detection, when compared with other forms of peptide-based or bottom-up protein MS methods. Systems perform poorly on sub-pmol quantities of protein states with greater than 300 kDa of unique sequences. The HX-MS analysis of complex protein states would be possible if proteomics-grade configurations could be used reliably, but temperature and temporal constraints have proven to be significant design challenges. Here, we describe an integrated HX-MS ion source operating on a vented-column geometry, which brings regulated column cooling right to the spray tip. The design offers chromatographic peak widths of 2-6 s (FWHM). It provides stable operation at 500 nL min<sup>-1</sup>, while retaining deuteration levels comparable to conventional geometries. We demonstrate at least a 50-fold improvement in protein consumption levels, and illustrate robustness by measuring peptide-averaged protection factors for 90% of DNA-PKcs, a 469 kDa protein, from 0.5 pmol injections.

### Keywords
Human, Hdx-ms, Nanospray hx-ms, Dna-pkcs

### Affiliations
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Cumming School of Medicine University of Calgary, Canada
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Morgan Hepburn

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Schriemer
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Cumming School of Medicine University of Calgary, Canada


