### Accession
PXD023422

### Title
Fluvastatin mitigates SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung cells

### Description
Clinical data of patients suffering from COVID-19 have indicated that statin therapy, used to treat hypercholesterolemia, is associated with a better clinical outcome. We therefore investigated the effect of statins on SARS-CoV-2 infection in human lung cells and found that fluvastatin inhibited coronavirus infection, while other tested statins did not. Fluvastatin inhibited high and low pathogenic coronaviruses in vitro and ex vivo in a dose-dependent manner. Proteomic analyses of infected versus uninfected lung epithelial cells treated with fluvastatin, simvastatin, or rosuvastatin revealed that all tested statins modulated the cholesterol synthesis pathways without compromising the innate antiviral immune response. Strikingly, fluvastatin treatment uniquely affected the proteome of SARS CoV 2 infected cells, specifically downregulating proteins that modulate protein translation and viral replication. These results suggest that statin therapy poses no additional risk to individuals exposed to SARS-CoV-2 and that fluvastatin may have a moderate beneficial effect on SARS CoV-2 infection by modulating protein translation.

### Sample Protocol
Calu-3 cells were treated with statins and infected as described in section ´SARS-2 infection and quantification by RT-qPCR´. Cells were lysed in buffer containing 4% SDS, 10 mM DTT and 10 mM HEPES (pH 8), heated at 95°C for 10 min and sonicated at 4°C for 15 minutes (level 5, Bioruptor, Diagenode). Proteins were precipitated with acetone at -20°C and resuspended in 8 M urea buffer containing 10 mM HEPES (pH 8). Total protein was diluted to a final concentration of 100 µg/ml in 10mM HEPES (pH 8) and 2 µg total protein was used for further analysis. Reduction was performed by applying a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP and heating at 55°C for 1 h, alkylation was then performed by the addition of final concentration of 20 mM MMTS and incubation for 10 min at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed by adding trypsin at a final concentration of 1 µg protease to 50 µg total protein and incubation over night at 37°C while shaking. Peptide recovery was performed using EvoTips (Evosep) and eluted using 0.2% TFA in 60% acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were dried and suspended in 100 µl 0.1% FA. Twenty percent of the samples were loaded on Evotips.  Samples were injected into an Evosep I HPLC (Evosep) connected to a timsTOFPro mass spectrometer with PASEF (Bruker). The 15 sample per day standard method (EvoSep I HPLC), and the standard Bruker method “PASEF method for short gradients” (MS/MS timsTOFPro) were applied.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw data files were processed by using Peaks X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions) and MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) software55 and UniProtKB databases (Homo sapiens: UP000005640/April 28, 2020; SARS-CoV-2: UP000464024/September 29, 2020). The following search parameters were used: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, methyl methanethiosulfonate (composition of H2CS at cysteine); variable modifications, oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term); peptide tolerance, 20 ppm; LFQ min. ratio count, 1; Match between runs Alignment time window, 10 min; other parameters are used as default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Virus, Fluvastatin, Air-liquid-interface culture, Covid-19, Risk factor, Proteomics, Hypercholesteremia, Statin, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Infection Reasearch, Structure and Function of proteins Division, Cellular Proteomics Group, Germany
HZI

### Submitter
Lothar Jaensch

### Lab Head
Dr Lothar Jaensch
Helmholtz Centre for Infection Reasearch, Structure and Function of proteins Division, Cellular Proteomics Group, Germany


