### Accession
PXD014259

### Title
Serum protein profile in LPS-induced mice model by two-dimensional LC-MS/MS

### Description
Serum is an ideal source of biomarkers because of easy accessibility, noninvasiveness, and rapid response to disease. Given that the different clinical manifestation between early phase and late phase of sepsis, the change of serum proteins profile during different phase of sepsis can give insight into predictor for early diagnosis of sepsis. In this study, differential serum proteins were screened in mice treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 2 h, 24 h and controls using free-labeling coupled with two-dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (2D LC-MS/MS) technique.

### Sample Protocol
To mimic sepsis, mice were treated with 10 mg/kg LPS (E. coli 0111: B4) to construct mice model. Male C57BL/6J mice (8-week old) were purchased from the Shanghai SLRC Laboratory Animals Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Mice were maintained on standard laboratory mice chow in a 12-h light-dark cycle and access to dry pellets and sterile water ad libitum. The care and use of the mice were conducted according to a protocol that was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Shanghai Children’s Hospital (Shanghai, China). A total of 30 male C57BL/6J mice were randomly divided into three groups (n = 9 per group) including control group, LPS treatment for 2h group (LPS 2h), LPS treatment for 24 group (LPS 24h). The mice were treated with vehicle (0.9% saline) (control group, n = 9) or LPS (10 mg/kg) (LPS group, n = 9) by intraperitoneal injection. The mice were anesthetized using pentobarbital (0.2mg/kg) by intraperitoneal injection at 2h or 24 h after LPS administration. Blood was collected from heart and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 minutes to separate serum. The serum samples were kept at -80oC for further analysis.  In order to increase the precision and accuracy of the data in proteomics study, equal amount of 3 different samples were mixed to produce a sample pool. After that three sample pools were generated (control group, LSP 2 h group, LPS 24 h group, n = 3 per group). The serum proteomic analysis was performed by Kangcheng. We used 200 μl serum to remove high-abundance serum proteins such as albumin, IgG, and haptoglobin using the ProteoMiner™ Protein Enrichment Small-Capacity Kit (Bio-rad, cat: 1633006, USA). Then, the proteins were concentrated and desalted. A total of 2 μg protein from each group was used to LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were separated by nano-UPLC system (EASY-nLC1200, ThermoFinnigan, USA) and were detected by using online mass spectrometer (MS) (Q-Exactive,Thermo Finnigan,USA). Samples were subsequently loaded onto the Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ column (1.9 μm, 0.1×300 mm, Dr. Maisch). The components produced by chromatography were subjected to Q-Exactive MS (Thermo Finnigan, USA) analysis. The ratio of the peak area of reporter reflected the relative abundance of peptide and protein.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.0) was used to identify peptides. The MS/MS data were searched against the mouse International Protein Index database (UNIPROT_MOUSE_2016_09) with parameter settings as described previously. And quantity of protein was detected by using the method of label-free (LFQ). In order to reduce false positive results, a strict cutoff for protein identification was applied with the unused ProtScore > 1.3 and at least one peptide with 99% confidence limit. The ratio of protein expression between the two groups (> 2.0) and adjust p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. The cellular component, molecular function, and biological process were analyzed through Gene Ontology database (http://geneontology.org/). The protein–protein network was analyzed by STRING software (http://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein profile, Lc-ms/ms, Serum, Mice, Lps

### Affiliations
Shanghai Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Chunxia Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Chunxia Wang
Shanghai Children's Hospital


