### Accession
PXD018314

### Title
Proteome analysis of human visceral and subcutaneous adipocytes identifies altered metabolic control points

### Description
Adipose tissue is a primary regulator of energy balance and metabolism. The distribution of adipose tissue depots is of clinical interest because the accumulation of upper-body subcutaneous (ASAT) and visceral adipose tissue (VAT) is associated with cardiometabolic diseases, whereas lower-body gluteal-femoral adipose tissue (GFAT) appears to be protective. There is heterogeneity in the morphological and metabolic traits of adipocytes obtained from different regions of the body, but detailed knowledge of the constituent proteins in each depot is lacking. Here, we determined the human adipocyte proteome from ASAT, VAT and GFAT using high-resolution SWATH mass spectrometry proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Adipocytes from each adipose tissue type and patient was lysed with 500 µl of 1% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate using a probe sonicator (6 pulses). Lysed samples were heated at 95 °C for 5 min and divided into 200 µl aliquots. Proteins were extracted using chloroform / methanol (4:1). Protein pellets from each aliquot per sample were pooled and the total protein content were measured using BCA protein Assay kit. The protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60 °C and the cysteine residues were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C in the dark. Fifty µg of each sample was digested with trypsin (20:1 protein to enzyme) overnight at 37 °C. A pool of all tryptic digests derived from VAT, ASAT and GFAT of all the patients (100 µg) was generated and fractionated by basic reversed phase chromatography (HpH RP) prior to LC-MS/MS and used for spectral library generation. Additionally, from each adipocyte type, one representative was also analysed by DDA-MS.

### Data Protocol
The DDA MS files were processed using ProteinPilot software (version 5.0, SCIEX, USA) with the paragon search algorithm and the MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human SwissProt database (released Feb 2016) to generate a spectral library. Individual ProteinPilot search results were imported into PeakView software (version 2.1) equipped with SWATH acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0) and the spectral lybraries were saved as text files. The text files were then merged to a master library files using SwathXtend (10.18129/B9.bioc.SwathXtend) and targeted information extraction from the SWATH files was performed using PeakView. Peptides shared between proteins were excluded. Information extraction was performed using up to six fragment ions per peptide, a maximum of 100 peptides per protein with a peptide confidence > 99% were allowed, the mass tolerance was set to 75 ppm, the extraction window 5 min and a false discovery rate (FDR)  1%.

### Publication Abstract
Adipose tissue is a primary regulator of energy balance and metabolism. The distribution of adipose tissue depots is of clinical interest because the accumulation of upper-body subcutaneous (ASAT) and visceral adipose tissue (VAT) is associated with cardiometabolic diseases, whereas lower-body glutealfemoral adipose tissue (GFAT) appears to be protective. There is heterogeneity in morphology and metabolism of adipocytes obtained from different regions of the body, but detailed knowledge of the constituent proteins in each depot is lacking. Here, we determined the human adipocyte proteome from ASAT, VAT, and GFAT using high-resolution Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical (SWATH) mass spectrometry proteomics. We quantified 4,220 proteins in adipocytes, and 2,329 proteins were expressed in all three adipose depots. Comparative analysis revealed significant differences between adipocytes from different regions (6% and 8% when comparing VAT vs. ASAT and GFAT, 3% when comparing the subcutaneous adipose tissue depots, ASAT and GFAT), with marked differences in proteins that regulate metabolic functions. The VAT adipocyte proteome was overrepresented with proteins of glycolysis, lipogenesis, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction. The GFAT adipocyte proteome predicted the activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor &#x3b1; (PPAR&#x3b1;), fatty acid, and branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) oxidation, enhanced tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle flux, and oxidative phosphorylation, which was supported by metabolomic data obtained from adipocytes. Together, this proteomic analysis provides an important resource and novel insights that enhance the understanding of metabolic heterogeneity in the regional adipocytes of humans.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> Adipocyte metabolism varies depending on anatomical location and the adipocyte protein composition may orchestrate this heterogeneity. We used SWATH proteomics in patient-matched human upper- (visceral and subcutaneous) and lower-body (glutealfemoral) adipocytes and detected 4,220 proteins and distinguishable regional proteomes. Upper-body adipocyte proteins were associated with glycolysis, de novo lipogenesis, mitochondrial dysfunction, and oxidative stress, whereas lower-body adipocyte proteins were associated with enhanced PPAR&#x3b1; activation, fatty acid, and BCAA oxidation, TCA cycle flux, and oxidative phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Obesity, Adipose tissue, Swathßms, Proteomics, Lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Department of Physiology School of Biomedical Sciences Faculty of Medicine Dentistry and Health Sciences The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Watt
Department of Physiology School of Biomedical Sciences Faculty of Medicine Dentistry and Health Sciences The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia


