### Accession
PXD041780

### Title
Human blood vessel organoids reveal a critical role for CTGF in maintaining microvascular integrity

### Description
The microvasculature plays a key role in tissue perfusion, transport of mediators, and exchange of gases and metabolites to and from tissues. Microvascular dysfunction has emerged as an important contributor to cardiovascular diseases. In this study we used human blood vessel organoids (BVOs) as a model of the microvasculature to delineate the mechanisms of microvascular dysfunction caused by metabolic rewiring. BVOs fully recapitulated key features of the normal human microvasculature, including reliance of mature endothelial cells (ECs) on glycolytic metabolism, as concluded from metabolic flux assays using 13C-glucose labelling and mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. Pharmacological targeting of PFKFB3, a potent activator of glycolysis, with two different chemical inhibitors resulted in rapid BVO restructuring, vessel regression with reduced pericyte coverage. PFKFB3 mutant BVOs also displayed similar structural remodelling compared to control BVOs. Proteomic analysis of the BVO secretome revealed remodelling of the extracellular matrix and differential expression of paracrine mediators such as CTGF. Treatment with recombinant CTGF recovered tight junction formation and increased pericyte coverage in microvessels. Our metabolic and proteomics findings demonstrate that BVOs rapidly undergo restructuring in response to metabolic changes and identify CTGF as a critical paracrine regulator of microvascular integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted proteins were concentrated using 3kD MWCO spin filters (Amicon) at 20,000 x g, 4°C. The protein samples were denatured by 6M urea, 2M thiourea and reduced by 10mM DTT at 37°C for 1h, alkylated by 50mM iodoacetamide at RT in the dark for 1h, and washed with 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH=8.5) for 3 times in the spin filter. The proteins were digested by trypsin/lysC (protein: enzyme = 25:1, Millipore) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and C18 cleanup was performed using Bravo AssayMAP robot with C18 cartridges (Agilent) following the manufacturer’s instruction. Eluted peptides were SpeedVac dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.05% TFA in LC-MS grade H2O. Peptide samples were injected and separated by an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano system (EASY-Spray C18 reversed-phase column, 75µm x 50cm, 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following LC gradient: 0-1 min: 1% B; 1-6 min: 1-6% B; 6-40 min: 6-18% B; 40-70 min: 18-35% B; 70-80 min: 35-45% B; 80-81min: 45-99% B; 81-89.8 min: 99% B; 90-120 min: 1% B (A=0.1% formic acid in H2O, B=80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in H2O). The separated peptides were directly injected into an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS spectra were collected using Orbitrap with scan range of 375-1500 m/z and a resolution of 60,000. The most abundant 15 ions from the full MS scan were selected for data-dependant MS2 with HCD fragmentation and acquired using Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 and isolation windows 2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion of 40 seconds and lock mass of 445.12003 m/z were used.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with MASCOT algorithm (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The following parameters were used: UniProt/SwissProt human and bovine protein database (version 2021_01, 26410 protein entries) were used; trypsin was used as enzyme with maximum 2 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation on cysteines was selected as static modification and oxidation on methionine, lysine and proline was selected as dynamic modifications; precursor ion mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set at 20 milli mass unit (mmu). Protein identification FDR confidence was set to High and the minimum number of peptides per protein was 2. The precursor peak area was used for quantification and exported for further statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The microvasculature plays a key role in tissue perfusion and exchange of gases and metabolites. In this study we use human blood vessel organoids (BVOs) as a model of the microvasculature. BVOs fully recapitulate key features of the human microvasculature, including the reliance of mature endothelial cells on glycolytic metabolism, as concluded from metabolic flux assays and mass spectrometry-based metabolomics using stable tracing of <sup>13</sup>C-glucose. Pharmacological targeting of PFKFB3, an activator of glycolysis, using two chemical inhibitors results in rapid BVO restructuring, vessel regression with reduced pericyte coverage. PFKFB3 mutant BVOs also display similar structural remodelling. Proteomic analysis of the BVO secretome reveal remodelling of the extracellular matrix and differential expression of paracrine mediators such as CTGF. Treatment with recombinant CTGF recovers microvessel structure. In this work we demonstrate that BVOs rapidly undergo restructuring in response to metabolic changes and identify CTGF as a critical paracrine regulator of microvascular integrity.

### Keywords
Metabolic rewiring, Induced pluripotent stem cells, Microvascular dysfunction, Glycolysis, Blood vessel organoids, Cardiovascular diseases

### Affiliations
School of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Medicine and Sciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
School of Cardiovascular & Metabolic Medicine and Sciences, King's College London, London, United Kingdom


