### Accession
PXD013397

### Title
Prognostic Markers in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer

### Description
There are no widely-accepted prognostic markers currently available to predict outcomes in patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), and no targeted therapies with confirmed benefit. We have used MALDI mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) of tryptic peptides to compare regions of cancer and benign tissue in 10 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of TNBC tumors. Proteins were identified by reference to a peptide library constructed by LC-MALDI-MS/MS analyses of the same tissues. The prognostic significance of proteins that distinguished between cancer and benign regions was estimated by Kaplan-Meier analysis of their gene expression from public databases. Among peptides that distinguished between cancer and benign tissue in at least 3 tissues with a ROC area under the curve >0.7, 14 represented proteins identified from the reference library, including proteins not previously associated with breast cancer.  Initial network analysis using the STRING database showed no obvious functional relationships except among collagen subunits COL1A1, COL1A2, and COL63A, but manual curation, including the addition of EGFR to the analysis, revealed a unique network connecting 10 of the 14 proteins. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis to examine the relationship between tumor expression of genes encoding the 14 proteins, and recurrence-free survival (RFS) in patients with basal-like TNBC showed that, compared to low expression, high expression of nine of the genes was associated with significantly worse RFS, most with hazard ratios >2. In contrast, in estrogen receptor-positive tumors, high expression of these genes showed only low, or no, association with worse RFS. These proteins are proposed as putative markers of RFS in TNBC, and some may also be considered as possible targets for future therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Patient specimens Ten FFPE blocks containing TNBC tissue were obtained from the Department of Surgical Pathology, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. Sections of 10 µm were cut with a microtome and mounted onto ITO treated glass slides. Adjacent sections were mounted onto conventional glass slides for hematoxylin and eosin staining to permit histopathology evaluation of the tumor location.    Slide preparation for MSI analysis Mounted FFPE sections were deparaffinized in two changes of xylene (15 min each) and hydrated with a graded series of ethanol dips (2 min each: 100%, 100%, 95%, 70%, 0%, 0%). Antigen retrieval was performed with 10 mM citrate acid buffer pH 6.0 using a Dako Cytomation Pascal pressure cooker (Model S2800, Dako, NSW, Australia), at 121°C for 16 min followed by 90°C for 16 min. Sections were then cooled to room temperature and washed with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) for 1 min. The ITO mounted tissue was digested using the ImagePrep automatic vibrational nebulizer (Bruker Daltonics) spraying a 0.1 µg/µL solution of trypsin in 20 mM ABC. Spraying was performed at room temperature using the default “Trypsin Deposition” method. ITO slides were then incubated 2 h at 40°C in a humidified container. Internal calibrants were sprayed onto the slides using the “Trypsin Deposition” method and matrix solution of 7 mg/mL CHCA in 50% ACN/0.2% TFA was then sprayed using standard CHCA settings.   Peptide extraction for LC-MALDI analysis  To extract tissues for LC-MALDI peptide analysis, slides were subjected to antigen retrieval and vacuum dried for 1 h, then the tissue was removed from the slide, placed in a 1.5 mL tube in 500 µl of 0.2% RapiGest SF surfactant in 50 mM ABC, vortexed, sonicated 10 min, then tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine was added to a final concentration of 5 mM. Samples were heated for 30 min at 60°C, cooled to room temperature, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. BCA assays were performed to determine protein concentrations. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 ratio relative to protein concentration, and incubated overnight at 37°C. TFA was added to the digested protein samples to a concentration of 0.5% (pH <2) and incubated at 37°C for 40 min. Samples were centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 10 min, and supernatants were collected and freeze-dried. Samples were reconstituted with 2% ACN/0.1% TFA, centrifuged at 13,200 rpm, and supernatants were passed through a 0.2 µm filter into HPLC vials.   MALDI MS imaging data  Each of the ten H&E stained sections was examined by a pathologist and regions of each section were designated cancerous, benign or common (both cancerous and benign tissue present). Adjacent sections on ITO slides were used to acquire imaging mass spectra from each region. Spectra were acquired using a Bruker UltrafleXtreme TOF-TOF MALDI mass spectrometer equipped with a SmartBeam 2000 Hz laser (Bruker Daltonics) in positive ion reflectron mode. Mass spectra were collected in the m/z range 700-3500, with a spatial resolution of 50 µm. FlexImaging 4.1 (Build116) was used to drive flexControl 3.4 (Build 125) during the acquisition. Data were visualized using flexImaging software (Bruker Daltonics). Spectral processing was performed using flexAnalysis 3.4 (Build 76) and SCiLs Lab 2014b (version 2.02.5378) software. MSI data were exported to SCiLs Lab software for statistical analysis, with processing using default pipelines carrying out peak picking, baseline correction and total ion current normalization, to remove systematic artifacts affecting mass spectral intensity.   Tumor and benign regions were initially compared by intensity plots and principal component analysis (PCA). Following this each region of cancer vs benign were compared using Hypothesis tests (receiver operating characteristics, ROC) to determine subsets of significantly different peaks (p<0.05), ranked by their area-under-the-curve (AUC) values. Peptides with an AUC ≥ 0.7 between cancer and benign tissue were selected for further analysis. These were referred to the reference library of peptide IDs generated by LC-MALDI-MS/MS and were incorporated into combined lists from each tissue in the MSI experiment.      Reference peptide library  LC-MALDI analysis was performed to generate a reference library of peptides present in the antigen-retrieved, trypsin-digested tissue samples, to be subsequently matched to peptides of interest found in MSI experiments. MALDI-MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired on an UltrafleXtreme spectrometer using CHCA as matrix. A Thermo Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher) was coupled to a Bruker Proteineer fcII spotting robot (Bruker Daltonics) to deposit eluent onto 384 or 1536 sample AnchorChip MALDI target plates under conditions as described in Hunt NJ, Phillips L, et al. Proteomic MALDI-TOF/TOF-IMS examination of peptide expression in the formalin fixed brainstem and changes in sudden infant death syndrome infants. J Proteomics (2016) 138:48-60.

### Data Protocol
MSI data were exported to SCiLs Lab software for statistical analysis, with processing using default pipelines carrying out peak picking, baseline correction and total ion current normalization, to remove systematic artifacts affecting mass spectral intensity. Tumor and benign regions were initially compared by intensity plots and principal component analysis (PCA). Following this each region of cancer vs benign were compared using Hypothesis tests (receiver operating characteristics, ROC) to determine subsets of significantly different peaks (p<0.05), ranked by their area-under-the-curve (AUC) values. Peptides with an AUC ≥ 0.7 between cancer and benign tissue were selected for further analysis. These were referred to the reference library of peptide IDs generated by LC-MALDI-MS/MS and were incorporated into combined lists from each tissue in the MSI experiment.

### Publication Abstract
There are no widely-accepted prognostic markers currently available to predict outcomes in patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), and no targeted therapies with confirmed benefit. We have used MALDI mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) of tryptic peptides to compare regions of cancer and benign tissue in 10 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of TNBC tumors. Proteins were identified by reference to a peptide library constructed by LC-MALDI-MS/MS analyses of the same tissues. The prognostic significance of proteins that distinguished between cancer and benign regions was estimated by Kaplan-Meier analysis of their gene expression from public databases. Among peptides that distinguished between cancer and benign tissue in at least 3 tissues with a ROC area under the curve &gt;0.7, 14 represented proteins identified from the reference library, including proteins not previously associated with breast cancer. Initial network analysis using the STRING database showed no obvious functional relationships except among collagen subunits COL1A1, COL1A2, and COL63A, but manual curation, including the addition of EGFR to the analysis, revealed a unique network connecting 10 of the 14 proteins. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis to examine the relationship between tumor expression of genes encoding the 14 proteins, and recurrence-free survival (RFS) in patients with basal-like TNBC showed that, compared to low expression, high expression of nine of the genes was associated with significantly worse RFS, most with hazard ratios &gt;2. In contrast, in estrogen receptor-positive tumors, high expression of these genes showed only low, or no, association with worse RFS. These proteins are proposed as putative markers of RFS in TNBC, and some may also be considered as possible targets for future therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Maldi imaging, Triple-negative, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
Hormones & Cancer Group, Kolling Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney 2065, Australia

### Submitter
Robert Baxter

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Charles Baxter
Hormones & Cancer Group, Kolling Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney 2065, Australia


