### Accession
PXD000686

### Title
Tousled-like kinases phosphorylate Asf1 to promote histone supply during DNA replication

### Description
During DNA replication, nucleosomes are rapidly assembled on newly synthesized DNA to restore chromatin organization. Asf1, a key histone H3-H4 chaperone required for this process, is phosphorylated by Tousled-Like Kinases (TLKs). Here, we identify TLK phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry and dissect how phosphorylation impacts on human Asf1 function. The divergent C-terminal tail of Asf1a is phosphorylated at several sites and this is required for timely progression through S phase. Consistent with this, biochemical analysis of wild-type and phospho-mimetic Asf1a shows that phosphorylation enhances binding to histones and the downstream chaperones CAF-1 and HIRA. Moreover, we find that TLK phosphorylation of Asf1a is induced in cells experiencing deficiency of new histones and that TLK interaction with Asf1a involves its histone-binding pocket. We thus propose that TLK signaling promotes histone supply in S phase by targeting histone-free Asf1 and stimulating its ability to shuttle histones to sites of chromatin assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Asf1a and Asf1b gel bands were subjected to in-gel digestion as previously described, with replicate bands digested with either 100 ng of trypsin (overnight at 37°C) or thermolysin (Calbiochem, 60 min at 56°C). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on titanium dioxide microcolumns before the resulting eluates were desalted with Poros R3 material. LC-MS/MS was conducted on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as reported, with a minimum threshold of 30000 precursor ions required to trigger MS/MS spectrum acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Using Proteome Discoverer 1.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific), raw data files were submitted to Mascot database searches 2.2.04 (Matrix Science). An NCBI non-redundant database (20090412) containing 222460 human protein sequences was searched with the following parameters: ESI-TRAP was selected as the instrument type, with specified mass tolerances of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragment). N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation (serine, threonine and tyrosine) were set as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a fixed modification. Thermolytic searches were permitted up to nine missed cleavages, with cleavage specificity set N-terminal to valine, isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine, alanine and methionine. Tryptic searches were conducted with one missed cleavage permissible. Only Asf1a and Asf1b phosphopeptides with Mascot ion scores above 20 were considered for evaluation, which involved manual validation of the MS/MS spectrum to determine the site of phosphorylation.

### Publication Abstract
During DNA replication, nucleosomes are rapidly assembled on newly synthesized DNA to restore chromatin organization. Asf1, a key histone H3-H4 chaperone required for this process, is phosphorylated by Tousled-like kinases (TLKs). Here, we identify TLK phosphorylation sites by mass spectrometry and dissect how phosphorylation has an impact on human Asf1 function. The divergent C-terminal tail of Asf1a is phosphorylated at several sites, and this is required for timely progression through S phase. Consistent with this, biochemical analysis of wild-type and phospho-mimetic Asf1a shows that phosphorylation enhances binding to histones and the downstream chaperones CAF-1 and HIRA. Moreover, we find that TLK phosphorylation of Asf1a is induced in cells experiencing deficiency of new histones and that TLK interaction with Asf1a involves its histone-binding pocket. We thus propose that TLK signalling promotes histone supply in S phase by targeting histone-free Asf1 and stimulating its ability to shuttle histones to sites of chromatin assembly.

### Keywords
Phosphopeptide, Thermolysin, Asf1b, Asf1a

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics, The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark.

### Submitter
Clifford Young

### Lab Head
Dr Ole Nørregaard Jensen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark.


