### Accession
PXD043302

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of the Dopey paralog TTHERM_00758980 from Tetrahymena thermophila

### Description
Tetrahymena thermophila encodes several Dopey domain-containing proteins. Here we analyse the interactome of the paralog TTHERM_00758980.

### Sample Protocol
Dop1 was endogenously epitope tagged with 3xFLAG and subjected to cryomilling affinity capture, essentially as described (PMID: 31964712). Untagged cells served as control. Immunoprecipitation eluates were loaded on a 4–20% gel for SDS-PAGE gel, allowed to migrate for ∼1 cm into the gel, and briefly stained with Coomassie Blue R-250 solution (0.1% w/v Coomassie, 10% acetic acid and 50% methanol). The protein containing gel slice was excised from the Coomassie-stained gel, destained, and then subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation using standard procedures. LC-MS/MS was performed by the OMICS Proteomics Facility at Biocev on a Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) method of MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (PMID: 24942700) searching the T. thermophila annotated protein database from ciliate.org (PMID: 16933976; PMID: 16381920). The minimum peptide length was set at seven amino acids and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. If the identified peptide sequence set of one protein contained the peptide set of another protein, these two proteins were assigned to the same protein group.

### Publication Abstract
The contractile vacuole complex (CVC) is a dynamic and morphologically complex membrane organelle, comprising a large vesicle (bladder) linked with a tubular reticulum (spongiome). CVCs provide key osmoregulatory roles across diverse eukaryotic lineages, but probing the mechanisms underlying their structure and function is hampered by the limited tools available for in vivo analysis. In the experimentally tractable ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila, we describe four proteins that, as endogenously tagged constructs, localize specifically to distinct CVC zones. The DOPEY homolog Dop1p and the CORVET subunit Vps8Dp localize both to the bladder and spongiome but with different local distributions that are sensitive to osmotic perturbation, whereas the lipid scramblase Scr7p colocalizes with Vps8Dp. The H+-ATPase subunit Vma4 is spongiome specific. The live imaging permitted by these probes revealed dynamics at multiple scales including rapid exchange of CVC-localized and soluble protein pools versus lateral diffusion in the spongiome, spongiome extension and branching, and CVC formation during mitosis. Although the association with DOP1 and VPS8D implicate the CVC in endosomal trafficking, both the bladder and spongiome might be isolated from bulk endocytic input.

### Keywords
Tetrahymena, Dopey, Dop1

### Affiliations
Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Zoltner
Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV Průmyslová 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


