### Accession
PXD018232

### Title
Crosslinking-MS dataset of the TFIIIC subcomplex tauA with Brf1 and TBP

### Description
Identification of crosslinks between the subunits tau131, tau95, tau55, Brf1 and TBP

### Sample Protocol
40 microgramsg of tauA were incubated with an equimolar amount of the Brf1-TBP fusion protein at a protein concentration of 2.5 microM in 75 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 20 °C. The sample was crosslinked for 1h at 20 °C by addition of 5 mM H12/D12 isotope-coded di-succinimidyl-suberate (DSS,Creative Molecules) and quenched by addition 50 mM of ammonium bicarbonate for 10 minutes. Crosslinked proteins were denatured using urea and Rapigest (Waters) at a final concentration of 4 M and 0.05% (w/v), respectively. Samples were reduced using 10 mM DTT (30 min at 37°C), and cysteines were carbamidomethylated with 15 mM chlorooacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins were digested first using 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Wako Chemicals) for 4 h at 37°C and then the urea concentration was reduced to 1.5 M and digested was finalized with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified with 10% (v/v) TFA and desalted using OASIS® HLB µElution Plate (Waters). Crosslinked peptides were enriched using size exclusion chromatography. In brief, desalted peptides were reconstituted with SEC buffer (30% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% (v/v) TFA) and fractionated using a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE) on a 1200 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent) at a flow rate of 50 l/min. Fractions eluting between 50-70 l were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in 30 μl 4% (v/v) ACN in 1% (v/v) FA. Collected fractions were analysed by liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)

### Data Protocol
. The mass spectrometric analysis was conducted using an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) for 5 min at 30 µL/min (0.05% TFA in water). Peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm) with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water, Fisher Chemicals) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade acetonitrile, Fisher Chemicals). Total analysis time was 60 min with a gradient containing an 8-25% solvent B elution step for 39 min (min 6 to 45), followed by an increase to 40% solvent B for 5 min, 85% B for 4 min and 6 min of a re-equilibration step to initial conditions (2% B). The LC system was online coupled to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray-Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective). The MS was operated in positive mode and a spray voltage of 2.4 kV was applied for ionization with an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in profile mode for a mass range of 375-1600 m/z at a resolution of 120 000 (RF Lens 30%, AGC target 2e5 ions and maximum injection time of 250 ms). The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode for MS/MS acquisition. Peptide fragment spectra were acquired for charge states 3-7. Quadrupole isolation window was set to 0.8 m/z and peptides were fragmented via CID (35% NCE). Fragment mass spectra were recorded in the ion trap at normal scan rate for a maximum of 2e4 ions (AGC target) or 100 ms maximum injection time. The instrument acquired MS/MS spectra for up to 10 scans between MS scans. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.   The data analysis was performed using xQuest and xProphet and all crosslinks at the 5% false discovery rate (FDR) were exported. Search parameters for crosslinked peptides were: xlinker ID: DSS xlinker MW: 138.0680796 #mass shift for inter-or intra-peptide links monolink mw: 156.0786442, 155.0964287 DSS hydrolized 156.0786442, DSS AmBic quenched 155.0964278

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factor (TF) IIIC is a conserved eukaryotic six-subunit protein complex with dual function. It serves as a general TF for most RNA polymerase (Pol) III genes by recruiting TFIIIB, but it is also involved in chromatin organization and regulation of Pol II genes through interaction with CTCF and condensin II. Here, we report the structure of the S. cerevisiae TFIIIC subcomplex &#x3c4;A, which contains the most conserved subunits of TFIIIC and is responsible for recruitment of TFIIIB and transcription start site (TSS) selection at Pol III genes. We show that &#x3c4;A binding to its promoter is auto-inhibited by a disordered acidic tail of subunit &#x3c4;95. We further provide a negative-stain reconstruction of &#x3c4;A bound to the TFIIIB subunits Brf1 and TBP. This shows that a ruler element in &#x3c4;A achieves positioning of TFIIIB upstream of the TSS, and suggests remodeling of the complex during assembly of TFIIIB by TFIIIC.

### Keywords
Transcription, Xl-ms, Pol iii, Tfiiic, Tfiiib, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
EMBL Heidelberg

### Submitter
Matthias Vorländer

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph W Mueller
EMBL Heidelberg


