### Accession
PXD034420

### Title
PKC isoforms activate LRRK1 kinase by phosphorylating conserved residues (Ser1064, Ser1074 and Thr1075) within the CORB GTPase domain

### Description
Leucine-rich-repeat-kinase 1 (LRRK1) and its homologue LRRK2 are multidomain kinases possessing an atypical ROC-CORA-CORB containing GTPase domain and phosphorylate distinct Rab proteins. LRRK1 loss of function mutations cause the bone disorder osteosclerotic metaphyseal dysplasia, whereas LRRK2 missense mutations that enhance kinase activity cause Parkinson’s disease. Previous work suggested that LRRK1 but not LRRK2, is activated via a Protein Kinase C (PKC)-dependent mechanism. Here we demonstrate that phosphorylation and activation of LRRK1 in HEK293 cells is blocked by PKC inhibitors including LXS-196 (Darovasertib), a compound that has entered human clinical trials. We show multiple PKC isoforms phosphorylate and activate recombinant LRRK1 in a manner reversed by phosphatase treatment. PKCα phosphorylates LRRK1 at cluster or conserved residues (Ser1064, Ser1074 and Thr1075) located within a region of the CORB domain that lies at the equivalent region of the LRRK2 DK helix that is reported to stabilize the kinase domain αC-helix in the active conformation. Thr1075 lies within an optimal PKC site phosphorylation motif and its mutation, blocked PKC mediated activation of LRRK1. A triple Glu mutation of Ser1064/Ser1074/Thr1075 to mimic phosphorylation, enhanced LRRK1 kinase activity ~3-fold. From analysis of available structures, we postulate that phosphorylation of Ser1064, Ser1074 and Thr1075 could activate LRRK1 promoting interaction of these residues with the C-helix on the kinase domain. This study provides fundamental insights into the mechanism controlling LRRK1 activity.

### Sample Protocol
A 20 l reaction mixture was set up containing 200 nM of kinase inactive LRRK1[D1409A, 28-2015] (1000 g) containing 400 nM recombinant full-length PKC (0.5 µg) and in a buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 0.1 % (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, 100 g/ml L-α-Phosphatidylserine, 10 g/ml L-α-Diacylglyerol, 1 mM CaCl2 and 10 M GTP-γ-S, 10 mM MgAc and 1 mM ATP (non-radioactive) for 30 min at 30 oC. The reactions were stopped by the addition of 6.6 l of 4× SDS–PAGE sample buffer containing 1% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, and samples subjected to electrophoresis on a 4–12% SDS–PAGE gels. The gel was stained with Coomassie blue and the bands corresponding to LRRK1 were excised and subjected to In-gel digestion and proteases (w/v) were freshly prepared in the appropriate buffers (Trypsin + LysC in 50 mM TEABC, Asp-N in 50 mM Tris-HCl, Chymotrypsin in 100 mM Tris-HCl + 10 mM CaCl2) and 100 ng of proteases were added to gel pieces and incubated overnight on a thermomixer at 37oC, 800 xg. Digested peptides were extracted from gel pieces by addition of 200 l of extraction buffer (80% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.2% (v/v) formic Acid), incubated on a Thermomixer with an agitation at 800 xg for 20 min. The extraction was completed by repeating this step again. The eluate was immediately vacuum dried.  Vacuum dried peptides of each sample was resolubilized in LC-buffer (3% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and incubated on a Thermo mixer at 1800 rpm at room temperature for 30 minutes. Further, 200ng of peptide digest was loaded onto Evotips. The Evotips were further placed on an autosampler tray of EvoSep LC system for LC-MS/MS analysis. 30 sample per day (44 min run time) method was used and the peptides were resolved on a 15cm analytical column (ReproSil-Pur C18, 1.9 µm beads by Dr Maisch. #EV1113) and directly electrosprayed using Easy nano LC source into the Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. The data was acquired in a Data dependent mode (DDA) targeting top-10 dependent scans. The full MS and MS2 scans were acquired at 120,000 and 15,000 resolution (m/z 200) respectively and measured using Orbitrap mass analyzer. The precursor ions were fragmented using 28% normalized Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The AGC target for MS1 and MS2 are set at 3E6 and 1E5 ions respectively and maximum ion injection times were set for MS1 and MS2 are 25 and 100 ms. The dynamic exclusion option was enabled and was set for 5 sec durations.   LRRK1 tryptic digests were analyzed using a Waters M Class UPLC system coupled to ZenoTOF 7600 mass spectrometer (Sciex). Digests were chromatographed on a Kinetix XB C18 150 x 0.3mm column (Phenomenex) at 6ml/min (A=0.1% Formic acid in water, B=0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) with a 21min gradient (3-30% B) followed by 3 min (30-80% B). The column was connected directly to the ZenoTOF 7600 OptiflowTM source fitted with a low microflow probe and heated at 30oC with the integral column oven.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data was processed using MaxQuant software suite version 2.0.3.0. Human LRRK1 sequence from Uniprot was used as a FASTA sequence to search the data. Trypsin+Lys-C, AspN and Chymotrypsin were set as proteases with a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn/Gln and phosphorylation of Ser/Thr were set as a variable modification and Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. The default instrument parameters for MS1 and MS2 tolerance were used, and the data was filtered for 1% PSM, peptide and Protein level FDR. The pSTY sites table was further processed using in-house python script to generate the heatmap representation of identified high-confident LRRK1 phosphosites.  LCMS data was acquired using optimal source conditions and the data dependent acquisition was performed on the Top 30 precursors (m/z 400-2000) with charge state 2-4+, with a minimum intensity of 300cps and excluded for 6s after 1 occurrence. TOFMSMS spectra (m/z 100-2000) were acquired with Electron Activated Dissociation (EAD) using a filament current of 3000nA, 0eV kinetic energy, a reaction time of 10ms and total MSMS accumulation time of 15ms. Data files (wiff) were converted to mgf files using the AB Sciex MS Data converter (Sciex) and searched using Mascot 2.6 against Swissprot (2019_11.fasta) database. Enzyme cleavage allowed for 1 missed cleavage, Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, tyrosine, and oxidation of methionine were variable modifications. The instrument type chosen to match the EAD spectra was EThcD and the mass accuracy for precursors (20ppm) and for MSMS spectra (0.05Da).

### Publication Abstract
Leucine-rich-repeat-kinase 1 (LRRK1) and its homolog LRRK2 are multidomain kinases possessing a ROC-CORA-CORB containing GTPase domain and phosphorylate distinct Rab proteins. LRRK1 loss of function mutations cause the bone disorder osteosclerotic metaphyseal dysplasia, whereas LRRK2 missense mutations that enhance kinase activity cause Parkinson's disease. Previous work suggested that LRRK1 but not LRRK2, is activated via a Protein Kinase C (PKC)-dependent mechanism. Here we demonstrate that phosphorylation and activation of LRRK1 in HEK293 cells is blocked by PKC inhibitors including LXS-196 (Darovasertib), a compound that has entered clinical trials. We show multiple PKC isoforms phosphorylate and activate recombinant LRRK1 in a manner reversed by phosphatase treatment. PKC&#x3b1; unexpectedly does not activate LRRK1 by phosphorylating the kinase domain, but instead phosphorylates a cluster of conserved residues (Ser1064, Ser1074 and Thr1075) located within a region of the CORB domain of the GTPase domain. These residues are positioned at the equivalent region of the LRRK2 DK helix reported to stabilize the kinase domain &#x3b1;C-helix in the active conformation. Thr1075 represents an optimal PKC site phosphorylation motif and its mutation to Ala, blocked PKC-mediated activation of LRRK1. A triple Glu mutation of Ser1064/Ser1074/Thr1075 to mimic phosphorylation, enhanced LRRK1 kinase activity &#x223c;3-fold. From analysis of available structures, we postulate that phosphorylation of Ser1064, Ser1074 and Thr1075 activates LRRK1 by promoting interaction and stabilization of the &#x3b1;C-helix on the kinase domain. This study provides new fundamental insights into the mechanism controlling LRRK1 activity and reveals a novel unexpected activation mechanism.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lrrk1, Pkc, Rab7a

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Dario R. Alessi
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom.


