### Accession
PXD027821

### Title
Interval-based secretomics unravels the time-dependent acute phase response in hepatocyte model systems

### Description
Mass spectrometry based secretomics approaches preferentially utilize serum-free culture conditions to circumvent serum induced interference and enable sufficient analytical depth. However, this negatively affects a wide range of cellular functions and thus reduces the biological relevance. Moreover, the experimental time range is limited by the viability of cells under serum free culture conditions which results in potentially missing out a large fraction of transcriptionally regulated secretion events and feedback-loops. We present an “interval-based” secretomics workflow, that addresses the shortcomings of the serum-free secretomics approach, by probing protein secretion rates in short serum-free time windows. We applied this approach to unravel the time-resolved secretion in the hepatocyte model systems HepG2 and HepaRG after stimulation of the acute-phase response (APR), a cellular reaction to inflammatory stimuli that typically manifests over days. The integration of relative quantification using tandem mass tags (TMT) enabled precise monitoring of time dependent changes in the secretome over days. Cell line and cytokine specific changes were observed: IL1b directed the APR towards pathogen defense over three distinct chronological phases. In contrast, IL6 directed the APR towards regeneration. Cell surface shedding was pronounced upon IL1b stimulation and small molecule inhibition of ADAM and matrix metalloproteases identified induced as well as constitutive shedding events. Inhibition of ADAM proteases by TAPI-0 not only led to reduced shedding of the sorting receptor SORT1, but also an attenuated cytokine response suggesting a direct link between cell surface shedding and cytokine secretion rates.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen secretome samples were dried in vacuo. Pellets were resuspended in 115 µL resuspension buffer (2 % SDS, 0.5 % IGEPAL CA-630) and incubated for 15 minutes on an orbital shaker (Heidolph Titramax 1000) at 800 rpm. 100 µL resuspended samples were processed through a modified version of the single pot solid-phase sample preparation (SP3) protocol as described by Werner et al. (Doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1024-4_17) Briefly, proteins in resuspension buffer were bound to paramagnetic beads (SeraMag Speed beads, GE Healthcare, CAT#45152105050250, CAT#651521050502) by addition of 160 µl cleanup solution to a final ethanol concentration of 50 %. Contaminants were removed by washing 4 times with 200 µL 70 % ethanol. Proteins were digested by resuspending in 0.1 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) containing TCEP, chloracetamide, trypsin, and LysC following o/n incubation. Derived peptides were labeled with isobaric mass tags (TMT, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The labeling reaction was performed in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) 50 % Acetonitrile at 22 °C and quenched with hydroxylamine. Labeled peptide extracts were pooled and purified using C18SCX stage-tips as described in the above publication by Werner et al. followed by peptide frationation into 8 fractions prior to LC-MS/MS analysis using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, lyophilized samples were resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in water and 30 % of each sample was injected into an Ultimate3000 nanoRLSC (Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on custom-made 50 cm × 100 μm (ID) reversed-phase columns (C18, 1.9 μm, Reprosil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) at 55 °C. Gradient elution was performed from 2 % acetonitrile to 40 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid and 3.5 % DMSO over 65 min at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Samples were online injected into Q-Exactive or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometers. The Q Exactive Plus was operating with data-dependent top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired using 70.000 resolution and an ion target of 3 × 106 for MS1 scans. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) scans were performed with 35 % NCE at 35.000 resolution (at m/z 200), and ion target settings was set to 2 × 105  so as to avoid coalescence [23]. The instruments were operated with Tune 2.4 and Xcalibur 3.0 build 63. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operated with a fixed cycle time of 3 s. Mass spectrometry spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 and an ion target of 4 × 105. HCD fragmentation was performed at 38 % NCE at a resolution of 30,000 and an ion target 1 × 105. The instrument was operated with Tune v.2.1.1565.23 and Xcalibur v.4.0.27.10

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used for protein identification, in a first search 30 ppm peptide precursor mass and 30 mDa (HCD) mass tolerance for fragment ions was used for recalibration according to Cox et al. (Doi: 10.1007/s13361-011-0142-8) followed by search using a 10 ppm mass tolerance for peptide precursors and 20 mDa (HCD) mass tolerance for fragment ions. The search database consisted of a customized version of the SwissProt sequence database (SwissProt Human release December 2018, 42 423 sequences) combined with a decoy version of this database created using scripts supplied by Matrix Science. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and TMT modification of lysine residues were set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation of proteins, and TMT modification of peptide N-termini were set as variable modifications.  Unless stated otherwise, we accepted protein identifications as follows. (i) For single-spectrum to sequence assignments, we required this assignment to be the best match and a minimum Mascot score of 31 and a 10× difference of this assignment over the next best assignment. Based on these criteria, the decoy search results indicated <1% false discovery rate (FDR). (ii) For multiple spectrum-to-sequence assignments and using the same parameters, the decoy search results indicate <0.1 % FDR. All identified proteins were quantified; FDR for quantified proteins was below 1 %.  Reporter ion intensities were read from raw data and multiplied with ion accumulation times (the unit is milliseconds) so as to yield a measure proportional to the number of ions; this measure is referred to as ion area (see DOI: 10.1021/ac201760x). Spectra matching to peptides were filtered according to the following criteria: mascot ion score >15, signal-to-background of the precursor ion >4, and signal-to-interference >0.5 (see DOI: 10.1016/j.jasms.2010.01.012). Fold-changes were corrected for isotope purity as described and adjusted for interference caused by co-eluting nearly isobaric peaks as estimated by the signal-to-interference measure (see DOI: 10.1021/pr400098r). Protein quantification was derived from individual spectra matching to distinct peptides by using a sum-based bootstrap algorithm; 95% confidence intervals were calculated for all protein fold-changes that were quantified with more than three spectra. Only proteins quantified with at more than one quantified spectrum and more than one unique peptide were considered for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shedding, Il6, Heparg, Acute-phase response, Il1b, Liver, Interval-based secretomics, Secretomics, Hepg2

### Affiliations
Cellzome GmbH, a GSK company
Cellzome - a GSK company Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 HEIDELBERG

### Submitter
Sascha  Knecht

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome - a GSK company Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 HEIDELBERG


