### Accession
PXD004740

### Title
Early prediction of inflammation by unprecedented unbiased linking of tissue ‎molecular ‎composition and structure

### Description
The identification of molecular signatures that aid early diagnosis of complex tissue pathologies, ‎such as inflammatory diseases, ‎poses a major scientific and clinical challenge due to their genetic ‎and phenotypic heterogeneity. We have been able to unprecedentedly discover a distinct tissue ‎state occurring before the onset of inflammatory clinical symptoms by integrating quantitative ‎proteomics with advanced microscopy analyses. Through monitoring colonic extracellular matrix ‎‎(ECM) ‎remodeling in colitis animal models we have unexpectedly revealed that pre-‎symptomatic ‎tissues display a unique ECM signature in terms of molecular ‎composition, morphology and ‎stiffness. By applying‏ ‏advanced computational analyses we were able to project quantitative ‎proteomics data onto an axis correlating with spatially resolved tissue damage originating from ‎the ECM. These results bridge the gap between tissue structure and composition while outlining ‎the predictive ‎power of the cellular microenvironment in early diagnostics of ‎inflammatory ‎diseases. ‎

### Sample Protocol
Tissue slices from colons of WT( HC/healthy, D4/pre inflammatory, D10/acute inflammation) or IL-10-/-(IH/healthy, ILL/ chronic inflammation) mice at different stages of the inflammation models were immersed in a solution containing 50% trifluoroethanol (TFE), 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) and 15mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and coarsely homogenized by repeated cycles of boiling, freezing and sonication. Subsequently, samples were shaken at 30˚C, 1400 rpm for 30 minutes, followed by the addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) to a final concentration of 25mM and further shaking for 30 minutes at 30˚C and 1400 rpm. TFE was then diluted to 25% with 50mM ABC, LysC (Wako Chemicals, 1:100 v/v) and sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, 1:50) was added and incubated overnight at room temperature. On the following morning more trypsin was added (1:80) for 4 hours. Peptide mixtures were purified on C18 stage tips (60μg per tip). Eluted peptides were analyzed on an EASY-nLC-1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus MS (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed with MaxQuant software and an Andromeda search engine, with a 1% FDR threshold on the peptide and protein levels.Label free quantification algorithm was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix, Colitis, Inflammatory bowel disease .proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel


