### Accession
PXD023026

### Title
MCRS1 is a histone acetylation regulator whose loss in hepatocytes promotes cirrhosis

### Description
Cirrhosis is a late stage of fibrosis that fatally impairs liver function. Unfortunately, genetic animal models mimicking human cirrhosis are lacking and the molecular mechanisms remain unknown. Here we report the first murine genetic model recapitulating clinical features of cirrhosis, which are induced by hepatocyte-specific elimination of microspherule protein 1 (MCRS1), a member of the non-specific lethal (NSL) and INO80 chromatin modifier complexes. Deregulation of bile acid (BA) transporter expression, revealed by proteomic analysis of MCRS1-depleted mouse livers, with pronounced downregulation of the Na+-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP), causes BA accumulation in liver sinusoids. Genetic ablation of the BA receptor FXR in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) suppresses bile duct ligation (BDL)-induced fibrosis in mice. Moreover, in vitro experiments demonstrate that fibrotic marker expression is reduced in FXR-depleted HSCs cultured in conditioned medium containing high BAs from MCRS1-depleted hepatocytes. Additionally, hepatocytic MCRS1 overexpression increases their NTCP levels, and consequently protects mice against BDL-induced liver fibrosis. Deletion of a putative SANT domain in MCRS1, also revealed by protein sequence analysis and essential for histone H3 (H3) binding, disrupts H3/HDAC1 complex formation. This evicts MCRS1 and HDAC1 from their H3 anchoring sites and increases histone lysine acetylation of BA transporter genes, independently of the NSL or INO80 complexes. Taken together, our data reveal a previously unrecognized function of MCRS1 as a novel histone acetylation regulator that binds to H3, and recruits a novel chromatin-modifying complex that maintains gene expression homeostasis and liver health. Accordingly, loss of nuclear MCRS1 correlates with increased histone acetylation in human cirrhosis samples. Regulation of histone acetylation might thus be central to cirrhotic development.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue samples were lysed in a Precellys24 with 2.8 mm ceramic beads (5,500 rpm, 2 x 20 s, 15 s break) using 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 15 mM TCEP, in 100 mM Hepes pH 7.5, supplemented with 1:1000 (v/v) of benzonase (Novagen) and 1:100 (v/v) of HaltTM phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail 100x (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein concentration was determined using Qubit® (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, samples (110 g) were digested by means of the standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced and alkylated (15 mM TCEP, 55 mM IAA, 30 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, overnight at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 4 h at 37oC). Samples were labeled using iTRAQ® reagent 8-plex following manufacturer’s instructions. Labeling scheme was as follows: MCRS1(+/+)hep mice (corresponding to Control NGG 313 (113), Control NGG 315 (114), Control NGG 316 (115), Control NGG 321 (116)) and MCRS1()hep mice (corresponding to Mutant NGG 314 (117) Mutant NGG 323 (118), Mutant NGG 325 (119) and Mutant NGG 327 (121)). Samples were mixed in 1:1 ratios based on total peptide amount, which was determined from an aliquot by comparing overall signal intensities on a regular LC-MS/MS run. The final mixture was finally desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried prior high pH reverse phase HPLC pre-fractionation. Peptides were pre-fractionated offline by means of high pH reverse phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a sample collector. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 100 μl of phase A (10 mM NH4OH) and loaded onto a XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 μm, 2.1mm x 150 mm) (Waters). Phase B was 10 mM NH4OH in 90% CH3CN. The following gradient (flow rate of 100 μL/min) was used: 0-50 min 0-25% B, 50-56 min 25-60% B, 56-57 min 60-90% B. 50 fractions were collected and concatenated into 15 fractions. LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18 5 m, 20 mm length, NanoSeparations) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2.5 L/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 1.9 um, 400 mm length and 0.075 mm ID) and separated using a 133 min effective linear gradient (buffer A: 4% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The gradient used was: 0-2 min 2-6% B, 2-133 min 6-30% B and 133-143 min 98% B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.8 kV) into the mass spectrometer with a PicoTip emitter (360/20 Tube OD/ID μm, tip ID 10 m) (New Objective), a heated capillary temperature of 325°C and S-Lens RF level of 60%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (threshold signal ≥ 5000 counts and dynamic exclusion of 40 s). MS spectra (350-1500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 (400 m/z). Peptides were isolated using a 1.5 Th window and fragmented using Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with linear ion trap read out at a NCE of 36% (0.25 Q-value and 0.10 ms activation time) the resulting fragments were detected in the Orbitrap system with a resolution of 7,500 at m/z 400. The ion target values were 1E6 for MS (500 ms max injection time) and 30000 for MS/MS (250 ms max injection time).

### Data Protocol
All files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) with Sequest HT as the search engine against a concatenated mouse database supplemented with common contaminants (UniProtKB/TrEMBL, 43,938 sequences), iTRAQ 8plex tag labelling in lysine and peptide N-termini were included as fixed modifications, together with carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 8plex labelling of tyrosine were included as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da. The integration of reporter ions was performed using the most confident centroid with a tolerance of 50 ppm. PSMs were filtered using Percolator (v2.04) with a FDR of 1%. Quantification results at the PSM level were loaded into Isobar (v 1.10) for statistical analysis, using a noise model that accounts for the technical variability and a second biological variability model estimated from bio-logical replicates. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Proteins with a p-value ≤0.05 (in both models) and with a log2 ratio > 0.3 or < - 0.3 were considered regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mcrs1, Hepatocytes, Itraq

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
Proteomics Core Unit, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Proteomics Core Unit, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Madrid, Spain


