### Accession
PXD003165

### Title
Label-free based quantitative proteomics analysis of primary neonatal porcine Leydig cells exposed to the persistent contaminant 3-methylsulfonyl-DDE

### Description
Evidence that persistent environmental pollutants may target the male reproductive system is increasing. The male reproductive system is regulated by secretion of testosterone by testicular Leydig cells, and perturbation of Leydig cells function may have ultimate consequences. 3-methylsulfonyl-DDE (3-MeSO2-DDE) is a potent adrenal toxicants formed from the persistent insecticide DDT. Although studies have revealed endocrine disruptive effect of 3-MeSO2-DDE, the underlying mechanisms at cellular level in steroidogenic Leydig cells remains to be established. The current study addresses the effect of 3-MeSO2-DDE viability, hormone production and proteome response of primary neonatal porcine Leydig cells. The AlamarBlue™ assay was used to evaluate cell viability. Solid phase radioimmunoassay was used to measure concentration of hormones produced by both unstimulated and luteinizing hormone (LH)-stimulated Leydig cells following 48 h exposure. Protein samples from Leydig cells exposed to a non-cytotoxic concentration of 3-MeSO2-DDE (10µM) were subjected to nano-LC-MS/MS and analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer and quantified using label-free quantitative algorithm. Gene Ontology (GO) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) were carried out for functional annotation and identification of protein interaction networks. 3-MeSO2-DDE regulated Leydig cell steroidogenesis differentially depending on cell culture condition. Whereas its effect on testosterone secretion at basal condition was stimulatory, the effect on LH-stimulated cells was inhibitory. From triplicate experiments, a total of 7540 proteins were identified in which the abundance of 87 proteins in unstimulated Leydig cells and 146 proteins in LH-stimulated Leydig cells were found to be significantly regulated in response to 3-MeSO2-DDE exposure. These proteins not only are the first reported in relation to 3-MeSO2-DDE exposure,  but also display small number of proteins shared between culture conditions, suggesting the action of 3-MeSO2-DDE on several targeted pathways, including mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative phosphorylation, EIF2-signaling, and glutathion-mediated detoxification. Further identification and characterization of these proteins and pathways may build our understanding to the molecular basis of 3-MeSO2-DDE induced endocrine disruption in Leydig cells.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues protein extracts were prepared using a 2% SDS in 25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 buffer. Proteins were processed using MED-FASP protocol and two digest aliquots using Lys-C and trypsin were obtained .

### Data Protocol
Samples were then analyzed by nano-LC–MS/MS using a Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap mass spectrometer interfaced with an EASY-spray ion source (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to a nano-LC HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Dionex). The peptides were loaded onto a trap column (C18, 100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on EASY-Spray columns (PepMapRSLC, C18, 2 μm particles, 100 Å, 50 cm, 75 μm ID, Thermo Scientific) :using a 4 h binary gradient consisting of solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and solvent B (90% ACN and 0.1% FA in water) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The column was operated at constant temprature of 35 °C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source. The MS instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. Full MS scans were acquired in resolution of 70000, with automatic gain control target value of 3 × 106 ions or maximum injection time of 50 ms within the scan range 300–1750 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy set to 25. The MS/MS spectra were acquired of the 10 most abundant ions (Top10 method) in the resolution R = 17500, automatic gain control target value of 2 × 105 ions, or maximum fragment accumulation time of 100 ms. Generation of raw files into MS/MS peak lists and quantifications were performed with MaxQuant software version v1.4.0.8 as described by Cox and Mann (2008).  MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB FASTA database for the Sus scrofa (26071 entries, downloaded from www.UniProt.org July 2014) using the following parameters: oxidations (M), acetylation (protein N term), Gln-pyro (Q) and pyro-Glu (E) were specified as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. Database search was performed with mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ion for mass calibration, and with a 6 ppm tolerance after calibration. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Evidence that persistent environmental pollutants may target the male reproductive system is increasing. The male reproductive system is regulated by secretion of testosterone by testicular Leydig cells, and perturbation of Leydig cell function may have ultimate consequences. 3-Methylsulfonyl-DDE (3-MeSO2-DDE) is a potent adrenal toxicants formed from the persistent insecticide DDT. Although studies have revealed the endocrine disruptive effect of 3-MeSO2-DDE, the underlying mechanisms at cellular level in steroidogenic Leydig cells remains to be established. The current study addresses the effect of 3-MeSO2-DDE on viability, hormone production and proteome response of primary neonatal porcine Leydig cells. The AlamarBlue&#x2122; assay was used to evaluate cell viability. Solid phase radioimmunoassay was used to measure concentration of hormones produced by both unstimulated and Luteinizing hormone (LH)-stimulated Leydig cells following 48h exposure. Protein samples from Leydig cells exposed to a non-cytotoxic concentration of 3-MeSO2-DDE (10 &#x3bc;M) were subjected to nano-LC-MS/MS and analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer and quantified using label-free quantitative algorithm. Gene Ontology (GO) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) were carried out for functional annotation and identification of protein interaction networks. 3-MeSO2-DDE regulated Leydig cell steroidogenesis differentially depending on cell culture condition. Whereas its effect on testosterone secretion at basal condition was stimulatory, the effect on LH-stimulated cells was inhibitory. From triplicate experiments, a total of 6804 proteins were identified in which the abundance of 86 proteins in unstimulated Leydig cells and 145 proteins in LH-stimulated Leydig cells was found to be significantly regulated in response to 3-MeSO2-DDE exposure. These proteins not only are the first reported in relation to 3-MeSO2-DDE exposure, but also display small number of proteins shared between culture conditions, suggesting the action of 3-MeSO2-DDE on several targeted pathways, including mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative phosphorylation, EIF2-signaling, and glutathione-mediated detoxification. Further identification and characterization of these proteins and pathways may build our understanding to the molecular basis of 3-MeSO2-DDE induced endocrine disruption in Leydig cells.

### Keywords
3-methylsulfonyl-dde, Proteomics, Leydig cells, Endocrine disruption, Steroidogenesis, Ipa, Persistent organic pollutants, Sus scrofa

### Affiliations
Section of Experimental Biomedicine, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway
Dept. of Immunology

### Submitter
Gustavo de Souza

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Ropstad
Section of Experimental Biomedicine, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway


