### Accession
PXD023170

### Title
BONCAT in Arabidopsis cell culture LC-MS

### Description
Determining which proteins are actively synthesised at a given point in time and being able to extract them for analysis is important to understanding plant responses to environmental or developmental stimuli, but there are few verified experimental tools to do this directly or quantitatively. In-vivo labelling with stable isotope labelled salts or amino acids allow the measurement of the synthesis rates of different proteins. However, they do not allow enrichment of newly synthesised proteins, which could increase sensitivity and would enable biochemical features of nascent protein sets to be studied and evaluated in isolation. Here we show that using the methionine (Met) analogue homopropargylglycine (HPG) enables BONCAT (Bio-Orthogonal Non-Canonical Amino acid Tagging) of proteins that are being synthesised in Arabidopsis plants or cell cultures, facilitating their enrichment for analysis using commercially-available click-chemistry kits. Importantly, the sites of HPG incorporation could be confirmed by peptide mass spectrometry at Met-sites throughout the amino acid sequence of proteins and correlation with independent studies of protein labelling with 15N verified the data. We provide evidence that HPG-based BONCAT tags nascent plant proteins in a superior manner to azidohomoalinine (AHA)-based BONCAT in Arabidopsis and show that AHA’s induction of Met metabolism and greater inhibition of cell growth rate than HPG likely limits AHA incorporation at Met sites in Arabidopsis. HPG-based BONCAT provides a verifiable method for determining which plant proteins are being synthesised at a given time point and enriches new protein molecules from the bulk protein pool for identification, quantitation and subsequent biochemical analysis.

### Sample Protocol
After treating cells with homopropargylglycine or azidohomoalanine or 15N salts, protein extraction was performed essentially according to the procedure outlined by Wessel and Flügge (1984). Once protein pellets were clean, tagged proteins were enriched using the Click Chemistry Tools Click-&-Go Enrichment kits, with minimal modifications to the manufacturer's protocol. Wessel D, Flügge UI (1984) A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids. Analytical Biochemistry 138: 141-143

### Data Protocol
For 15N label incorporation analysis, Agilent .d files were converted to mzML using the Msconvert package (v3.0.1908-43e675997). These files were analysed using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (a joint project between the Institute for Systems Biology and the Seattle Proteome Center) and then using an in-house R-script (see Li et al., 2017).  To detect AHA and HPG tagging, Agilent .d files were analysed using MaxQuant (MQ, v1.6.10.43; Cox and Mann, 2008), with Met-to-AHA (-4.9863 Da), Met-to-HPG (-21.9877 Da) and Met-to-triazole (+50.0559 Da) as additional variable modifications. MQ output files from tagging experiments and the untreated control were processed using in-house R-scripts (available from https://github.com/ndtivendale/ncaa).  For open searches, one complete replicate of AHA, HPG and untagged raw data was searched against the Araport11 peptide database with a precursor mass tolerance of  250 amu using Comet (2019.01 rev5). Results were rescored using Peptide prophet (TPP5.0), filtered to 1% FDR and histograms of mass error prepared using R.  For detection of modifications on enriched (i.e. new) and unenriched (i.e. new and old) proteomics datasets from AHA and HPG tagging experiments, MSFragger run in the FragPipe wrapper was used (Kong et al., 2017). In addition to the Met-to-AHA and Met-to-HPG variable modifications and the carbamidomethylation of Cys fixed modification, the following variable modifications were allowed: Met or Pro oxidation (+15.9949 Da), N-terminal or Lys acetylation (+42.0106 Da), Ser, Thr or Tyr phosphorylation (+79.9663 Da) and Glu, Arg or Lys methylation (+14.0157 Da). Only one modification per peptide was allowed. Results were checked using the Philosopher program (da Veiga Leprevost et al., 2020) and data was analysed using an in-house R-script (available from https://github.com/ndtivendale/ncaa). To pass the filtration steps of this script, a protein had to be identified in two out of three replicates and a protein was considered modified if it was identified as modified in two out of three replicates (not necessarily the same modification in each replicate). If a protein was found to be modified in only one out of three replicates, it was deemed to have an unknown modification status and removed from further analysis steps. When comparing the extent of modification between the enriched and unenriched samples, Met-to-AHA, Met-to-HPG and Cys carbamidomethylation were excluded. For t-tests to detect significant differences between the enriched and unenriched datasets in the modified:total spectral hits for each protein, we only used proteins with a minimum mean of five spectral hits in both the enriched and unenriched samples.

### Publication Abstract
Determining which proteins are actively synthesized at a given point in time and extracting a representative sample for analysis is important to understand plant responses. Here we show that the methionine (Met) analogue homopropargylglycine (HPG) enables Bio-Orthogonal Non-Canonical Amino acid Tagging (BONCAT) of a small sample of the proteins being synthesized in Arabidopsis plants or cell cultures, facilitating their click-chemistry enrichment for analysis. The sites of HPG incorporation could be confirmed by peptide mass spectrometry at Met sites throughout protein amino acid sequences and correlation with independent studies of protein labelling with <sup>15</sup> N verified the data. We provide evidence that HPG-based BONCAT tags a better sample of nascent plant proteins than azidohomoalanine (AHA)-based BONCAT in Arabidopsis and show that the AHA induction of Met metabolism and greater inhibition of cell growth rate than HPG probably limits AHA incorporation at Met sites in Arabidopsis. We show HPG-based BONCAT provides a verifiable method for sampling, which plant proteins are being synthesized at a given time point and enriches a small portion of new protein molecules from the bulk protein pool for identification, quantitation and subsequent biochemical analysis. Enriched nascent polypeptides samples were found to contain significantly fewer common post-translationally modified residues than the same proteins from whole plant extracts, providing evidence for age-related accumulation of post-translational modifications in plants.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cell culture, Noncanoical amino acids, Arabidopsis, Boncat

### Affiliations
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, School of Molecular Sciences, The University of Western Australia
The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Nathan Tivendale

### Lab Head
Dr A. Harvey Millar
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, School of Molecular Sciences, The University of Western Australia


