### Accession
PXD018682

### Title
MS analysis of SARS-CoV2 proteins from patient samples

### Description
We developed a simple, MS-based method to specifically detect SARS-CoV-2 proteins from gargle solution samples of COVID-19 patients. Our protocol consists of an acetone precipitation and tryptic digestion of proteins contained within the gargle solution, followed by a targeted MS analysis. Our methodology identifies unique peptides originating from SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein. Building on these promising initial results, faster MS protocols can now be developed as routine diagnostic tools for COVID-19 patients. https://biorxiv.org/cgi/content/short/2020.04.18.047878v1

### Sample Protocol
Gargle solutions (20 ml in 0.9% NaCl) were obtained from three patients with confirmed COVID-19 infection. All samples had been classified as SARS-CoV-2-positive by three reverse transcription and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) analyses identifying E-, S- and N-gene RNAs. For protein precipitation, 1 ml of acetone (-20°C) was added to 750 µl of gargle solution and stored overnight at -20°C. After centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was dissolved in 10 µl of SMART Digest buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The solution was kept at 75°C for 10 min. Afterwards, 1 µl of PNGase F (non-reducing, NEB) was added to remove protein N-glycosylations and the sample was incubated at 50°C for 10 minutes. 1 µg of trypsin (SMART Digest, bulk resin option, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added in 50 µl of SMART Digest buffer (Thermo Fisher Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the solution was incubated at 70°C for 30 min. Reduction and alkylation were performed with dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide, respectively. Before LC/MS analysis, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). LC/MS analysis was performed on a nano-HPLC system (UltiMate RSLC 3000) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer with nano-ESI source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed for 15 min with 0.1 % (v/v) TFA at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Trapped peptides were eluted using a separation column (200cm µPAC, C18, PharmaFluidics) that had been equilibrated with 3 % B (A: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water; B: 0.08 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides were separated with linear gradients from 3 to 10 % B over 15 min, followed by 15 % B to 30 % B over 165 minutes. The column was kept at 30°C and the flow-rate was set to 300 nl/min. Targeted MS analysis was performed based on an inclusion list of tryptic peptides from SARS-CoV-2 proteins (see Supporting Information) [3]. In case none of the target masses from the inclusion list was detected, a TOP-5s method was applied. The resolving power in MS mode was set to 120,000 at m/z 200. A parallel data acquisition strategy was employed, relying on Orbitrap-HCD (higher energy collision-induced dissociation, R = 15,000) and linear ion trap-CID (collision-induced dissociation)-MS/MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
Database search (UniProt human, dated November 2019 with 20,315 entries, and SARS-CoV-2 [3]) was performed with Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was restricted to human and SARS-COV-2 proteins; two missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification, while Met oxidation and deamidation of Asp, due to PNGase F treatment, were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Nucleoprotein, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Institute of Pharmacy Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics Charles Tanford Protein Center
MLU Halle, Inst. f. Pharmacy

### Submitter
Christian Ihling

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Institute of Pharmacy Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics Charles Tanford Protein Center


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: saliva
- cell type: no available
- disease: normal
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Deamidated

