### Accession
PXD023694

### Title
Tissue extracellular matrix hydrogels as alternative to Matrigel for culturing gastrointestinal organoids

### Description
Matrigel, a mouse tumor extracellular matrix (ECM) protein mixture, is an indispensable component of most organoid tissue culture. However, it has limited the utility of organoids for drug development and regenerative medicine due to its tumor-derived origin, batch-to batch variation, high cost, and safety issues. Here, we demonstrate that gastrointestinal (GI) tissue-derived ECM hydrogels are a suitable substitute for Matrigel in GI organoid culture. We found that the development and function of GI organoids grown in GI ECM hydrogels are comparable or often superior to those in Matrigel. In addition, GI ECM hydrogels enabled long-term subculture and transplantation of GI organoids by providing GI tissue-mimetic microenvironments. Tissue-specific and age-related ECM profiles of GI ECM hydrogels that affect organoid development were also elucidated through proteomic analysis. Together, our results suggest that ECM hydrogels derived from decellularized GI tissues are an effective alternative to the current gold standard, Matrigel, and produce organoids suitable for GI disease modeling, drug development, and tissue regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
The lyophilized tissues were reconstituted with lysis buffer [4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; Wako), 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), and 1 protease inhibitor (Sigma) in 500 l] and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. Subsequently, the tissues were boiled for 15 minutes at 95C on a heat block. Tissue lysis was performed on ice by sonication using a probe sonicator (Qsonica Q125, Newtown, CT, USA) and centrifuged at 14,000 ×g at 4C for 20 minutes. The supernatant was collected and transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was measured using the BCA protein assay (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Matrigel, IEM, and SEM (100 g) protein samples were digested using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP)1. Briefly, proteins were reduced in SDT buffer [4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 and 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT)] at 37C for 45 minutes and boiled for 10 minutes at 95C on a heat block. The protein samples were then sonicated for 10 minutes in a bath sonicator (Diagenode, Denville, NJ, USA) followed by centrifugation at 14,000 ×g at 20C for 5 minutes. The supernatant was combined with 200 l of 8 M urea (in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and transferred to a membrane filter (YM-30, Millipore Corporation, Burlington, MA, USA). The SDS was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 xg at 20C for 60 minutes, and the protein samples remained on the membrane filter. SDS removal was repeated three times. Subsequently, cysteine alkylation was performed with 100 l of 0.05 M iodoacetamide in 8 M urea for 25 minutes at room temperature in the dark, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 ×g at 20C for 30 minutes. The protein samples were washed three times with 200 l of 8 M urea. Finally, 100 l of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) was added to the filter, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 ×g at 20C for 30 minutes three times. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added to the filter at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w), and the proteins were digested at 37C overnight. The resulting peptides were then eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 ×g at 20C for 30 minutes. The filter was rinsed with 75 l of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged at 14,000 ×g at 20C for 20 minutes. This step was repeated three times. The eluents were combined and dried.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.10.43). MS/MS spectra were searched against target-decoy Mouse Uniprot database (released in March 2020) for matrigel tissues and sus scrofa (pig) Uniprot database (released in March 2020) for intestine and stomach tissues using the Andromeda search engine. Primary searches were performed using a 4.5 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to full tryptic digestion. Peptides with a minimum length of six amino-acids and up to two missed cleavages were considered. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and modification level. The Intensity Based Absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was used for quantification as a part of the MaxQuant platform. Briefly, iBAQ values calculated by MaxQuant are raw intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides. Thus, iBAQ values are proportional to the molar quantities of the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Matrigel, a mouse tumor extracellular matrix protein mixture, is an indispensable component of most organoid tissue culture. However, it has limited the utility of organoids for drug development and regenerative medicine due to its tumor-derived origin, batch-to-batch variation, high cost, and safety issues. Here, we demonstrate that gastrointestinal tissue-derived extracellular matrix hydrogels are suitable substitutes for Matrigel in gastrointestinal organoid culture. We found that the development and function of gastric or intestinal organoids grown in tissue extracellular matrix hydrogels are comparable or often superior to those in Matrigel. In addition, gastrointestinal extracellular matrix hydrogels enabled long-term subculture and transplantation of organoids by providing gastrointestinal tissue-mimetic microenvironments. Tissue-specific and age-related extracellular matrix profiles that affect organoid development were also elucidated through proteomic analysis. Together, our results suggest that extracellular matrix hydrogels derived from decellularized gastrointestinal tissues are effective alternatives to the current gold standard, Matrigel, and produce organoids suitable for gastrointestinal disease modeling, drug development, and tissue regeneration.

### Keywords
Matrigel, Lc-ms/ms, Organoid

### Affiliations
KHU
Yonsei university

### Submitter
Jae Hun Jung

### Lab Head
Dr Jae Hun Jung
Yonsei university


