### Accession
PXD027550

### Title
Cys-SH based quantitative redox proteomics of salt induced response in sugar beet monosomic addition line M14

### Description
Salt stress is a major abiotic stress that limits plant growth, development and productivity. Studying the molecular mechanisms of salt stress tolerance may help to enhance crop productivity. Sugar beet monosomic addition line M14 exhibits tolerance to salt stress.  In this work, the changes in the BvM14 proteome and redox proteome induced by salt stress were analyzed using a multiplex iodoTMTRAQ double labeling quantitative proteomics approach. A total of 80 proteins were differentially expressed under salt stress. Interestingly, 42 potential redox-regulated proteins showed differential redox change under salt stress. A large proportion of the redox proteins were involved in photosynthesis, ROS homeostasis and other pathways. For example, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase activase changed in its redox state after salt treatments. In addition, three redox proteins involved in regulation of ROS homeostasis were also changed in redox states. Transcription levels of eighteen differential proteins and redox proteins were profiled.  The results showed involvement of protein redox modifications in BvM14 salt stress response and revealed the short-term salt responsive mechanisms. The knowledge may inform marker-based breeding effort of sugar beet and other crops for stress resilience and high yield.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from the BvM14 leaves was performed according to a phenol extraction method (Ghoulam et al. 2002). Briefly, 2 g M14 leaves were ground into a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and suspended in 1.25 mL Tris saturated phenol (pH8.8) and 1.25 mL phenol extraction buffer (900 mM sucrose, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.8), 1 mM PMSF, 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), 10 mM EDTA) (Parker et al. 2015; Yuan et al. 2019). NEM will irreversibly block free cysteine thiols during the protein extraction process. Protein samples were prepared from three independent biological replicates, and protein concentration was determined using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, USA) with BSA (2 mg/mL) as the standard (Parker et al. 2012).Reduced thiols for reverse labeling were generated by incubating the protein samples with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 1 h at 50°C. We labeled 0, 30 and 60 min control samples with 126, 128 and 130 iodoTMT reagents, and the salt treated samples with 127, 129 and 131 reagents, respectively. Labeling was performed at 37°C for 2 h in the dark, then quenched with 0.5 M DTT for 15 min at 37℃ in the dark. Trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega, Madison) was added with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and the digestion was performed at 37°C overnight (Parker et al. 2012). Peptides were cleaned up with C18 desalting columns (The Nest Group Inc., Southborough, MA) and lyophilized to dryness.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against the B. vulgaris database (52,749 entries) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the parameters from a previous publication (Yin et al. 2017). We used iodoTMT and iTRAQ reporter ion peak intensities for relative quantification with unique peptides. Each iodoTMT tag was exported as unique peptide peak intensities, and ratios were calculated accordingly peak intensity values. We used student’s t-test conducted between the fold change of iodoTMT labeled peptides and the fold change of the corresponding proteins based on iTRAQ. The protein should be quantified in all the three biological replicates. The protein fold change >1.2 or <0.8 (p-value <0.05) were used to determine significant redox or total protein level changes. All the proteins were searched by NCBInr and Uniprot (http://www.ebi.uniprot.org) for functional annotation, subcellular location and gene ID numbers of the homologous proteins. Gene ontology (GO) (http://geneontology.org) terms and imported Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (https://www.kegg.jp) database were used for Blast2GO analysis (Conesa et al. 2005). The functional enrichment analysis was performed according to Yu’s procedure (Yu et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Salt stress, Molecular mechanisms, Iodotmtraq, Sugar beet m14 line

### Affiliations
Engineering Research Center of Agricultural Microbiology Technology, Ministry of Education, Heilongjiang University, Harbin 150500, China
Heilongjiang University

### Submitter
Zhang Jialin

### Lab Head
Dr Li Haiying
Engineering Research Center of Agricultural Microbiology Technology, Ministry of Education, Heilongjiang University, Harbin 150500, China


