### Accession
PXD036288

### Title
Drug-target of DNA methyltransferase inhibitors

### Description
Malaria eradication requires the development of new drugs to combat drug-resistant parasites. The search for new chemical scaffolds that target novel pathways of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum is of highest priority. We identified bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids isolated from Cocculus sp. (trilobine derivatives) as active in the nanomolar range against P. falciparum blood stages. Synthesis of a library of 94 hemi-synthetic derivates allowed us to identify compound 84 (c-84) that kills multi-drug resistant clinical isolates in the nanomolar range (median IC50 ranging from 35-88nM). Efforts were made to obtain compounds with significantly improved preclinical properties. Out of those, compound 125 (c-125) delays the onset of parasitemia in P. berghei infected mice and inhibits P. falciparum transmission stages in vitro (culture assays) and in vivo using membrane feeding assay in the Anopheles stephensi vector. C-125 also impairs P. falciparum development in sporozoite-infected hepatocytes, in the low micromolar range. Finally, we used a chemical pull-down to identify potential protein targets of this chemical family. Our mass spectrometry analysis identified the parasite interactome with trilobine alkaloid, allowing us to identify protein partners belonging to metabolic pathways that have not been previously targeted by antimalarial drugs or implicated in drug-resistance mechanisms in malaria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation (Click Chemistry samples after on-beads purification)  The parasites in red blood cells (RBCs) where incubated in RPMI for 30min with the probe 1590 + 30min with the competitor or the equivalent amount of DMSO. Samples where then washed with RPMI and treated with 0,15% saponin to lyse the RBCs. Parasites were pelleted and thoroughly washed until no hemoglobin was visible in the supernatant. Free parasites were then exposed to UV for 1h at 365nm to crosslink the probe to the protein target. Parasites were then pelleted again and lysed in a NP40 buffer (NP40 1%, 1X proteases inhibitors, 1mM DTT in PBS). Extracts were sonicated for 5min (30s on/off cycles, medium power) and centrifuged for 15 min at 10000g to get rid of the insoluble material. Samples were diluted to 1mg/ml and the reagents for the click chemistry were added (60uM TAMRA-biotin-azide, 1mM CuSO4, 1mM TCEP, 100uM TBTA). Extracts were shaked for 1h. The proteins were then precipitated with methanol/chloroform/water in a 2/0,5/1 ratio and spined at 14000g for 3min. The pellet was thoroughly washed with Methanol. The pellet was then air dried and resuspended in SDS buffer (1% SDS, 10mM DTT) and sonicated. Samples were then enriched on avidin-coupled agarose beads (Pierce™NeutrAvidin™ Agarose, ThermoFisher Scientific) (50 μL, pre-washed three times in 0.2 % SDS in PBS) by incubation with gentle shaking for 2 h at room temperature to bind and enrich biotin-labeled proteins thanks to the probe. The supernatant was then removed, and the beads were washed on a column with 1 % SDS in PBS (3 x 500 uL), 4 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) (2 x 300 uL) and 50 mM AMBIC (5 x 300 uL).

### Data Protocol
Protein digestion  Reduction of disulfide bonds of enrich biotin-labeled proteins in 50 mM AMBIC was achieved by addition of DTT to final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min at 56 °C with shaking. Then, IAA was added at final concentration of 20 mM, and samples were incubated in dark for 30 min at 37 °C. Samples were digested for 4 hours using LysC (Promega, MA, USA). Subsequently, 1 μg of trypsin (Promega, MA, USA) was added, and samples were digested overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was quenched by addition formic acid (FA). The digest was subsequently desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and lyophilized in vacuum for further analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis  All the samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer coupled with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with solvent A of 0.1% formic acid and solvent B of 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. One microgram of each sample was injected on a 75-μm ID PicoFrit column packed in-house to approximately 30-cm length with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm beads (Dr. Maisch). Column equilibration and peptide loading were done at 900 bars in buffer A (0.1% FA). Samples were separated at a 250 nl min−1 flow rate with a gradient of 2 to 7% buffer B in 5min, 23 % buffer B in 70 min, 23 to 45 % buffer B in 30 min, 45 to 95 % buffer B in 5 min, followed by a hold at 95% for 7 min and back to 2% for 15 min. Column temperature was set to 60°C. Mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS instrument parameters were set as follows: MS1, r = 70,000; MS2, r = 17,500; MS1 AGC target of 3e6; MS2 for the 10 most abundant ions using an AGC target of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 60 ms; and a 45 s dynamic exclusion. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z and normalized collision energy fixed to 28 for HCD fragmentation. Unassigned precursor ion charge states as well as 1, 7, 8 and >8 charged states were rejected and peptide match was disable.   Data analysis  Acquired Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 version [1] using the Andromeda search engine [2] against Plasmodium falciparum, strain NF54 proteome database (5,548 entries, download from PlasmoDB) and human reference proteome (89260 entries, download Jan 2018), concatenated with usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. All searches were performed with oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Trypsin was selected as protease allowing for up to two missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and to 20 ppm for the MS/MS match tolerance. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. The match between run was selected. A false discovery rate cut-off of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. All mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited at ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier XXXXXX.  The identification and quantification data were then mined for functional analysis to identify targets using tools for GO term enrichment, such as DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/ ) and STRING (https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Click chemistry methyltransferase

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Biologie des interactions hôte-parasite Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Nardella Flore
Biologie des interactions hôte-parasite Institut Pasteur


