### Accession
PXD021006

### Title
Proteomic and glycoproteomic analysis of myogenesis in L6 myoblasts

### Description
The majority of cell surface and secreted proteins are modified by glycans and this glycosylation process plays an important role in the development of multicellular organisms. These glycan modifications enable communication between cells and the extracellular matrix via interactions with specific glycan-binding lectins and the regulation of receptor-mediated signalling. Glycosylation plays an important role in myogenesis and the development of muscle tissue but our molecular understanding of the precise glycans, catalytic enzymes and lectins involved remain only partially understood. Here, we quantified dynamic remodeling of the membrane-associated proteome during in vitro myogenesis. We observed wide-spread changes in the abundance of several receptors and important enzymes regulating glycosylation. Quantification of released N-linked glycans via glycomic analysis confirmed remodeling of the glycome with a switch in sialic acid linkages, and changes in di-galactosylation and paucimannosylation. Quantitative glycoproteomic analysis with stable isotope labelling, enrichment of glycopeptides and analysis via multiple fragmentation approaches identified precise glycoproteins containing these regulated glycans including integrins and growth factor receptors. Myogenesis was also associated with the regulation of several lectins including the up-regulation of Galectin-1 (LGALS1). CRISPR/Cas9-mediated deletion of Lgals1 inhibited differentiation and myotube formation suggesting an early defect in the myogenic program. We also observed similar changes in N-glycosylation and the up-regulation of LGALS1 during postnatal skeletal muscle development in mice. Finally, treatment of new-born mice with recombinant adeno-associated viruses to express LGALS1 in the musculature resulted in enhanced muscle mass. Our data will be a valuable resource to further understand the role of glycosylation and lectins on myogenesis and may aid in the development of intervention strategies aimed at promoting healthy muscle.

### Sample Protocol
Rat L6 myoblasts were maintained in α-MEM containing 5.5 mM glucose and 10% fetal bovine serum a 10% CO2 incubator. L6 myoblasts were differentiated into myotubes over 7 days with 2% FBS. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysis in 100 mM sodium carbonate containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) by tip-probe sonication. Lysates were rotated at 4℃ for 1 h then centrifuged at 150,000 g for 60 min at 4℃. The pellet was resuspended in 6 M urea, 2M thiourea, 1% SDS containing 25 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0 and protein precipitated with chloroform:methanol:water (1:3:4). Precipitated protein was washed with methanol and resuspended in 6 M urea, 2M thiourea containing 25 mM TEAB, pH 8.0. Protein concentration was determined via Qubit and normalized. Peptides were prepared essentially as described previously [PMID: 26537798]. Briefly, 35 µg of membrane-enriched protein from each time point and replicate (8 points x n=3) were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature followed by alkylation with 25 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The reaction was quenched to 25 mM DTT and digested with 0.7 µg of LysC for 3 h at room temp. The digest was diluted 5-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with 0.7 ug trypsin Sigma overnight at 30℃. Samples were acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid (FA), centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at room temperature and desalted using 30 mg of hydrophilic-lipophilic balance – solid phase extraction (HLB-SPE) material in a 96-well plate. The plate was washed with 5% acetonitrile (MeCN) containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were eluted with 50% MeCN containing 0.1% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 20 µL of 100 mM HEPEs, pH 8.0 and isotopically labelled with 73 µg of 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT) in a final concentration of 33% MeCN for 2 h at room temperature. The sample channels were labelled as follows: 126=day-0, 127N=day-1, 127C=day-2, 128N=day-3, 128C=day-4, 129N=day-5, 129C=day-6, 130N=day-7. The reactions were quenched with 0.8% hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature, and then acidified and diluted to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA and 5% MeCN. The labelled peptides were pooled and purified by HLB-SPE as described above. Peptides were resuspended in 90% MeCN containing 0.1% TFA and 10% of the peptide separated directly into 12 fractions for total proteome analysis using amide-80 HILIC as described previously [PMID: 21127490]. Glycopeptides were enriched from 90% of the remaining peptide using zic-HILIC microcolumns as previously described [PMID: 15253437; PMID: 20536156]. The analysis of each fraction for proteome quantification was performed on a Dionex 3500RS coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch, Germany) with a gradient of 2 – 40% MeCN containing 0.1% FA over 150 min at 250 nl/min at 55°C. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1400 m/z (120,000 resolution, 5e5 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition of the 10 most intense ions with CID and detection in the ion-trap (rapid scan rate, 1e4 AGC, 70 ms injection time, 30% NCE, 1.6 m/z isolation width). Synchronous precursor selection (SPS) was enabled with multi-notch isolation [PMID: 24927332] of 10 most abundant fragment ions excluding precursor window of 40 m/z and loss of TMT reporter ions with H with MS3 analysis by HCD and detection in the orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 300 ms injection time, 100 – 500 m/z, 55% NCE, 2 m/z). The analysis of glycopeptides was performed as single-shot analysis without fractionation on the identical system as described above. An MS1 scan was acquired from 550 – 1750 (120,000 resolution, 5e5 AGC, 100 ms injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition of the 7 most intense ions and highest charge state with HCD and detection in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 2e5 AGC, 200 ms injection time, 40 NCE, 2.0 m/z quadrupole isolation width). The acquisition strategy included a product ion triggered re-isolation of the precursor ion if HexNAc oxonium ions (138.0545 and 204.0867 m/z) were detected amongst the top 20 fragment ions of the HCD MS/MS spectrum. The re-isolated precursor ion was subjected to both EThcD and CID MS/MS analysis [PMID: 23106539; PMID: 22701174; PMID: 24796651]. EThcD MS/MS analysis was detected in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 3e5 AGC, 250 ms injection time, calibrated charge dependent ETD reaction times [2+ 121 ms; 3+ 54 ms; 4+ 30 ms; 5+ 20ms; 6+ 13 ms; 7+; 10 ms], 2 m/z quadrupole isolation width) and, CID MS/MS analysis was detected in the ion trap (rapid scan rate, 1e4 AGC, 70 ms injection time, 35% NCE, 2 m/z quadrupole isolation width).

### Data Protocol
The identification and quantification of peptides for proteomic analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.1.0.801) using Sequest [PMID: 12433093] against the rat UniProt database (November 2015). The precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm with a maximum of two full trypsin miss cleavages while CID MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT of peptide N-terminus and lysine was set as a fixed modification. A precursor isotope off set was enabled (narrow) to account for incorrect precursor monoisotopic reporting (+/- 1.0 Da). All data was searched as a single batch with PSM and peptide FDR set to 1% using Percolator [PMID: 17952086 ] and protein level FDR set to 1% using Protein FDR Validator node. Quantification was performed using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node with integration set to 20 ppm and co-isolation threshold set to 50% and reporter ions were required in all channels. Peptides were grouped in each replicate based on unique sequence and unique modifications, and the median reporter ion areas calculated. Data was expressed as Log2 fold-change to day-0 for each replicate and normalized to a median of 0. Significantly regulated glycopeptides were determined using ANOVA with permutation-based FDR set at 5% with Tukey’s posthoc test.  The identification and quantification of glycopeptides was performed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.1.0.801) using the Byonic node [PMID: 23255153] against the rat UniProt database (November 2015). The precursor, HCD MS/MS and EThcD MS/MS tolerance were set to 20 ppm with a maximum of two full trypsin miss cleavages. The peptides were searched with oxidation of methionine and N-glycan modification of asparagine (309 possible glycan compositions without sodium adducts available within Byonic) set as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT of peptide N-terminus and lysine was set as a fixed modification. A precursor isotope off set was enabled (narrow) to account for incorrect precursor monoisotopic reporting (+/- 1.0 Da). All data was searched as a single batch with PSM FDR set to 1% using the PSM Validator node and a minimum Byonic score of 100 was applied. Only HCD MS/MS spectra containing HexNAc oxonium ions within the range of 138.05-138.06 and 204.08-204.09 m/z were annotated in the final list of glycopeptides as previously described [PMID: 24090084]. Identified glycopeptides were quantified in HCD MS/MS using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node with integration set to 20 ppm and co-isolation threshold set to 75%. Reporter ions were required in all channels. Peptides were grouped in each replicate based on unique sequence and unique modifications, and the median reporter ion areas calculated. Data was expressed as Log2 fold-change to day-0 for each replicate and normalized to a median of 0. Significantly regulated glycopeptides were determined using ANOVA with permutation-based FDR set at 5% with Tukey’s posthoc test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, N-linked glycosylation, Myogenesis

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


