### Accession
PXD042917

### Title
Activity-based protein profiling of glycosidases in the vaginal microbiome

### Description
The goal of this project was to utilize activity-based protein profiling to isolate and identify glycogen degrading enzymes present in cervicovaginal fluid.

### Sample Protocol
CVF samples were collected from donors following IRB guidance. Donors self-collected a sample by inserting a Soft Disc and then waiting 1-4 hours before removing the disc  CVF was removed from the disc through the addition of 1 mL of PBS and frozen for processing. Samples were probe labeled, enriched with streptavidin resin, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Except for S010,LC-MS/MS was performed with an Orbitrap Eclipse. A 60-minute gradient using a two-mobile-phase system consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in water (B). The chromatographic separation was achieved over a 60 min gradient from 8 to 30% B over 57 min, 30 to 45% B for 10 min, 45 to 60% B for 3 min, 60 to 95% B for 2 min and held at 95%B for 11 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. A spray voltage of 2300 V was applied to the electrospray tip in line with a FAIMS source using varied compensation voltage_–40, –60, –80 while the Orbitrap Eclipse instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode, MS survey scans were in the Orbitrap (Normalized AGC target value 300%, resolution 240,000, and max injection time 50 ms) with a 1 sec cycle time and MS/MS spectra acquisition were detected in the linear ion trap (Normalized AGC target value of 50% and injection time 35 ms) using HCD activation with a normalized collision energy of 27%. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds after a repeat count of 1. For S010, peptide samples were disolved in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (20 μL) and analyzed (18 μL) by LC/ESI MS/MS with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. A 90-minute gradient from 2% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute was used for chromatographic separations. A spray voltage of 2200 V was applied to the electrospray tip and the Orbitrap Fusion instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode, MS survey scans were in the Orbitrap (AGC target value 500,000, resolution 120,000, and injection time 50 ms) with a 3 sec cycle time and MS/MS spectra acquisition were detected in the linear ion trap (AGC target value of 10,000 and injection time 35 ms) using HCD activation with a normalized collision energy of 27%. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds after a repeat count of 1.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using FragPipe IonQuant enabled. Spectra were matched to a database containing UniProt human reference proteins; UniRef90 proteins for L. crispatus, L. iners, L. gasseri, L. jensenii, G. vaginalis, A. vaginae, P. bivia, and M. mueleris; common contaminants; and reverse protein sequences as decoys for FDR estimation (accessed 25 May 2022). Raw data are available in Supplementary File 4. Abundance data were analyzed using Perseus. Abundance data were log2 transformed and normalized using width adjustment. For S010, protein groups present in two of three replicates were averaged, and the data tables were combined. Proteins with at least a 2-fold increased abundance relative to the No Probe control in one biological sample, 2 spectral counts across all samples, and a ProteinProphet probability of above 0.95 (corresponding to an approximately 2% FDR) were searched for CAZyme domains using dbCAN 2.

### Publication Abstract
The human vaginal microbiota is frequently dominated by lactobacilli and transition to a more diverse community of anaerobic microbes is associated with health risks. Glycogen released by lysed epithelial cells is believed to be an important nutrient source in the vagina. However, the mechanism by which vaginal bacteria metabolize glycogen is unclear, with evidence implicating both bacterial and human enzymes. Here we biochemically characterize six glycogen-degrading enzymes (GDEs), all of which are pullanases (PulA homologues), from vaginal bacteria that support the growth of amylase-deficient Lactobacillus crispatus on glycogen. We reveal variations in their pH tolerance, substrate preferences, breakdown products and susceptibility to inhibition. Analysis of vaginal microbiome datasets shows that these enzymes are expressed in all community state types. Finally, we confirm the presence and activity of bacterial and human GDEs in cervicovaginal fluid. This work establishes that bacterial GDEs can participate in the breakdown of glycogen, providing insight into metabolism that may shape the vaginal microbiota.

### Keywords
['Glycosidase', 'Vaginal microbiome', 'Activity-based protein profiling']

### Affiliations
['Seattle University']

### Submitter
['Christopher Whidbey']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Seattle University', 'email': 'whidbeyc@seattleu.edu', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Christopher Whidbey', 'id': '2587118'}]

