### Accession
PXD032293

### Title
Mouse and human abdominal aneurysm proteomics

### Description
Aortic tissues of developing and established aneurysms produced by angiotensin II (AngII) infusion were examined in Apoe-/- and Ldlr-/- mice.  Aortas were also acquired from wildtype C57BL/6J mice following intraluminal elastase incubation.  Aortas were dissected free and separated into eight anatomical segments for proteomics in comparison to their appropriate controls. In addition, proteomics was performed on human infrarenal aortic aneurysm tissues as well as aortic tissue collected from age-matched controls.

### Sample Protocol
Each aortic segment was minced further with the aid of microsurgical scissor and forceps, and then processed by the Precellys24 tissue homogenization system (Bertin Technologies, Rockville, MD) with bead size 1.44 mm in 0.4 ml RIPA buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA) with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Then, samples were briefly centrifuged to remove solid material. The final volume of each lysed fraction was ~0.3 ml.  Protein precipitation proceeded using 0.2 ml of prepared protein, adding MS-grade water up to 0.4ml, then a 2.5x volume of 2:1 (v:v) chloroform:methanol solution was added, followed by agitation via vortexing and centrifugation (maximum speed on a standard table top centrifuge for 30 minutes) for phase separation. The upper methanol and lower chloroform layers were carefully aspirated so that the middle, white protein disk, was not disturbed. The protein disk was washed with ice-cold methanol by repeating the vortex and centrifugation steps. The methanol was removed and the protein precipitate was dissolved in 50-100 µl 6 M urea/ 2 M thiourea in 100 mM TEAB buffer by incubation at 37 oC for 45 minutes in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) at 800 RPM.  Protein was diluted 5x for protein concentration measurement, performed using 660 nm Protein Assay system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and data was collected using a microplate reader.  Up to 10 ug of prepared protein sample was utilized for in-solution digestion using a mixture of 0.1% final concentration RapiGest (Waters), 500 mM TEAB buffer, and 50 mM TCEP for reduction of cysteine disulfide bridges. The samples were incubated at 56°C for 45 minutes while shaking at 800 RPM.  The reduced protein was then alkylated by adding 30 mM IAA (final concentration). Trypsin digestion was performed overnight and the resulting peptide solutions were desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges (1cc/10 mg, Waters) and eluted with 70% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prepared in MS-grade water. The peptides were dried using a benchtop vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 42 µl sample loading buffer (5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid) and stored at -80 oC until use.   Mouse aortic proteome analysis - The surgeries and tissue collections were performed in a manner that interspersed control (saline) with aneurysmal (AngII or elastase) treatments within the respective models to avoid significant introduction of experimental variation.  Further, collection of mass spectrometry data was spread over several months [8 months for both Apoe-/- and Ldlr-/- genotypes (Angiotensin II model), and 9 months for wildtype (elastase model) mice], which could potentially present bias in the proteomics data.  We therefore re-analyzed the peptides from representative mice collected at the beginning of each surgery model time-span towards the end of the surgery/sample preparations, in order to account and normalize for inter-month variability. The aorta tissue peptide samples were analyzed with the LTQ-Orbitrap (Elite model, Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer fronted with a Nanospray FLEX ion source, coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen Germany). The peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an analytical column that was packed with 3 µm, 100 Å pore size C18 resin (Bruker) in a 75 µm X 200 mm long piece of fused silica capillary in-house. The gradient was run at 350nl/min from 10 to 28% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 90 minutes, followed by five minutes of 95% solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set at 120 K resolution, and the top 20 precursor ions (within a scan range of 380-2000 m/z) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (collision energy 35%) for peptide sequencing (MS/MS)  Mouse laser microdissections, and human aneurysmal and control infrarenal tissues ¬– The peptide samples were analyzed by the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer fronted with an EASY spray source, coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and an EASY spray LC heated (45 oC) column, 75 µm X 250 mm. The gradient was run at 300nl/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 50 minutes, 21 to 30% Solvent B for 10 minutes, followed by five minutes of 95% solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set at 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time (within a scan range of 375-1500 m/z) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
: For mouse data, the MS/MS data were queried against the mouse UniProt database (downloaded on August 01, 2014) using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% FDR.  Due to the large number of individual MS files to analyze for the mouse aortic tissue portion of the study (612 - derived from the multiple aorta tissue fragments per mouse replicate per model), batches of up to 50 MS raw files per model were submitted to Proteome Discoverer at a time (the maximum number of files that can be handled). The protein lists were exported as ungrouped (no definitive protein assignment) and the “Master Protein” was assigned once all batches per model were combined using in-house Python scripts. Peptides assigned by Proteome Discoverer to a given protein group (Master Protein), and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique and used for quantification. A minimum of two unique peptides were included. Up to the three most abundant peptides per protein were used for quantification using the area-under-the-curve (AUC) of the precursor peptides. For the human samples, the MS/MS data were queried against the human UniProt database (downloaded on August 01, 2014) and analyzed in PD as above.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Co-regulation, Mass spectrometry, Fermt3

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Masanori Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hospital


