### Accession
PXD026541

### Title
Chromatin enrichment for Proteomics in Plants (ChEP-P) implicates the histone reader ALFIN-LIKE 6 in Jasmonate signaling

### Description
Covalent modifications of core histones govern downstream DNA-templated processes such as transcription by altering chromatin structure and function. Previously, we reported that the plant homeodomain protein ALFIN-LIKE 6 (AL6), a bona fide histone reader that preferentially binds trimethylated lysin 4 on histone 3 (H3K4me3), is critical for recalibration of cellular phosphate (Pi) homeostasis and root hair elongation under Pi-deficient conditions. Here, we demonstrate that AL6 is also involved in the response of Arabidopsis seedlings to jasmonic acid (JA) during skotomorphogenesis, possibly by modulating chromatin dynamics that affect the transcriptional regulation of JA-responsive genes. Dark-grown al6 seedlings showed a compromised reduction in hypocotyl elongation upon exogenously supplied JA, a response that was calibrated by the availability of Pi in the growth medium. A comparison of protein profiles between wild-type and al6 mutant seedlings using a quantitative Chromatin Enrichment for Proteomics (ChEP) approach, that we modified for plant tissue and designated ChEP-P (ChEP in Plants), yielded a comprehensive suite of chromatin-associated proteins and candidates that may be causative for the mutant phenotype. Altered abundance of proteins involved in chromatin organization in al6 seedlings suggests a role of AL6 in coordinating the deposition of histone variants upon perception of internal or environmental stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
ChEP-P, Chromatin enrichment for Proteomics in Plants.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using MaxQuant software. Label-free quantification was performed using the intensity of Protein_LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Chep-p

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Schmidt
Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology


