### Accession
PXD030701

### Title
Multi-OMICs analysis of metabolites, proteins, and histone modifications during human macrophage polarization reveals novel regulatory pathways

### Description
Macrophages are phagocytic cells in the innate immune system that infiltrate into resident tissues and subsequently polarize into at least two classical phenotypes: ‘pro-inflammatory’ M1 and ‘anti-inflammatory’ M2. Aberrant polarization can aggravate the pathophysiology of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis. Understanding the mechanisms that influence macrophage biology can lead to pharmacological control of polarization.  We have developed a novel triomics approach utilizing liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to perform simultaneous analysis of metabolites, proteins, and histone modifications. Using human blood derived monocytes that were polarized in vitro towards M1- (IFN-γ) and M2- (IL-4) phenotypes, we found that elevated nitric oxide production in M1 macrophages, inhibits oxidative phosphorylation and upregulates glycolytic pathways. Due to the uncoupling of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle/oxidative phosphorylation, an accumulation of acetylated amino acids was measured. Stable isotope tracing of glucose revealed reduced histone acetylation of certain key markers such as H3K27Ac, and others. We propose that the reduction could be due to trapping of excess acetyl-coA into acetylated amino acids. Furthermore, nitric oxide seems to irreversibly bind B12, a necessary co-factor for methionine synthase, inhibiting endogenous methionine synthesis, which could alter the histone epigenetic methylation and therefore downstream gene and protein expression. Triomics also allowed us to identify novel arginine methylation and Nα-acetylation of aspartate, glutamate, and ornithine. We conclude that triomics approach demonstrates a dynamic interplay between cellular metabolism and epigenetics and this axis can ultimately influence macrophage phenotype and gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
We integrated these three OMICs seamlessly in one sample preparation followed by analysis of metabolites, histone modifications, and proteins on the QExactive mass spectrometer (Figure 1). Briefly, cell pellets of M0-, M1-, and M2-MФs were lysed using Radio Immuno-Precipitation Assay (RIPA) buffer (ThermoFishers Scientific, Cat#:89901) supplemented with 1% Nonidet P40, PMSF (0.2 mM), and Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFishers Scientific, Cat#: 50-100-3301, one tablet per 10 mL lysis buffer). The protein concentrations were measured by Bicinchoninic Acid Assay (BCA). An aliquot (~100 µl) of lysate containing 100 µg proteins was immersed in 500 µl of precooled (-20 °C) acetone overnight. After centrifugation, metabolites in the supernatant were analyzed by LC-MS/MS and the proteins in the precipitates were used for analysis of histone modifications and differential proteins expression.

### Data Protocol
Each sample was a pool of cell pellets from three wells of six-well plate (3x4x106 cells). At least six injections of LC-MS/MS were performed for every sample analyzed. Metabolomics data acquired from QExactive instrument were processed by Xcalibur. Metabolite peak areas were integrated after manually inputing the calculated metabolites of interest. Less than 5 ppm between calculated mass and measured mass were considered as an authentic identification; however, in most cases, the identification was further verified by the fragmentation patterns consistent with the chemical structure of the molecule. Two-tailed Student’s t-Test of the Excel imbedded T.TEST function was used to test for significance of metabolic changes between M1- and M2-MФs. As previously described, histone modifications were evaluated by the percentage (or ratio) of the peak area of a modified peptide over a peptide free of modifications which was normalized to the percentage (or ratio) of the same pair of peptides with stable-isotope labeling at arginine (61). Two-tailed Student’s t-Test of the Excel imbedded T.TEST function was used to test for significance of modification changes between M1- and M2-Mɸs. Proteins were identified with the Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 platform (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Sequest HT search engine that employs the nr_human_062321validated.fasta database with 420779 protein sequence entries (downloaded on June 23, 2021). Sequest HT parameters were specified as: trypsin enzyme, 3 missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 4, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Daltons. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation at N-terminal, TMT at lysine and deamination of asparagine were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT at peptide N-termini was set as a fixed modification. Peptides were filtered for a maximum false discovery rate of 1% (strict). Protein quantification was also through PD 2.2 using the reporter ion ratios of TMT for each set. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 0.04 Dalton with the most confident centroid setting. At least one unique peptide with a posterior error probability of <0.05 was accepted for quantification and proteins were grouped. Two-tailed and weighted two-sample Welch’s t-Test was used to test for significance of modification changes between M1- and M2-Mɸs. Protein interaction networks are built upon the list of proteins in gene names identified by proteomics whose expressions have significant changes, using the STRING Web-based software. Its output coordinates were revisualized by Cytoscape with the nodes colored from blue (negative Log2 fold change) to red (positive Log2 fold change) based on protein quantification data. Pathways corresponding to a group of proteins selected from proteomics data meeting a defined criteria are identified by g:Profiler and visualized by Cytoscape with EnrichmentMap APP.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages (M&#x424;) are an essential immune cell for defense and repair that travel to different tissues and adapt based on local stimuli. A critical factor that may govern their polarization is the crosstalk between metabolism and epigenetics. However, simultaneous measurements of metabolites, epigenetics, and proteins (phenotype) have been a major technical challenge. To address this, we have developed a novel triomics approach using mass spectrometry to comprehensively analyze metabolites, proteins, and histone modifications in a single sample. To demonstrate this technique, we investigated the metabolic-epigenetic-phenotype axis following polarization of human blood-derived monocytes into either 'proinflammatory M1-' or 'anti-inflammatory M2-' M&#x424;s. We report here a complex relationship between arginine, tryptophan, glucose, and the citric acid cycle metabolism, protein and histone post-translational modifications, and human macrophage polarization that was previously not described. Surprisingly, M1-M&#x424;s had globally reduced histone acetylation levels but high levels of acetylated amino acids. This suggests acetyl-CoA was diverted, in part, toward acetylated amino acids. Consistent with this, stable isotope tracing of glucose revealed reduced usage of acetyl-CoA for histone acetylation in M1-M&#x424;s. Furthermore, isotope tracing also revealed M&#x424;s uncoupled glycolysis from the tricarboxylic acid cycle, as evidenced by poor isotope enrichment of succinate. M2-M&#x424;s had high levels of kynurenine and serotonin, which are reported to have immune-suppressive effects. Kynurenine is upstream of de novo NAD<sup>+</sup> metabolism that is a necessary cofactor for Sirtuin-type histone deacetylases. Taken together, we demonstrate a complex interplay between metabolism and epigenetics that may ultimately influence cell phenotype.

### Keywords
Multi-omics., Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Texas Medical Branch
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA

### Submitter
Kangling Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kangling Zhang
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA


