### Accession
PXD031111

### Title
Pythium insidiosum protein identification

### Description
Pythiosis is a deadly infectious disease of humans and animals living in tropical and subtropical countries. The causative agent is the oomycete Pythium insidiosum. Treatment of pythiosis is challenging. Therefore, protein profiling could generate the important information for further drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Pythium insidosum was mixed with lysis buffer (containing of 1% Triton X-100 (Merck, Germany), 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (Merck, Germany), and 1% NaCl (Merck, Germany). The sample was estimated for protein concentration by Quick Start™ Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, USA). A 30 μg sample was separated by 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (Bio-Rad, USA) and stained by Coomassie R-250 solution (Bio-Rad, USA) as previously described. The whole lane was excised into 15 pieces and further subjected to in-gel digestion.A mixture of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was used for de-staining the blue color from gel slides. Proteins were reduced by 4mM DTT and incubated at 60°C for 15 min. The reduced proteins were further alkylated by 250 mM iodoacetamine (IAA) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in dark. The gel pieces were dehydrated by removing all solution and adding 100% ACN (Thermo Scientific, USA). For tryptic digestion, trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, USA, T6567) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was added to rehydrate the gels, which were then incubated overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptide extraction was performed by adding 100% ACN and incubating for 15 min. The resulting solution was transferred into a new microcentrifuge tube and dried using a centrifugal concentrator (TOMY, Japan). The peptide mixtures were stored at -20°C prior to mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and subjected to an Ultimate® 3000 Nano-LC systems (Thermo Scientific, USA). The peptides were eluted and infused to a microTOF-Q II (Bruker, Germany). The acquisition was operated by HyStar™ version 3.2 (Bruker, Germany), and the resulting data were processed and converted to mascot generics format (.mgf) files using Compass DataAnalysis™ software version 3.4 (Bruker, Germany). A database search was performed using Mascot Daemon software (Matrix Science, USA) against the in-house genome database with the following parameters: one missed cleavage site, variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M), 0.8 Da for MS peptide tolerance and 0.8 Da for MS/MS tolerance. The significance threshold was set at 95%. Two biological replications were performed for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to most pathogenic oomycetes, which infect plants, <i>Pythium insidiosum</i> infects both humans and animals, causing a difficult-to-treat condition called pythiosis. Most patients undergo surgical removal of an affected organ, and advanced cases could be fetal. As a successful human/animal pathogen, <i>P. insidiosum</i> must tolerate body temperature and develop some strategies to survive and cause pathology within hosts. One of the general pathogen strategies is virulence factor secretion. Here, we used proteogenomic analysis to profile and validate the secretome of <i>P. insidiosum</i>, in which its genome contains 14,962 predicted proteins. Shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis of <i>P. insidiosum</i> proteins prepared from liquid cultures incubated at 25 and 37 &#xb0;C mapped 2980 genome-predicted proteins, 9.4% of which had a predicted signal peptide. <i>P. insidiosum</i> might employ an alternative secretory pathway, as 90.6% of the validated secretory/extracellular proteins lacked the signal peptide. A comparison of 20 oomycete genomes showed 69 <i>P. insidiosum</i>-specific secretory/extracellular proteins, and these may be responsible for the host-specific infection. The differential expression analysis revealed 14 markedly upregulated proteins (particularly cyclophilin and elicitin) at body temperature which could contribute to pathogen fitness and thermotolerance. Our search through a microbial virulence database matched 518 secretory/extracellular proteins, such as urease and chaperones (including heat shock proteins), that might play roles in <i>P. insidiosum</i> virulence. In conclusion, the identification of the secretome promoted a better understanding of <i>P. insidiosum</i> biology and pathogenesis. Cyclophilin, elicitin, chaperone, and urease are top-listed secreted/extracellular proteins with putative pathogenicity properties. Such advances could lead to developing measures for the efficient detection and treatment of pythiosis.

### Keywords
Pythium

### Affiliations
Mahidol university

### Submitter
onrapak reamtong

### Lab Head
Dr Onrapak Reamtong
Mahidol university


