### Accession
PXD018907

### Title
Proteomic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with active TB and at the end of treatment

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB) is a chronic granulomatous disease caused by the pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The success of M. tuberculosis can be attributed to its ability to evade protective host immune responses and its recalcitrance to antimicrobial chemotherapy. Detailed understanding of protective host immune response to TB is still lacking and there are limited reports that characterize host responses to TB at the site of disease. Furthermore, although cure of the majority of patients treated with the standard 6-month multidrug regimen indicates that treatment is highly effective, approximately 4-10% of clinically cured patients will develop recurrent disease within the first 12 months after completing therapy. We therefore analyzed BALF supernatant proteomes from pulmonary TB patients and patients at the end of standard anti-TB treatment to gain a better understanding of the host response at the site of disease. This would not only aid our understanding of localised host responses during TB disease, but could allow us to identify protein signatures associated with active TB disease or clinical cure.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from five end of treatment patients (including one who subsequently relapsed) and BALF from five active tuberculosis (TB) patients (before treatment initiation) were analyzed. Participants underwent a bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage by instilling sterile physiologic saline solution into a lobe of the lung, which was subsequently aspirated. After cell collection 4,000 xg for 20 minutes at 10°C, the BALF supernatants were filter sterilized using 0.22 µm PVDF filters. The filtered BALF samples were concentrated using Amicon 15k Da centrifugal filters (Merck) and depleted using the ProteoPrep Blue Albumin and IgG Depletion kit (Sigma-Aldrich), as recommended by the supplier. Ice-cold acetone was added to the depleted samples and proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µL 8 M urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay. Fifty-µg protein from each sample were processed using filter-aided sample preparation. Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 1 hour at RT and alkylated with 5.5 mM IAA for one hour in the dark at RT. Samples were concentrated using Amicon 30 kDa Ultra 0.5 mL spin filters (Merck) at 14 000 xg for 15 minutes before adding 400µL 50mM TEAB to each spin filter, and further centrifugation. This process was repeated a further three times, discarding the flow through between washes. Following the wash steps, 400 µL of 50 mM TEAB was added directly onto each filter and the samples centrifuged. This process was repeated a further two times. Modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:50 ratio of trypsin to protein to each filter and samples were incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. Following trypsin digestion, filters were transferred to a new collection tube and centrifuged at 14 000 xg for 15 minutes, collecting peptides in the flow through. Peptides were further eluted using 400 µL of 100 mM sodium chloride and centrifuged again. Peptide eluates were pooled and concentrated by vacuum drying. Peptides were subsequently desalted using in-house packed C18 STAGE tips, vacuum dried and stored until TMT labelling. TMT 10 plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) labelling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 15 µg from each sample was combined into a new tube and desalted and fractionated using a C18 STAGE tip. STAGE tip-based fractionation was performed by elution with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile in 10 mM TEAB as follows; 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15.5%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 30%, 50% before vacuum drying. Mass spectrometry Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and each sample was independently analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (100 μm ID × 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75  μm ID  × 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used for analysis was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 5 min, followed by an increase from 3% to 35% B in 90 min, 35%-90% B in 0.5 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 3% for 10 min. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. Precursor ion (MS1) scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the range of 375-1,500 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. An automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4E5 and an ion injection time of 50 ms was allowed. Precursor ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter with an isolation width of 0.7 m/z, and fragmented using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a collision energy of 35%. MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion (IT) trap using turbo mode. An AGC target of 1E4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms was allowed. Ten MS2 fragment ions were co-selected for MS3 analysis using synchronous precursor selection (SPS), and underwent high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with collision energy set to 65% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. SPS-MS3 fragment ions were analyzed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. An AGC target of 5E4 and maximum injection time of 120 ms was allowed. The number of MS2 and MS3 events between full scans was determined on-the-fly to maintain a 3 s fixed duty cycle. Dynamic exclusion of ions within a ± 10 ppm m/z window was implemented using a 35 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV and capillary temperature of 275°C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.6, and searched against a combined Homo sapiens and Mycobacterium tuberculosis database. Proteome databases were downloaded from Uniprot on 09 January 2019. The Homo sapiens database contained 42,410 entries while the Mycobacterium tuberculosis database contained 3,993 entries. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were allowed as variable modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. TMT labelling (TMT 10 plex) of peptide N-termini and lysine residues was enabled during the database search. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Proteins that contained similar peptides and that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Reporter ion quantification (TMT 10 plex) at MS3-level was enabled in MaxQuant and reporter ion intensities were used for relative quantification. Reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by site were removed before further analysis. The corrected reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed and loading in each channel was normalized using median normalization. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides were used for statistical testing. Hypothesis testing was performed using the Limma package, available in the R/Bioconductor repository, and p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins were considered significantly regulated when they had at least a two-fold change difference between groups and a corrected p-value less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> (Mtb) is extremely recalcitrant to antimicrobial chemotherapy requiring 6 months to treat drug-sensitive tuberculosis (TB). Despite this, 4-10% of cured patients will develop recurrent disease within 12 months after completing therapy. Reasons for relapse in cured TB patients remains speculative, attributed to both pathogen and host factors. Populations of dormant bacilli are hypothesized to cause relapse in initially cured TB patients however, development of tests to convincingly demonstrate their presence at the end of anti-TB treatment has been challenging. Previous studies have indicated the utility of culture filtrate supplemented media (CFSM) to detect differentially culturable tubercle bacilli (DCTB). Here, we show that 3/22 of clinically cured patients retained DCTB in induced sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), with one DCTB positive patient relapsing within the first year of completing therapy. We also show a correlation of DCTB status with "unresolved" end of treatment FDG PET-CT imaging. Additionally, 19 end of treatment induced sputum samples from patients not undergoing bronchoscopy were assessed for DCTB, identifying a further relapse case with DCTB. We further show that induced sputum is a less reliable source for the DCTB assay at the end of treatment, limiting the utility of this assay in a clinical setting. We next investigated the host proteome at the site of disease (BALF) using multiplexed proteomic analysis and compared these to active TB cases to identify host-specific factors indicative of cure. Distinct signatures stratified active from cured TB patients into distinct groups, with a DCTB positive, subsequently relapsing, end of treatment patient showing a proteomic signature closer to active TB disease than cure. This exploratory study offers evidence of live Mtb, undetectable with conventional culture methods, at the end of clinically successful treatment and putative host protein biomarkers of active disease and cure. These findings have implications for the assessment of true sterilizing cure in TB patients and opens new avenues for targeted approaches to monitor treatment response.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Tuberculosis, Bal fluid, Tmt, End of treatment

### Affiliations
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom


