### Accession
PXD034453

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of fly brain cytoplasmic RNP granules containing the lncRNA mimi

### Description
In neurons, mRNAs and associated RNA-binding proteins assemble into ribonucleoprotein (RNP) granules essential to regulate mRNA trafficking, local translation, and turnover. Dysregulation of RNA-protein condensation can disturb synaptic plasticity. We report that the novel lncRNA mimi is a constitutive and essential component of large cytoplasmic condensates (RNP granules) in fly neurons that are biochemically enriched by differential centrifugation. Here, employing relative iBAQ quantification we carry out a differential proteomic analysis of cytoplasmic RNP granules in wild-type versus delta-mimi mutant fly brains. Brain lysates from wild-type and mutant flies serve as a general proteome input control.

### Sample Protocol
Anaesthetized flies were blended in PBS and the mixture was used to isolate head tissue. The latter was solubilized in a Kontes Tissue Grinder (VWR) and served as input for a multi-step differential centrifugation enrichment procedure resulting in the purification of RNP granules. For proteome analysis, the granule pellet was resuspended in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH8, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Na-deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 5mM TCEP ), homogenized for 1 min with a mechanical Pellet Pestle Motor (Kontes), incubated for 15 min on ice and analyzed by nanoLC-MS subsequent to an in-hosue adopted SP3-assisted (Mol Syst Biol (2014)10:757; doi.org/10.15252/msb.20145625) sample preparation protocol utilizing IAA (carbamidomethylation of cysteines) and a sequential LysC/trypsin digestion workflow. Nano-scale LC-MS Top12-DDA analysis was done on a Q Exactive MS system interlinked to an EASY-nLC1000 nUHPLC. Chromatographic separation of tryptic peptides was conducted on a 25 cm in-house packed fused-silica emitter microcolumn (75 μm ID × 360 µm OD SilicaTip PicoTip; New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm reverse-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). SP3 purified/desalted input and granule samples were measured in seven technical replicates utilizing a 120 min gradient nLC-MS method. The gradient was: 0 min 5%, 5 min: 8%, 90 min: 35%, 10 min: 45% 7 min: 80% (300 nl/min flow rate). This was followed by 5 min inverse gradient from 80% to 2% B buffer (flow rate 500 nl/min).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v. 1.6.14.0) employing standard parameters was used to identify peptides and final proteins identification role-up (both at 1%FDR). MS raw data were searched simultaneously with the target-decoy standard settings against the Uniprot Drosophila melanogaster database (Uniprot_reviewed+Trembl including canonical isoforms; downloaded on August 5th, 2020) and an in-house curated FASTA file containing commonly observed contaminant proteins. Wild-type and delta-mimi samples were further analyzed utilizing relative intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values. For each of the four conditions (wild-type brain tissue lysate, wild-type granules, delta-mimi brain tissue lysate, delta-mimi granules), if a single replicate’s iBAQ value was reported missing, the missing value was imputed based on a nearest neighbor calculation. If two or three of three replicate iBAQ values were missing in a given condition, these values were instead imputed with a low basement value of 8, to facilitate subsequent processing. Two subsequent filters were applied to remove unreliable proteins from the analysis before assessing for differential expression. A protein was removed if: 1) In wild-type samples, any granules-tissue lysate replicate pair showed missing values in both conditions, or 2) If in either wild-type or delta-mimi samples, a replicate where an iBAQ value was imputed based on the nearest neighbour calculation, showed an opposite trend in the pairwise comparison granules vs. tissue lysate compared to the replicate with actual reported iBAQ value. To identify candidate mimi granule proteins, the relative log2 difference in differential expression between granules and brain tissue lysate samples in the wild-type relative to the delta-mimi condition was calculated. iBAQ values were normalized using the R package caret before differential expression was assessed. In cases where expression was observed in both wild-type and delta-mimi conditions, log2 fold change in the granules vs. tissue lysate fraction in wild-type had to be at least 4,8 greater than the log2 fold change in delta-mimi. In cases where no expression was observed in delta-mimi samples, only a positive log2 fold change expression in granules vs. brain tissue lysate was required in wild-type. Proteins that met either of these criteria were considered granule-associated. To investigate the effect of mimi RNP granule loss on the global proteome, differential protein expression between wild-type and delta-mimi brain lysate samples was assessed. Missing iBAQ values were imputed using the nearest neighbor method and normalized using the R package caret. A two-sample t-test (two-tailed, equal variance) was run to assess for significant (p <0.05) differential expression between wild-type and delta-mimi samples (log2 fold change > |0.5|).

### Publication Abstract
RNA binding proteins and messenger RNAs (mRNAs) assemble into ribonucleoprotein granules that regulate mRNA trafficking, local translation, and turnover. The dysregulation of RNA-protein condensation disturbs synaptic plasticity and neuron survival and has been widely associated with human neurological disease. Neuronal granules are thought to condense around particular proteins that dictate the identity and composition of each granule type. Here, we show in <i>Drosophila</i> that a previously uncharacterized long noncoding RNA, <i>mimi</i>, is required to scaffold large neuronal granules in the adult nervous system. Neuronal ELAV-like proteins directly bind <i>mimi</i> and mediate granule assembly, while Staufen maintains condensate integrity. <i>mimi</i> granules contain mRNAs and proteins involved in synaptic processes; granule loss in <i>mimi</i> mutant flies impairs nervous system maturity and neuropeptide-mediated signaling and causes phenotypes of neurodegeneration. Our work reports an architectural RNA for a neuronal granule and provides a handle to interrogate functions of a condensate independently of those of its constituent proteins.

### Keywords
Rnp granules; fly brain; neurons; lncrna mimi;, Fne; rbp9, Drosophila; relative ibaq; quantitative proteomics;

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Proteomics Unit Stuebeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Proteomics Unit Stuebeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany


