### Accession
PXD030338

### Title
Tyr62 phosphorylation of the phosphatase SHP2 enables acquired resistance to SHP2 allosteric inhibitors in FLT3-ITD-driven AML

### Description
The protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 is crucial for oncogenic transformation of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells expressing mutated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), as it is required for full RAS-ERK activation to promote cell proliferation and survival programs. SHP2 allosteric inhibitors act by stabilizing SHP2 in its auto-inhibited conformation and they are currently being tested in clinical trials for tumors with over-activation of the RAS/ERK pathway, alone and in various drug combinations. Using in vitro models, we established acquired resistant cell lines to the allosteric SHP2 inhibitor SHP099 from two FLT3-ITD-positive AML cell lines. We performed both label-free and isobaric labeling quantitative mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to reveal that AML cells can restore phosphorylated ERK (pERK) in presence of SHP099, thus developing adaptive resistance. Mechanistically, SHP2 inhibition induces the tyrosine phosphorylation and feedback-activation of the FLT3 receptor, which in turn phosphorylates SHP2 on Tyrosine 62. This phosphorylation stabilizes SHP2 in its open conformation, preventing SHP099 binding, thus resulting in resistance. Combinatorial inhibition of SHP2 and MEK or SHP2 and FLT3 prevents pERK rebound and resistant cell growth. We observed the same mechanism in a FLT3-mutated B-ALL cell line and in the inv(16)/KITD816Y AML mouse model. Finally, we show that allosteric SHP2 inhibition does not impair the clonogenic ability of normal bone marrow progenitors, supporting its future use for clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Single-shot label-free proteomics and phosphoproteomics After SDS-based lysis, proteins were on-bead digested through the “PAC” protocol (27). 750 ng of peptide were loaded on evotips for proteome analysis. The remaining peptides were cleaned-up on Sep-Pak and subjected to automated Ti-IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment (200 µg peptide input). After elution, the phosphopeptides mixtures were loaded on evotips for MS analysis. Samples were analyzed on the Evosep One system (28) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (29). Samples were separated online in a 15 cm column (150 μm inner diameter). Pre-programmed gradients were used: 30 and 60 samples per day for the proteome and phosphoproteome, respectively. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Full MS resolution was set to 120,000, the MS/MS acquisition was set to 15,000, and IT to 22 ms.   TMT Phosphoproteomics After guanidine-based lysis, proteins were digested in solution. Following Sep-Pak cleanup, peptides were TMT-labeled (10-plex kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific), pulled and subjected to TiO2 enrichment (300 µg of peptides per sample: total 3 mg). After elution, phosphopeptide mixtures were separated by offline high pH reversed-phase fractionation into twelve concatenated fractions. All fractions were acidified, dried, and subsequently solubilized in 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA prior to MS analysis. Samples were analyzed on an Easy nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (31). Samples were separated on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter), with a 77-minute gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full MS resolution was set to 60,000, the MS/MS acquisition was set to 45,000, and a Top10 method was used.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw MS files were analyzed using the Spectronaut software with the direct DIA workflow (proteome) or with by using a project-specific spectral library (phosphoproteome). TMT DDA raw MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shp2, Aml, Proteomics, Ptpn11, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center For Protein Research, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3B København N

### Submitter
Giulia Franciosa

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Blegdamsvej 3B København N


