### Accession
PXD031140

### Title
Intramembrane client recognition potentiates the chaperone functions of calnexin

### Description
One-third of the human proteome is comprised of membrane proteins, which are particularly vulnerable to misfolding and often require folding assistance by molecular chaperones. Calnexin (CNX), which engages client proteins via its sugar-binding lectin domain, is one of the most abundant ER chaperones, and plays an important role in membrane protein biogenesis. Based on mass spectrometric analyses, we here show that calnexin interacts with a large number of nonglycosylated membrane proteins, indicative of additional nonlectin binding modes. We find that calnexin preferentially bind misfolded membrane proteins and that it uses its single transmembrane domain (TMD) for client recognition. Combining experimental and computational approaches, we systematically dissect signatures for intramembrane client recognition by calnexin, and identify sequence motifs within the calnexin TMD region that mediate client binding. Building on this, we show that intramembrane client binding potentiates the chaperone functions of calnexin. Together, these data reveal a widespread role of calnexin client recognition in the lipid bilayer, which synergizes with its established lectin-based substrate binding. Molecular chaperones thus can combine different interaction modes to support the biogenesis of the diverse eukaryotic membrane proteome.

### Sample Protocol
MS sample preparation and measurement of CNX enrichment: HEK293T CNX KO cells were seeded in P100 plates and cultivated for 24 h prior transfection with 10 µg of EV or ALFA-tagged CNX variants with a total of three replicates for each construct. DSSO crosslinking and cell lysis was performed as described above using NP-40 lysis buffer additionally supplemented with 1 mM MgCl2 and 5% Glycerol. Immunoprecipitations were performed in the same buffer using anti-ALFA Selector ST agarose beads as described above followed by two additional washing steps in detergent free buffer. During further proceedings, immunoprecipitated proteins destined for MS analysis were digested and eluted from beads prior to desalting and purification of the samples as otherwise described (Keilhauer et al., 2015). Nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS analyses were performed using a combination of an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) together with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were first loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID × 2 cm trap column together with 0.1% FA before transfer to an Aurora reversed phase UHPLC analytical column, 75 µm ID × 25 cm, 120 Å pore size, (Ionopticks). Columns were constantly heated at 40 °C. Subsequent separation was performed using a first gradient ranging from 5 to 22% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 105 min followed by a second gradient ranging from 22 to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 10 min at an overall flow rate of 400 nl/min. Peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization and measurements carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion in a top speed data dependent mode. MS sample preparation and measurement parameters proteome:HEK293T CNX KO cells were seeded in P100 plates and transfected with empty vector or reconstituted with vector coding for CNX WT. Four plates of either condition were used for the four independent replicates. Lysis was performed two days after transfection by removing the supernatant and adding 300 µl  of lysis buffer (as described above) to the cells followed by 10 min incubation on ice. Cells were removed from plates by scraping and precleared by centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Life Technologies) and 300 µg of each sample was precipitated according to (Wessel and Flügge, 1984) and proteins afterwards resuspended in 8M urea, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 for denaturation. Samples were loaded on molecular cut-off spin columns (Microcon 30 kDa, Merck Millipore) and subsequently reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin on the filters following the FASP protocol described by (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). The obtained peptide mixtures were lyophilized, desalted on 50 mg SepPac C18 columns (Waters) and afterwards fractionated on self-made SCX stage tips (3 disks of Cation extraction material, Empore, in 200 µl pipette tips). Peptides bound to the SCX material were step wise eluted with five different concentrations of AcONH4 (20 mM, 50 mM, 100 mM, 250 mM and 500 mM), 0.1 % TFA, 15 % acetonitrile. Overall 40 samples (5 fractions for each of the two conditions and four replicates) were further evaporated in a Speed Vac, desalted on self-made C18 stage tips (2 layers of C18 disks, Empore) and after final evaporation resuspended in 25 µl 0.1% formic acid (FA) and filtered through equlibrated 0.2 μm Millipore filters before MS measurement. Nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS analysis for the proteome analysis was performed on a TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometer equipped with an CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher). The column setup for peptide separation was as described above. Gradient length on the TimsTOF Pro was 73 mins, while acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA was step wise increased from 5 to 28% in 60 mins and  from 28 to 40% in 13 mins, followed by a washing and equilibration step of the column. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode (Meier et al., 2015; Meier et al., 2018). For more details please have a look at the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
MS search and bioinformatics for CNX enrichment Thermo raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) with most default settings and a protein database containing human sequences (downloaded July 2019 from Uniprot, taxonomy ID: 9606, 74349 entries). The ALFA tagged version of Calnexin was not implemented. The following parameter settings were used: PSM and protein FDR 1%; enzyme specificity trypsin/P; minimal peptide length: 7; variable modifications: methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation. The minimal number of unique peptides for protein identification was set to 2. For label-free protein quantification, the MaxLFQ algorithm was used as part of the MaxQuant environment: (LFQ) minimum ratio count: 2; peptides for quantification: unique. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). Proteins identified only by site, reverse hits or potential contaminants were removed. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and data were then filtered for at least two valid values in at least one group (wt). Then, missing values were imputed from normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8 standard deviations, mode: over whole matrix). The replicate groups were compared via a two- sided, two-sample Student’s t test (S0 = 0, permutation-based FDR method with FDR = 0.05 and 250 randomizations). Enrichment values and corresponding −log10 P values were plotted. Cut offs in the volcano plot were set to 2-fold enrichment and a p-value of 0.05. MS search and bioinformatics for proteome analysis TimsTOF raw files were loaded into MaxQuant (software version 2.0.3.0) and the default settings for TimsTOF files were applied except that the TOF MS/MS match tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. For the Andromeda search the human protein database downloaded from Uniprot in September 2021 was used. Other search parameters were set as described for the CNX enrichment dataset and also statistical analysis, performed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) followed the same steps. Data filtration was chosen for at least three valid values in at least one group, followed by imputation of missing values and comparison of replicate groups of CNX knock out cells versus CNX reconstituted cells via a two- sided, two-sample Student’s t test (S0 = 0, permutation-based FDR method with FDR = 0.05 and 250 randomizations). Cut offs were set for the p-value < 0.05 and a difference in fold change of 20%.

### Publication Abstract
One-third of the human proteome is comprised of membrane proteins, which are particularly vulnerable to misfolding and often require folding assistance by molecular chaperones. Calnexin (CNX), which engages client proteins via its sugar-binding lectin domain, is one of the most abundant ER chaperones, and plays an important role in membrane protein biogenesis. Based on mass spectrometric analyses, we here show that calnexin interacts with a large number of nonglycosylated membrane proteins, indicative of additional nonlectin binding modes. We find that calnexin preferentially bind misfolded membrane proteins and that it uses its single transmembrane domain (TMD) for client recognition. Combining experimental and computational approaches, we systematically dissect signatures for intramembrane client recognition by calnexin, and identify sequence motifs within the calnexin TMD region that mediate client binding. Building on this, we show that intramembrane client binding potentiates the chaperone functions of calnexin. Together, these data reveal a widespread role of calnexin client recognition in the lipid bilayer, which synergizes with its established lectin-based substrate binding. Molecular chaperones thus can combine different interaction modes to support the biogenesis of the diverse eukaryotic membrane proteome.

### Keywords
Molecular chaperones, Protein quality control, Calnexin, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
TU München
Technical University of Munich Department of Chemistry and Institute for Advanced Study Lichtenbergstr. 4 85748 Garching, Germany

### Submitter
Nina Bach

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias J. Feige
Technical University of Munich Department of Chemistry and Institute for Advanced Study Lichtenbergstr. 4 85748 Garching, Germany


