### Accession
PXD034212

### Title
Impact of neonatal lead exposure on memory: A study highlighting the association between hippocampal synaptic proteome and cognitive decline in rats

### Description
Lead (Pb2+) is a heavy metal ubiquitously present in the environment, with unknown essential functions to sustain life. The detrimental effects of Pb2+ on health are known since ancient times, which is also well supported by scientific literature. Incidentally, Pb2+ toxicity is more severe in children than in adults. Various studies highlight the drastic effects of Pb2+ exposure on memory and cognition. However, the exact signalling pathways affected by Pb2+ are still unclear. In the present study, we exposed rat pups to Pb2+ acetate through maternal lactation from day P0 till weaning. The impact of early Pb2+ exposure to spatial cognition was tested using partially baited radial arm maze task three months after weaning. Furthermore, to study the effect of Pb2+ exposure on SUMOylation, the synaptosomal fractions from the hippocampus were purified, and mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis was performed. Results from behavioral tests revealed that Pb2+ exposure early in life caused severe impairments in spatial cognition with increased reference memory errors and a reduced number of correct choices in PBRAM test. The proteomic analysis revealed differentially altered proteins in Pb2+ exposed rats compared to controls, including SUMO target proteins. Thus, our findings suggest that SUMOylation is a vital protein modification that plays an essential role in memory consolidation.

### Sample Protocol
Female Wistar rats on 18th–19th day of pregnancy were procured from CARF (Central Animal Research Facility) NIMHANS, Bengaluru. Pregnant female rats post-delivery were administered 100 ppm of lead acetate in drinking water (Fig. 1). On day 21 after birth, the litters were weaned with no more exposure of Pb2+ from the mother’s milk. For the behaviour analysis after 3 months using partially baited radial arm maze test, 6 control and 6 Pb2+ exposed animals were used. Hippocampal synaptosomes were isolated from adult Wistar rats (200-250 g). Synaptosomal isolation was carried out from 5 sets of control and 5 Pb2+ exposed animals each. The quality of synaptosomal preparation was assessed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM).  Equal amount (~250 µg) of protein from all the animal preparations were taken for further processing. Samples were reduced using 5 mM Dithiotheritol for 30 min at 60°C, followed by alkylation with 10 mM Iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Reduced and alkylated protein samples were subjected to protein precipitation by adding 5 volumes of chilled acetone and incubated at -20°C overnight. These were then centrifuged at 5000xg for 5 min to pellet down the protein. Pellet was resuspended in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEABC) and subsequent protein digestion was carried out using sequencing grade trypsin at 1:20 (enzyme: protein) ratio at 37°C for 12-14 h. Samples were acidified with 1% formic acid and peptides were cleaned using Sep-pak C18 cartridges, vacuum dried and stored until further use. Peptide estimation was carried out using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit. TMT labelling was done according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the TMT-10-plex was used for labelling and labels were reconstituted in 100 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile. The dried trypsin digested peptide preparations were reconstituted in 100 µL of 50 mM TEABC (pH 8.0). TMT labels were added to the respective samples and the reaction was incubated for 1 h at room temperature. After incubation, the reaction was quenched with 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Samples were pooled dried and processed further for fractionation. The pooled dried peptide sample was reconstituted in 5 mM ammonium formate buffer and fractionated into 96 fractions using bRPLC. The fractions were concatenated further into 12 fractions, dried and cleaned using in-house C18 stage tips. Elute was dried in speed vac and analyzed on mass spectrometer. LC-MS/MS data acquisition was done on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany), interfaced with Easy-nLC1000 nanoflow LC system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Sample was analyzed into technical triplicates. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a trap column (nanoviper 2 cm, 3 µm magic C18Aq, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (nanoviper 25 cm (75 µm silica capillary, 3 µm magic C18, Thermo Scientific)), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a linear gradient of 2–38% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN) over 100 min. The total run time was 120 min. Data-dependent acquisition with full scans in 350–1600 m/z range was carried out using an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a mass resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z. The most intense precursor ions (Top 20) from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation, with 34% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 50,000. AGC target value was set to 1,000,000 with maximum ion injection time of 150 ms. The raw data acquired from mass spectrometry was searched using SEQUEST search algorithm against Rat RefSeq database using Proteome Discoverer version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02 Da), TMT modification at peptide N-terminus and lysine side chain as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da) and peptide N-term acetylation (+42.01 Da) as dynamic modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Trypsin was specified as the protease with a permission of maximum of two missed cleavages. The data was searched against target decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level. Statistical analysis for the quantified proteins was carried out using Perseus software platform. Two sample t-test was performed and the p-value ≤0.05 was set as a cut-off for significant proteins. The fold change was calculated and 1.2 fold change cutoff was applied for significantly dysregulated proteins from control to Pb2+ exposed animals. Gene ontology of differentially expressed proteins was carried out using online available DAVID gene ontology tool.

### Data Protocol
The data was searched using Sequest node in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against the Uniprot Human Reviewed protein sequences (20,432 entries) and quantitation of peptides across experimental conditions was done using TMT reporter ion intensities as surrogates using “reporter ion quantifier” node. Just change for species and proteome discoverer version.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Memory impairment, Lead toxicity, Proteomics, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences

### Submitter
Bhupesh  Mehta

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Bhupesh Mehta
National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences


