### Accession
PXD040171

### Title
In silico predicted compound targeting the IQGAP1-GRD domain selectively inhibits growth of human acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is fatal in majority of adults. Identification of new therapeutic targets and their pharmacologic modulators are needed to improve outcomes. Previous studies had shown that immunization of rabbits with normal peripheral WBCs that had been incubated with fluorodinitrobenzene elicited high titer antibodies that bound to a spectrum of human leukemias. We report that proteomic analyses of immunoaffinity-purified lysates of primary AML cells showed enrichment of scaffolding protein IQGAP1. Immunohistochemistry and gene-expression analyses confirmed IQGAP1 mRNA overexpression in various cytogenetic subtypes of primary human AML compared to normal hematopoietic cells.  shRNA knockdown of IQGAP1 blocked proliferation and clonogenicity of human leukemia cell-lines. To develop small molecules targeting IQGAP1 we performed in-silico screening of 212,966 compounds, selected 4 hits targeting IQGAP1-GRD domain, and conducted SAR of ‘fittest hit’ to identify UR778Br, a prototypical agent targeting IQGAP1. UR778Br inhibited proliferation, induced apotosis, G2/M arrest, and colony formation by leukemia cell-lines and primary-AML while  sparing normal marrow cells. IQGAP1/F-actin showed co-localization and UR778Br induced filopodia formation in U937 cells. UR778Br exhibited favorable ADME/T profiles and drug-likeness to treat AML. In summary, AML shows dependency on IQGAP1 and UR778Br, identified through in-silico studies, selectively targeted AML cells while sparing normal marrow.

### Sample Protocol
Protein A/G PLUS Agarose Beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, cat# sc-2003) were used per manufacturer’s instructions. We adopted a strategy of depletion followed by enrichment. Cell pellets were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation (RIPA) buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% deoxycholic acid, 1% Triton X-100, 0.25 mM EDTA, and 5mM sodium fluoride) to which Halt Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, cat#78440) was added. One hundred microliters of the lysis buffer were added per million cells. The pellets were disaggregated by passing through a 21G needle x5 and were incubated on ice for 15 minutes and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10 minutes. Supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was measured using Piercenet BCA using manufacturer’s instruction. Similarly, whole cell lysates of de-identified clinical AML samples were incubated with protein A/G agarose beads to which IgG from the rabbit immunized with unmodified WBCs was attached. An aliquot of the unbound fraction was set aside for protein estimation, Western blot and for IP.  The remainder of the unbound fraction was incubated overnight at 4º C with protein A/G agarose beads to which IgG from rabbit immunized with WBCs modified by FDNB was attached. An aliquot of the unbound fraction was set aside for protein estimation, Western blot and for IP. Antigens bound to agarose beads were eluted by boiling the beads.  For LC-MS/MS analysis the three samples: index-, affinity purified- or depleted protein samples were cleaned up for lipid and detergent removal by a 10-minute electrophoresis step on SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie blue and the gel portions were isolated, processed for trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. In brief, gel pieces were diced into 1-mm squares, rinsed with water and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and dehydrated. Reduction of disulfide bonds was conducted with 10 mM dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested by rehydrating the gel slices in 20 μg/ml trypsin (Promega) in ammonium bicarbonate buffer plus 10% acetonitrile for 1 h at 24 °C, followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C and a second addition of trypsin the next day for 3 h. The digested material was extracted from the gel, combined, and dried, using a vacuum concentrator. 10–20% of the digest was loaded on a Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) Nano spray column/tip on a Thermo LTQ mass spectrometer and washed with 5% methanol, 0.1% formic acid for 10 min before peptide elution began, using a 5–60% methanol gradient. The LTQ ion trap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nano electrospray ionization source, ran a full MS survey scan every 3 seconds in the data-dependent mode to collect seven MS/MS fragmentation spectra per cycle, using dynamic exclusion to access lower intensity peptides.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files containing MS and fragmentation spectrum data were used in a Mascot search, against the complete human and rabbit proteomes. Mascot (Matrix Sciences) search parameters included precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.5 and 0.8 Daltons, respectively, one 13C incorporation, one missed trypsin cleavage site, fixed carbamidomethyl-cysteine modification, and variable methionine oxidation. Mascot search results files were uploaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software) and additionally searched with X!Tandem (X!Tandem-The GMP) in the Scaffold environment. Threshold values for protein identification were 95% minimum protein identification probability, with 90% peptide probability. Relative abundance of a protein in different samples was semi-quantitatively determined, using spectral counting analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Leukemia

### Affiliations
Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 704, Rochester, New York 14618, USA
University of Rochester Medical Center Mass Spectrometry Shared Resource Laboratory

### Submitter
Kyle Swovick

### Lab Head
Dr Deepak Sahasrabudhe
Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Box 704, Rochester, New York 14618, USA


