### Accession
PXD020197

### Title
Proteomic profiling of brain mitochondrial-derived vesicles

### Description
The generation of mitochondrial-derived vesicles (MDVs) is implicated in a plethora of vital cell functions, from mitochondrial quality control to peroxisomal biogenesis. The discovery of distinct subtypes of MDVs has revealed the selective inclusion of mitochondrial cargo in response to varying stimuli. However, the true scope and variety of MDVs is currently unclear, and unbiased approaches have yet to be used to understand their biology. Furthermore, as mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in many neurodegenerative diseases, it is essential to understand MDV pathways in the nervous system.  To address this, we sought to identify the cargo in brain MDVs. We used an in vitro budding assay and proteomic approach to identify proteins selectively enriched in MDVs. 72 proteins were identified as MDV enriched, of which 31% were OXPHOS proteins. Interestingly, the OXPHOS proteins localized to specific modules of the respiratory complexes, hinting at the inclusion of sub-assemblies in MDVs. Small TIM chaperones were also highly enriched in MDVs, linking mitochondrial chaperone-mediated protein transport to MDV formation.  As the two Parkinson’s disease genes PINK1 and Parkin have been previously implicated in MDV biogenesis in response to oxidative stress, we compared the MDV proteomes from the brains of wild-type mice with those of PINK1-/- and Parkin-/- mice. No significant difference was found, suggesting that PINK1- and Parkin-dependent MDVs make up a small proportion of all MDVs in the brain.  Our findings demonstrate a previously uncovered landscape of MDV complexity and provide a foundation from which to discover further novel MDV functions.

### Sample Protocol
For MDV sample preparation, sucrose gradient fractions at the 40/50 % interface (boxed in red in Figure 1C) from the budding assay described above were diluted 1:1 with MIB and centrifuged at 200,000 x g for 1 hour at 4 degrees. The pellet was washed gently using a manual pipette twice with MIB, then dried for 10 minutes before resuspension in 20 µL of denaturing buffer (8 M urea, 1mM EDTA, 50mM TEAB pH8.5). Protein quantification using BCA (Pierce) showed that MDV samples were very low in abundance and the yield was variable. We determined in previous experiments that the average protein concentration at the 40/50% interface was approximately 500 ng. Therefore, we digested all MDV samples based on 500 ng protein, since we did not have enough material to perform a BCA following each budding assay. For mitochondrial sample preparation, 50 µg of parental mitochondria (HM) were diluted in 1 mL MIB and centrifuged at 7,500 x g for 10 minutes at at 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in 20 µL of denaturing buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5). The excess amount of HM compared to MDV, which are approximately 500 ng per sample, was used to allow us to assess the enrichment of MDV cargo compared with as complete a mitochondrial proteome as possible. Samples in denaturing buffer were reduced with 2.5 mM TCEP for 1 hour at 37 °C, alkylated with 10 mM fresh iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, then pre-digested with Lys-C (Wako) in a 1:100 (µg sample / µg protease) ratio for 2 hours at 37°C in the dark. After cooling to 25°C, samples were diluted with 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 to reduce the urea concentration to < 1.5 M, and trypsin (Sigma, sequencing grade) was added in a 1:50 ratio to incubate for 16 hours at 25°C. To stop the digestion, samples were acidified to 0.5 % formic acid and 5% acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto Pierce C18 Spin Columns (ThermoFisher), washed with 5% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid, and eluted in 50 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % formic acid. Elutions were dried under ambient temperature in a SpeedVac (ThermoFisher SPD-1010), then the peptides were resuspended in 25 μl of 1% FA buffer. Peptides were assayed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and read at an absorbance of 205 nm. The peptides were transferred to a glass vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and stored at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry.   For LC-MS/MS, 250 ng of each sample was were injected into an HPLC (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) and loaded onto a trap column with a constant flow of 4 µl/min (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation) then eluted onto an analytical C18 Column (1.9 µm beads size, 75 µm x 25 cm, PepSep). Peptides were eluted over a 2-hour gradient of acetonitrile (5-37%) in 0.1% FA at 500 nL/min while being injected into a TimsTOF Pro ion mobility Mass mass Spectrometer spectrometer equipped with a Captive Spray nano electrospray source (Bruker Daltonics). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a 100-1700 m/z mass range, with PASEF enabled with a number of PASEF scans set at 10 (1.27 seconds duty cycle) and a dynamic exclusion of 0.4 minute, m/z dependent isolation window and collision energy of 42.0 eV. The target intensity was set to 20,000, with an intensity threshold of 2,500.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) with MaxQuant tims-DDA specific parameters already embedded and the Uniprot mouse database (UP000000589_10090, 55,398 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; minimum peptide length was set to 5; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzymes were Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, tyrosine nitrosylation, cysteine and tyrosine hydroxylation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Label-free quantification was chosen using default settings, including a minimum ratio count of 2. Peptide spectral match and protein false discovery rates and site decoy fraction were set to 0.05.   The resulting gene names list and spectral counts were subsequently analyzed following normalization by expressing each LFQ value as a percentage of the total LFQ intensity for all proteins detected within that sample. Data were then imported into Perseus (v1.6.10.50) for analysis and transformed to the logarithmic scale (base 2). Proteins positive for at least one of the "Reverse", "Potential contaminant" or “Only detected by site” categories, or with valid values in fewer than 70% of samples were eliminated. Volcano plots were generated to assess enrichment of proteins in MDVs compared to mitochondria, or the effect on MDV enrichment of experimental conditions (antimycin A treatment or genotype) using multiple t-tests with permutation-based FDR of 0.05 with 250 randomizations and s0 of 0.1. For global assessment of post-translation modifications, the total number of peptide counts for a particular modification were divided by the total peptide count in a sample, then multiplied by 100 to give a percentage.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Timstof

### Affiliations
McGill University
Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Canada

### Submitter
Rosalind Roberts

### Lab Head
Dr Edward A Fon
Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Canada


