### Accession
PXD000306

### Title
Proteomic identification of rainbow trout seminal plasma proteins

### Description
In the present study the combination of protein fractionation by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis and high performance  liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry was used to characterize the rainbow trout seminal  plasma proteome. Our results led to the creation of a catalogue of rainbow trout seminal plasma proteins and significantly  contributed to the current knowledge regarding the protein composition of fish seminal plasma. The major proteins of rainbow  trout seminal plasma, such as transferrin, apolipoproteins, complement C3, serum albumin, hemopexin-like protein, alpha-1-antiproteinase-like and precerebellin-like protein were recognized as acute phase proteins (proteins which plasma concentration changes in response to inflammation).  This study provides the basis for further functional studies of fish seminal plasma proteins, as well as for the identification of  novel biomarkers for sperm quality.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur “raw” files, and charge states were assigned using the Extract MSN script, which is a component of Xcalibur 2.0 (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA). The MS/MS data were searched with MASCOT version 2.1.03 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) using the NCBIr (National Center for Biotechnology Information) O. mykiss and Salmo salar databases (6902 and 17,416, respectively). The following parameters were used: (i) enzyme: trypsin; (ii) fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); (iii) variable modifications: oxidation (M); (iv) peptide tolerance: 2 Da; (v) MS/MS tolerance: 0.8 Da; (vi) peptide charge: 1+, 2+, and 3+; (vii) instrument: ESI-TRAP; and (viii) allowing up to one missed cleavages. The occurrence of false positives (false discovery rate) was estimated by running searches using the same parameters against decoy databases (sequence-reversed NCBIr O. mykiss and S. salar databases). Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identification were made using Scaffold v 2_04_00 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Protein identification probability was set to ≥99% and included the detection of at least two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In the study, the combination of protein fractionation by 1DE and HPLC-ESI-MS/MS was used to characterize the rainbow trout seminal plasma proteome. Our results led to the creation of a catalogue of rainbow trout seminal plasma proteins (152 proteins) and significantly contributed to the current knowledge regarding the protein composition of fish seminal plasma. The major proteins of rainbow trout seminal plasma, such as transferrin, apolipoproteins, complement C3, serum albumin, and hemopexin-, alpha-1-antiproteinase-, and precerebellin-like protein, were recognized as acute-phase proteins (proteins that plasma concentration changes in response to inflammation). This study provides the basis for further functional studies of fish seminal plasma proteins, as well as for the identification of novel biomarkers for sperm quality. The MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000306 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000306).

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rainbow trout, Proteome, Seminal plasma

### Affiliations
Department of Gamete and Embryo Biology

### Submitter
Joanna Nynca

### Lab Head


