### Accession
PXD004372

### Title
Secretome analysis of diarrhea inducing strains of Escherichia coli

### Description
Secreted proteins constitute a major part of virulence factors that are responsible for pathogenesis caused by gram negative bacteria. Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (E. coli), EHEC O157:H7 is the major pathogen often causing outbreaks. There is growing evidence that non-O157:H7 E. coli strains may also be involved in the recent outbreaks. However, there is no systematic study describing differential secreted proteins from non-O157:H7 E. coli strains. Here, we have applied isobaric tag-based TMT labeling combined with high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry to study the differential secretome analysis of major non-O157:H7 E. coli strains, O103, O111, O121, O145, O26 and O45, which is known as diarrhea inducing non-O175:H7 ATCC “big six” serogroup E. coli strains. We identified 1,240 proteins quantitatively identified, 565 proteins were found to be secreted as predicted by PSORTb and SecretomeP. We identified 310 proteins containing signal peptide and 255 proteins as secreted. We identified 20 strain specific proteins with in big-six group and was confirmed by proteogenomics approach. Further we enriched and have shown relative expression of type III secretion system. To our knowledge, this study is the first comparative proteomic study on secretome of E. coli big six serogroup and the several of these strain specific secreted proteins can be further studied to develop potential markers for identification and strain level differentiation. Moreover, the results of this study can be utilized in several applications, including food safety, diagnostics of E. coli outbreaks, and biodefense.

### Sample Protocol
A panel of big six group ATCC Escherichia coli O111:H8, O145, O26:H11, O103:H11, O45:H2, O121:H19 and K12 MG1655 were cultured and secretome was harvested and concentrated using 3kDa cut-off filters. Equal amount of protein from each strain was reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested. Tryptic peptides were desalted and subjected to tandem mass tags labeling. Samples were pooled and subjected to high-pH reversed phase liquid chromatography and fractions were concatenated to 12 fractions and analyzed on Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer as technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 version and searched against a combined protein database of big-six and K12 E. coli using combined Sequest and Mascot search algorithms. Peptides and proteins that passed 1% FDR and high confidence peptides were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Secreted proteins constitute a major part of virulence factors that are responsible for pathogenesis caused by Gram-negative bacteria. Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli, O157:H7, is the major pathogen often causing outbreaks. However, studies have reported that the significant outbreaks caused by non-O157:H7 E. coli strains, also known as "Big-Six" serogroup strains, are increasing. There is no systematic study describing differential secreted proteins from these non-O157:H7 E. coli strains. In this study, we carried out MS-based differential secretome analysis using tandem mass tags labeling strategy of non-O157:H7 E. coli strains, O103, O111, O121, O145, O26, and O45. We identified 1241 proteins, of which 565 proteins were predicted to be secreted. We also found that 68 proteins were enriched in type III secretion system and several of them were differentially expressed across the strains. Additionally, we identified several strain-specific secreted proteins that could be used for developing potential markers for the identification and strain-level differentiation. To our knowledge, this study is the first comparative proteomic study on secretome of E. coli Big-Six serogroup and the several of these strain-specific secreted proteins can be further studied to develop potential markers for identification and strain-level differentiation. Moreover, the results of this study can be utilized in several applications, including food safety, diagnostics of E. coli outbreaks, and detection and identification of bio threats in biodefense.

### Keywords
E.coli, Secretome, Big six strains, Diarhea

### Affiliations
US Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, Research and Technology Directorate, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, USA
ECBC

### Submitter
Rabih Jabbour

### Lab Head
Dr Rabih E. Jabbour
US Army Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, Research and Technology Directorate, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, USA


