### Accession
PXD015327

### Title
Differential scaling between G1 protein production and cell size dynamics promotes commitment to the cell division cycle in budding yeast

### Description
In the unicellular eukaryote Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Cln3-CDK activity enables Start, the irreversible commitment to the cell division cycle. However, the concentration of Cln3 has been paradoxically considered to remain constant during G1, due to the presumed scaling of its production rate with cell size dynamics. Measuring metabolic and biosynthetic activity during cell cycle progression in single cells, we found that cells exhibit pulses in protein production rate, which do not scale with cell size dynamics, but -following the intrinsic metabolic dynamics- peak around Start. Using a viral-based bicistronic construct and targeted proteomics to measure Cln3 at the single-cell and population level, we show that the differential scaling between protein production and cell size leads to a temporal increase in Cln3 concentration, and passage through Start. This differential scaling causes Start in both daughter and mother cells, across growth conditions. Thus, uncoupling between two fundamental physiological parameters drives cell cycle commitment.

### Sample Protocol
A mass isolation lists containing 2 peptides for each protein was exported from Spectrodive and imported into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos operating software for PRM analysis. Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). For PRM analysis peptide samples were prepared as described above and spiked with the heavy reference peptide mix above at 2 fmol/peptide/ug of total peptide mass. The peptides were separated using a following stepwise gradient: from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)  and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 19.9% water, 0.1% formic acid (v/v/v)) to 28% solvent B until 45 minutes and then to 45% solvent B until 60 minutes at the constant flow rate of 200 nl/min. For the PRM-MS analysis (MS2 scans), the resolution of the orbitrap was set to 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and the fill time was set to 250 ms to reach a target value of 1e6 ions. Ion isolation window was set to 0.4 Th. For each MS cycle, a full MS1 scan at 60,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) was included.

### Data Protocol
The PRM files were importeThe PRM files were imported and processed using the Spectrodive software with the default settings. For each target peptide, the total peak areas of the most intense transitions were exported. Only peptides with the Elution Group Q.Value < 0.01 were considered for quantitative analysis. Subsequently, the raw files were imported into the Skyline software (version 4.2) to extract and sum the MS1 intensities of peptide ions belonging to constitutively expressed proteins (Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 3, Enolase 2 and Actin, two peptides for each protein were selected). PRM (MS2) intensities of target peptides were then normalized to the summed (MS1) intensity of selected peptides from the constitutively expressed proteins. Finally, the obtained normalized intensities were by the median of all samples to shift the final expression values into a meaningful scale of around 1d and processed using the Spectrodive software with the default settings. For each target peptide, the total peak areas of the most intense transitions were exported. Only peptides with the Elution Group Q.Value < 0.01 were considered for quantitative analysis. Subsequently, the raw files were imported into the Skyline software (version 4.2) to extract and sum the MS1 intensities of peptide ions belonging to constitutively expressed proteins (Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 3, Enolase 2 and Actin, two peptides for each protein were selected). PRM (MS2) intensities of target peptides were then normalized to the summed (MS1) intensity of selected peptides from the constitutively expressed proteins. Finally, the obtained normalized intensities were by the median of all samples to shift the final expression values into a meaningful scale of around 1

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yest, Cell cycle, Cell division

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


