### Accession
PXD000329

### Title
Chemical profiling of live cell temporal redox dynamics in a photoautotrophic cyanobacterium

### Description
We have developed a quantitative chemical probe approach for live cell labeling of proteins that are sensitive to redox modifications. We utilize this in vivo strategy coupled to mass spectrometry-based proteomics to identify 176 proteins undergoing ~5-10 fold dynamic redox change in response to nutrient limitation and subsequent replenishment in the photoautotrophic cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. This method enables the identification of redox changes in as little as 30 seconds after nutrient perturbation, and oscillations in reduction and oxidation for 60 minutes following the perturbation.  The redox changes were validated by demonstrating that protein abundances did not change per global proteomic analyses.  Peptides identified by MS for global and probe-labeled samples were required to be at least six amino acids in length having a mass spectra generating function score of <=1E-10, which corresponds to an FDR of <1%.  Additionally, only peptides unique in identifying a single protein were utilized to estimate protein abundances, and proteins represented by <2 unique peptides were removed.  This resulted in the identification of 176 redox probe labeled protein identifications, and 808 protein identifications in the global data.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin then labeled with activity-based probes

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Protein reduction-oxidation (redox) modification is an important mechanism that allows microorganisms to sense environmental changes and initiate cellular responses. We have developed a quantitative chemical probe approach for live cell labeling and imaging of proteins that are sensitive to redox modifications. We utilize this in vivo strategy to identify 176 proteins undergoing &#x223c;5-10-fold dynamic redox change in response to nutrient limitation and subsequent replenishment in the photoautotrophic cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. We detect redox changes in as little as 30 s after nutrient perturbation and oscillations in reduction and oxidation for 60 min following the perturbation. Many of the proteins undergoing dynamic redox transformations participate in the major components for the production (photosystems and electron transport chains) or consumption (Calvin-Benson cycle and protein synthesis) of reductant and/or energy in photosynthetic organisms. Thus, our in vivo approach reveals new redox-susceptible proteins and validates those previously identified in vitro.

### Keywords
Chemical profiling, Cyanobacteria, Redox, Photosynthesis, Biofuels

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron T. Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA


