### Accession
PXD040745

### Title
Changes in cellular protein levels of the sgs1Δ mutant vs wildtype

### Description
Using quantitative proteomics in chromatin-enriched fractions, we have identified changes in the cellular response of cells lacking Sgs1, the yeast RecQ-like DNA helicase involved in homologous recombination. Primarily, we have identified upregulation of antioxidant enzymes such as Sod2 and Tsa1, compared to the wildtype cells. This analysis identifies an oxidative stress phenotype in cells lacking Sgs1.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilized with 4% SDS, 100mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100mM Tris (pH 7.6), incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Equal amounts of protein were digested by FASP. Briefly, proteins were alkylated, buffer exchanged with urea followed by ammonium bicarbonate, and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37˚C. Peptides are eluted, desalted using C18 SPE columns, and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Peptides are resuspended in H2O/0.1% formic acid for global proteome LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were completed using MaxQuant against the S.cerevisiae proteome sequence database downloaded from Uniprot. Parameters included heavy labelled amino acids Lys8 and Arg10; specific trypsin digest; variable modifications methionine oxidation, and n-terminal acetylation; constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Yeast, Silac-ms, Sgs1

### Affiliations
University of South Florida
Professor, Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of South Florida

### Submitter
Dale Chaput

### Lab Head
Dr Kristina Schmidt
Professor, Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of South Florida


