### Accession
PXD046479

### Title
Gas5 RIP-LC MS/MS using PFC lysates from behavioral-trained mice

### Description
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) represent a multidimensional class of regulatory molecules that are involved in many aspects of brain function. Emerging evidence indicates that lncRNAs are localized to the synapse; however, a direct role for their activity in this subcellular compartment in memory formation has yet to be demonstrated. Using lncRNA capture-seq, we identified a Gas5 variant that accumulate in the synaptic compartment within the infralimbic prefrontal cortex of adult male C57/Bl6 mice. Gas5 RNA immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry revealed that this Gas5 isoform, in association with the RNA binding proteins G3BP2 and CAPRIN1, regulates the activity-dependent trafficking and clustering of RNA granules. In addition, we found that cell-type-specific, activity-dependent, and synapse-specific knockdown of this Gas5 variant led to impaired fear extinction memory. These findings identify a new mechanism of fear extinction that involves the dynamic interaction between local lncRNA activity and RNA condensates in the synaptic compartment.

### Sample Protocol
Magnetic affinity beads were covered with 40 µl of 40 ng/µl sequence grade trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH8 buffer (Promega). The beads were placed in an incubator at 37°C overnight. The trypsin solution was removed from each sample and placed in a clean Eppendorf tube. 200 µl of 5% formic acid/acetonitrile (3:1 (vol/vol) was added to each tube and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in a shaker. The supernatant was placed into the pre-cleaned Eppendorf tubes, together with the trypsin solution for each sample and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge.   For HPLC/MS MS/MS analysis, 15 µl of 1.0% (vol/vol) TFA in water was added to the tube, which was vortexed and/or incubated for 2 min in the sonication bath and transferred to an autosampler vial for analysis. Tryptic peptide extracts were analyzed by microflow HPLC/MS MS/MS on an Eksigent, Ekspert nano LC400 uHPLC (SCIEX) coupled to a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with a micro Duo IonSpray, ion source. 5 µl of each extract was injected onto a 5mm x 300 µm, C18 3 µm trap column (SGE) for 6 min at 10 µl/min. The trapped tryptic peptide extracts were then washed onto the analytical 300 µm x 150 mm Zorbax 300SB-C18 3.5 µm column (Agilent Technologies) at 3 µl/min and a column temperature of 45°C. Linear gradients of 2-25% solvent B over 60 min at 3 µl/min flow rate, followed by a steeper gradient from 25% to 35% solvent B in 13 min, then 35% to 80% solvent B in 2 min, were used for peptide elution. The gradient was then returned to 2% solvent B for equilibration prior to the next sample injection. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The micro ionspray voltage was set to 5500V, declustering potential (DP) 80V, curtain gas flow 25, nebulizer gas 1 (GS1) 15, heater gas 2 (GS2) 30 and interface heater at 150oC. The mass spectrometer acquired 250ms full-scan TOF-MS data followed by up to 30, 50ms full scan product ion data, with a rolling collision energy, in an Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) scan mode. Full scan TOFMS data were acquired over the mass range m/z 350-2000 and for product ion ms/ms, m/z 100-1500. Ions observed in the TOF-MS scan exceeding a threshold of 150 counts and a charge state of +2 to +5 were set to trigger the acquisition of product ion, ms/ms spectra of the resultant 30 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
The data were acquired and processed using Analyst version 1.7 software (SCIEX). Protein identification was carried out using Protein Pilot version 5.0 (SCIEX) for database searching.

### Publication Abstract
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) represent a multidimensional class of regulatory molecules that are involved in many aspects of brain function. Emerging evidence indicates that lncRNAs are localized to the synapse; however, a direct role for their activity in this subcellular compartment in memory formation has yet to be demonstrated. Using lncRNA capture-seq, we identified a specific set of lncRNAs that accumulate in the synaptic compartment within the infralimbic prefrontal cortex of adult male C57/Bl6 mice. Among these was a splice variant related to the stress-associated lncRNA, Gas5. RNA immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry and single-molecule imaging revealed that this Gas5 isoform, in association with the RNA binding proteins G3BP2 and CAPRIN1, regulates the activity-dependent trafficking and clustering of RNA granules. In addition, we found that cell-type-specific, activity-dependent, and synapse-specific knockdown of the Gas5 variant led to impaired fear extinction memory. These findings identify a new mechanism of fear extinction that involves the dynamic interaction between local lncRNA activity and RNA condensates in the synaptic compartment.

### Keywords
Lc ms/ms, Mice, Pfc, Gas5

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Queensland Brain Institute, Bredy Lab, University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Wei-Siang Liau

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy W. Bredy
Queensland Brain Institute, Bredy Lab, University of Queensland, Australia


