### Accession
PXD018402

### Title
The IDR-containing protein PID-2 affects Z granules and is required for piRNA-induced silencing in the embryo

### Description
In Caenorhabditis elegans, the piRNA (21U RNA) pathway is required to establish proper gene regulation and an immortal germline. To achieve this, PRG-1-bound 21U RNAs trigger silencing mechanisms mediated by RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP)-synthetized 22G RNAs. This silencing can become PRG-1-independent, and heritable over many generations. This state is named RNAe. It is unknown how and when RNAe is established, and how it is maintained. We show that maternally provided 21U RNAs can be sufficient to trigger RNAe in embryos. Additionally, we identify the IDR-containing protein PID-2, as a factor required to establish and maintain RNAe. PID-2 interacts with two novel, partially redundant, eTudor domain proteins, PID-4 and PID-5. Additionally, PID-5 has a domain related to the X-prolyl aminopeptidase protein APP-1, and binds APP-1, implicating N-terminal proteolysis in RNAe. All three proteins are required for germline immortality, localize to perinuclear foci and affect Z granules, and are required for balancing of 22G RNA populations.  Overall, our study identifies three new proteins with crucial functions in the C. elegans small RNA silencing network.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry has been performed as described in (Almeida et al., 2018). After boiling, the samples were separated on a 4–12% gradient Bis‐Tris gel (NuPAGE Bis‐Tris gels, 1.0 mm, 10 well; Art. No. NP0321; Life Technologies) in 1X MOPS (NuPAGE 20X MOPS SDS running buffer; Art. No. NP0001; Life Technologies) at 180 V for 10 min, afterwards processed by in‐gel digest (Bluhm et al., 2019; Shevchenko et al., 2007) and desalted using a C18 StageTip (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The digested peptides were separated on a 25‐cm reverse‐phase capillary (75 μM inner diameter) packed with Reprosil C18 material (Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a 2 h gradient from 2 to 40% Buffer B with the EASY‐nLC 1,000 system (Thermo Scientific). Measurement was done on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with a Top10 data‐dependent MS/MS acquisition method per full scan (Bluhm et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
The measurements were processed with the MaxQuant software, version 1.5.2.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008) against the Wormbase C. elegans database (version of WS265) for quantitation and the Ensemble E. coli REL606 database (Version Oct 2018) to filter potential contaminations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; pirna

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


