### Accession
PXD009732

### Title
Native mass spectrometry of ClpB

### Description
The ATP-dependent bacterial protein disaggregation machine, ClpB belonging to the AAA+ superfamily, refolds toxic protein aggregates into the native state in cooperation with the cognate Hsp70 partner. The ring-shaped hexamers of ClpB unfold and thread its protein substrate through the central pore. However, their function-related structural dynamics has remained elusive. Here we directly visualize ClpB using high-speed atomic force microscopy (HS-AFM) to gain a mechanistic insight into its disaggregation function. The HS-AFM movies demonstrate massive conformational changes of the hexameric ring during ATP hydrolysis, from a round ring to a spiral and even to a pair of twisted half-spirals. HS-AFM observations of Walker-motif mutants unveil crucial roles of ATP binding and hydrolysis in the oligomer formation and structural dynamics. Furthermore, repressed and hyperactive mutations result in significantly different oligomeric forms. These results provide a comprehensive view for the ATP-driven oligomeric-state transitions that enable ClpB to disentangle protein aggregates

### Sample Protocol
Native mass spectrometry (nMS) was performed according to the method used in the study by Ishii et al with a minor modification62. The samples of full-length TClpB (13 μM as hexamer) and ΔN-TClpB (9 μM as hexamer) in a buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2) were incubated at 55°C in the presence of 2 mM ATP or ATPγS for 1 min. Then, the samples were buffer-exchanged into 150 mM ammonium acetate buffer, pH 7.5, containing 100 µM ATP or ATPγS, at 4 °C by passing the samples through MicroBioSpin-6 columns (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA). The buffer-exchanged samples were immediately analyzed by nanoflow electrospray ionization mass spectrometry using gold-coated glass capillaries made in house (approximately 2–5 µl sample loaded per analysis). Spectra were recorded on a SYNAPT G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Massachusetts, Milford, USA) in positive ionization mode at 1.33 kV with a 150 V sampling cone voltage and source offset voltage, 0 V trap and transfer collision energy, and 5 m min-1 trap gas flow.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were calibrated using 1 mg/ml cesium iodide and analyzed using MassLynx software (Waters).

### Publication Abstract
The ATP-dependent bacterial protein disaggregation machine, ClpB belonging to the AAA+ superfamily, refolds toxic protein aggregates into the native state in cooperation with the cognate Hsp70 partner. The ring-shaped hexamers of ClpB unfold and thread its protein substrate through the central pore. However, their function-related structural dynamics has remained elusive. Here we directly visualize ClpB using high-speed atomic force microscopy (HS-AFM) to gain a mechanistic insight into its disaggregation function. The HS-AFM movies demonstrate massive conformational changes of the hexameric ring during ATP hydrolysis, from a round ring to a spiral and even to a pair of twisted half-spirals. HS-AFM observations of Walker-motif mutants unveil crucial roles of ATP binding and hydrolysis in the oligomer formation and structural dynamics. Furthermore, repressed and hyperactive mutations result in significantly different oligomeric forms. These results provide a comprehensive view for the ATP-driven oligomeric-state transitions that enable ClpB to disentangle protein aggregates.

### Keywords
Native mass spectrometry, Clpb

### Affiliations
Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institutes of Natural Sciences
5Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University

### Submitter
Kentaro Ishii

### Lab Head
Dr Susumu Uchiyama
5Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University


