### Accession
PXD034087

### Title
Experimental strategies to improve drug-target identification in mass spectrometry-based thermal stability assays

### Description
In this study, we developed a model system for the assessment of small molecule-protein interactions using intact cells treated with a commercially available highly specific mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK) 1/2 inhibitor to prepare a set of unfractionated test samples labeled with tandem mass tags. Our objective was to improve qualitative and quantitative aspects of MS-TSA as well as its efficiency and accuracy. We evaluated individually and for the first time in combination ΦSDM, FAIMS, and SIILCC as an improved MS-based acquisition approach for thermal stability assays (iMAATSA). PSM-level filtering was preliminarily investigated as an approach to reduce melting curve variation and improve the accuracy of Tm measurements.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat E6.1 leukemic T-cell lymphoblasts were grown in T225 flasks containing RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS and 100 U/mL Penicillin-Streptomycin in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2. Cells were cultured and maintained at a density of 1x106 cells mL, and fresh media was exchanged the day before compound treatment. Prior to the experiment, media was removed, and cells were washed with 1x PBS twice. Cells were resuspended in 1x PBS and aliquoted to 96-well PCR plates. Either DMSO or a commercially available highly selective MEK1/2 inhibitor RO4987655 was added, which resulted in a final concentration of 10 µM compound and 1% DMSO. A 1-hour incubation was performed at 37°C. Immediately following, the plates were heated to 10 temperature points (37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, and 67 ˚C) for 3 minutes in a thermocycler and allowed to equilibrate to room temperature on the benchtop for 3 minutes. To each well, NP-40 detergent was added for a final concentration of 0.4% and mixed by pipetting. Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for 2 minutes and thawed in a room temperature water bath at room temperature for 2 minutes for a total of four cycles and stored at -80°C. A mixture of nuclease and protease, and phosphatase inhibitor was added to each sample for a final dilution concentration of 25 U/mL and 1x, respectively, and incubated at 4˚C for 20 minutes on a titer plate shaker at half maximum speed. The lysate was transferred to 8-well PCR strips and centrifuged for 40 minutes at 11,700 x g to remove the precipitate. Subsequently, 80 µL of supernatant from each well was transferred to a new set of 8-well PCR strips and stored on ice. Total protein concentration was estimated using BCA assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and samples were stored at -80°C before digestion. From each heated aliquot, equivalent volumes, corresponding to 25 µg from the 37˚C temperature point samples, were aliquoted into 2 mL low bind tubes. SDS and Tris were added for final concentrations of 1% and 100 mM at pH 8, respectively, and each sample was brought to a volume of 106.25 µL with deionized water. Reduction and alkylation were performed in a one-step process using a final concentration of 20 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA in each sample, followed by heating at 57˚C for 1 hour in a ThermomixerC. Protein precipitation was accomplished by the addition of six volumes of ice-cold acetone to each sample, followed by overnight incubation at -20˚C. The following day samples were pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 15 minutes at - 4°C, and the supernatant removed. Samples were washed with 800 µL of acetone and again centrifuged as previously described. The samples were then dried briefly with the cap open for ≤ 5 minutes, followed by the addition of 50 µL of 100 mM TEAB and trypsin/LysC at a ratio of protein to the enzyme of 50:1 and incubated in the Thermomixer® C at 37°C 500 rpm for four hours. A second aliquot of trypsin/LysC was added for a final ratio of protein to enzyme of 25:1, followed by overnight incubation. Peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s recommendations with slight modifications. Briefly, digests were thawed and tested using pH strips to ensure pH was between 8 to 8.5. The labeling reagents were allowed to equilibrate to room temperature and solubilized with anhydrous acetonitrile for 5 minutes with occasional vortexing. Each TMT reagent was added to the appropriate sample at a ratio of label to the total peptide of 8:1 and a final acetonitrile concentration of 19.5%. Incubation was carried out at room temperature for 1.5 hours in the dark and quenched with 0.3% hydroxylamine final concentration for 15 minutes. The forty labeled and digested aliquots were pooled accordingly into four samples (vehicle1, vehicle2, treated1, and treated2), and each pooled sample was equally split by weight resulting in two duplicate sets of samples. Fifty micrograms of an SDS-aided labeled Jurkat cell digest (TMT 131C) was added to half of the split samples to act as the trigger channel. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac and desalted using spin columns according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were first analyzed individually using Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest HT search engine. Tryptic peptides were included in the searches with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 15 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Static modifications included TMT6plex (229.163 Da) on the peptide N-terminus and lysine residues and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Oxidation of methionine residues was set as a dynamic modification, along with acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The UniProt reviewed human reference proteome (release 2018_03) was used, which contained 20,514 protein sequences. Peptide filtering was set to “high” confidence resulting in a 1% FDR. After confirmation that technical replicates (n=3) for each sample within the same iMAATSA had RSD ≤ 15% for protein, peptide, and PSM identifications, triplicates were reprocessed together using the same PD methods for all subsequent analyses.         The R-based package TPP was used for melting curve fitting, and filtering for high-quality melting curves was accomplished, using the following criteria based on the listed experimentally determined parameters: all four samples have a determined melting temperature, slope ≤ -0.06, plateau ≤ -0.3, and R2 ≥ 0.8. To further interrogate the data, we developed an R script to analyze data at the protein, PSM, and peptide group levels. The script was built as a pipeline to clean, normalize and perform complementary curve fitting to the information available. Normalization at the protein level was adapted from the existing TPP software. Briefly, the number of proteins selected had to pass the initial quality criteria stated above. Next, we selected proteins present in all iMAATSA and chose the experiment with the greatest number of melting curves. Afterward, median fold changes were calculated for each reporter ion channel, and these were fit using a sigmoidal fit. Finally, the curve with the greatest R2 value was used as a correction factor to apply to all the data over the entire temperature range.. Additional experimental details about materials, reagents, and methods, including cell culture, sample processing, LC conditions, mass spectrometry parameters, and data analysis, are provided in the Supporting Information file

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based thermal stability assays have recently emerged as one of the most promising solutions for the identification of protein-ligand interactions. Here, we have investigated eight combinations of several recently introduced MS-based advancements, including the Phase-Constrained Spectral Deconvolution Method, Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry, and the implementation of a carrier sample as improved MS-based acquisition approaches for thermal stability assays (iMAATSA). We used intact Jurkat cells treated with a commercially available MEK inhibitor, followed by heat treatment, to prepare a set of unfractionated isobarically-labeled proof-of-concept samples to compare the performance of eight different iMAATSAs. Finally, the best-performing iMAATSA was compared to a conventional approach and evaluated in a fractionation experiment. Improvements of up to 82% and 86% were demonstrated in protein identifications and high-quality melting curves, respectively, over the conventional approach in the proof-of-concept study, while an approximately 12% improvement in melting curve comparisons was achieved in the fractionation experiment.

### Keywords
Tpp, Target identification, Thermal stability assays, Drug-protein interactions, Mass spectrometry, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States
sanofi


### Submitter
Clifford Phaneuf

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Alexander Ivanov
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States


