### Accession
PXD004517

### Title
Extracellular Vesicles (EVs) fromTHP1 macrophages upon C.albicans interaction

### Description
TMT isotopic labelling to relative Quantitation of proteins from THP1 Macrophage EVs after C.albicans interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Pecipitation of proteins with methanol/chloroform, protein digestion, TMT6 peptides labelling, LC-MS/MS (TripleTOF 5600 System, ABSCIEX) analysis of 3 biological and two thecnical replicates

### Data Protocol
peptides and proteins identification with multiple search enginne(MASCOT, X-TANDEM!, OMSSA,MYRIMATCH) and relative quantification from combined data. Differential regulation was measured using linear models, and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR)

### Publication Abstract
The effectiveness of macrophages in the response to systemic candidiasis is crucial to an effective clearance of the pathogen. The secretion of proteins, mRNAs, noncoding RNAs and lipids through extracellular vesicles (EVs) is one of the mechanisms of communication between immune cells. EVs change their cargo to mediate different responses, and may play a role in the response against infections. Thus we have undertaken the first quantitative proteomic analysis on the protein composition of THP-1 macrophage-derived EVs during the interaction with Candida albicans. This study revealed changes in EVs sizes and in protein composition, and allowed the identification and quantification of 717 proteins. Of them, 133 proteins changed their abundance due to the interaction. The differentially abundant proteins were involved in functions relating to immune response, signaling, or cytoskeletal reorganization. THP-1-derived EVs, both from control and from Candida-infected macrophages, had similar effector functions on other THP-1-differenciated macrophages, activating ERK and p38 kinases, and increasing both the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and the candidacidal activity; while in THP-1 nondifferenciated monocytes, only EVs from infected macrophages increased significantly the TNF-&#x3b1; secretion. Our findings provide new information on the role of macrophage-derived EVs in response to C. albicans infection and in macrophages communication.

### Keywords
Evs, Candida-macrophage interaction, Tmt

### Affiliations
Microbiology II Department of Complutense University of Madrid
UCM

### Submitter
Eduardo Romeu

### Lab Head
Dr Gloria Molero
Microbiology II Department of Complutense University of Madrid


