### Accession
PXD011639

### Title
Host-symbiont proteomes of Bathymodiolus thermophilus

### Description
Bathymodiolus mussels inhabiting deep-sea hydrothermal vents harbor bacterial symbionts in their gills, which support the animals’ diet. While the basic mechanisms of energy generation and CO2 fixation that drive these symbioses are largely established, details of molecular interactions between the symbiotic partners and adaptations to their respective habitats remain unknown. In this study, we therefore comparatively examined the genomes and proteomes of two Bathymodiolus hosts and their respective symbionts from different geographical locations. Two mussel species were proteomically compared: i) B. thermophilus mussel containing sulfur-oxidizing symbiont from the east pacific rise. thermophilus and ii) B. azoricus containing thiotrophic and methanotrophic symbionts from the mid-atlantic ridge.  Symbionts (for both species) and host components (for B. azoricus) were selectively enriched using a multi-step centrifugation procedure. Enriched host and symbiont fractions along with unenriched gill foot tissue were subject to in-depth semi-quantitative proteomic analyses using the orbitrap and velos mass spectrometers. Proteins were quantified based on their spectral counts using the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) method. We identified common strategies of metabolic interactions that provide mutual nutritional support between host and symbionts, such as the detoxification of ambient sulfide by the Bathymodiolus host, which provides a stable thiosulfate reservoir for the thiotrophic symbionts, and a putative amino acid cycling mechanism that could supply the host with symbiont-derived amino acids. A suite of genes and proteins putatively related to virulence or defense functions was particularly abundant in the B. thermophilus symbiont, compared to its symbiont relatives, and may pose a host species-specific adaptation. Our results reveal both, a high degree of integration between the symbiotic partners, and great potential to adapt to the prevailing environment, which facilitate the holobiont’s survival in its hydrothermal vent habitat.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic proteins and membrane-associated proteins were extracted from different sample types and separated using 1D-PAGE as described in (Ponnudurai et al., 2016). For B. thermophilus, the soluble proteome (all cytosolic proteins) from 1) the symbiont-enriched pellet, 2) whole gill tissue, 3) whole foot tissue samples and membrane proteome from 4) whole gill tissue were analyzed in biological triplicates (n=3). For B. azoricus, the soluble proteome of 1) the symbiont-enriched pellet, 2) the enriched host fraction containing host cytosolic proteins, 3) whole gill tissue, and 4) whole foot tissue were analyzed in biological duplicates (n=2). The replicates of membrane fractions from whole gill and symbiont-enriched pellet in B. azoricus were pooled prior to MS-analysis. All soluble protein extracts of sample types from both species were digested and were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) whereas the membrane proteome of whole gill tissue samples analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). For B. azoricus, the same soluble proteome samples of the enriched symbiont fraction, plus one additional biological replicate (n=3), were analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Classic to increase protein identification rates. An Easy-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, U.S.) was coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos or LTQ Orbitrap Classic (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). Peptide separation was done with a 100 min binary gradient with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) and buffer B (99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid). The following MS settings were used for LTQ Orbitrap classic measurements: CID fragmentation of the 5 most abundant precursor ions (top5); gradient: 100 min; survey scan resolution: R=30k; exclusion duration: 30 s. During LTQ Orbitrap Velos measurements, the following settings were applied: CID fragmentation of the 20 most abundant precursor ions (top20); gradient: 100 min; survey scan resolution: R=30k; exclusion duration: 20 s.   To enable comparisons between the proteomes of the B. thermophilus symbiosis and the B. azoricus symbiosis, the resultant spectra were searched against a single comprehensive target-decoy database containing sequences targeting all members of both mussel species.

### Data Protocol
MS results were filtered using the Scaffold framework (version 4.3.0, http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold/) according to the following thresholds: i) 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and 1% protein FDR and ii) at least two unique peptides for each identified protein or protein group. For relative semi-quantitative analysis of the identified proteins, percent normalized spectral abundance factor (%NSAF) values were calculated for each sample and for each organism (%OrgNSAFs), i.e., for the respective symbiont(s) and the host. Differentially expressed proteins were determined by comparing the %OrgNSAF values of protein orthologs of the B. thermophilus thiotroph and the B. azoricus thiotroph in symbiont-enriched samples and in whole gill tissue samples. All data tables were loaded into Perseus version 1.5.6.0. The NSAF data was CLR-transformed and a Welch’s t-test with permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% was applied to detect proteins that differed significantly between symbionts of the two host species.

### Publication Abstract
Bathymodiolus mussels live in symbiosis with intracellular sulfur-oxidizing (SOX) bacteria that provide them with nutrition. We sequenced the SOX symbiont genomes from two Bathymodiolus species. Comparison of these symbiont genomes with those of their closest relatives revealed that the symbionts have undergone genome rearrangements, and up to 35% of their genes may have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer. Many of the genes specific to the symbionts were homologs of virulence genes. We discovered an abundant and diverse array of genes similar to insecticidal toxins of nematode and aphid symbionts, and toxins of pathogens such as Yersinia and Vibrio. Transcriptomics and proteomics revealed that the SOX symbionts express the toxin-related genes (TRGs) in their hosts. We hypothesize that the symbionts use these TRGs in beneficial interactions with their host, including protection against parasites. This would explain why a mutualistic symbiont would contain such a remarkable 'arsenal' of TRGs.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Hydrothermal vent, Bathymodiolus, Proteome, Host, Symbiont

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institut für Pharmazie/C_DAT, Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 3, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Ruby Ponnudurai

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Schweder, Stephanie Markert
University of Greifswald, Institut für Pharmazie/C_DAT, Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 3, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


