### Accession
PXD025832

### Title
The interactome of site-specifically acetylated linker histone H1

### Description
Linker histone H1 plays a key role in chromatin organization and maintenance, however, our knowledge of the regulation of H1 functions by its posttranslational modifications (PTMs) is very limited. In this study, we report on the generation of homogeneously and site-specifically mono- and di-acetylated H1 (H1 Ac) using genetic code expansion. We used these modified histones to identify and comprehensively characterize the acetylation-dependent cellular interactome for linker histone H1 and show that site-specific acetylation results in overlapping, but distinct groups of interacting partners. Intriguingly, H1 acetylation-specific interactors comprise translational initiation factors and are involved in transcriptional regulation, suggesting that acetylation of H1 may indeed act as a regulator of the linker histone H1 by modulation of protein-protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of site-specifically acetylated H1.2: The non-canonical amino acid acetyllysine (AcK) was incorporated into H1.2 by amber stop codon suppression. H1.2 was modified at positions K17, K64, or K17 and K64. Incorporation of AcK was verified by LC-MS/MS analysis. Therefore, proteins were loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel, visualized with Coomassie blue staining, the respective band cut from the gel and prepared for analysis by in-gel digestion with trypsin. After desalting, peptides were analyzed on a QExcactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the determination of full-length protein mass, recombinant proteins were analyzed on a micrOTOF II (Bruker) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC system. Compass DataAnalysis (Bruker) software was used for re-calibration and spectra deconvolution. AP-MS: To identify protein-protein interactions, pulldown assays were performed with H1.2 and H1.2 KxAc variants. Samples without any bait protein served as control. 2.5 mg HEK 293T cell lysate and 2.35 nmol bait protein in 500 µl total volume were incubated on ice for 10 min and centrifuged. The supernatant was added to 20 µl Strep-Tactin Superflow resin (IBA Lifescience) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Beads were washed, followed by elution of bound proteins in 2.5 mM desthiobiotin. For identification of co-purified proteins, elution fractions were freeze-dried, followed by tryptic in-solution digestion, desalting, and LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each pulldown was performed in biological triplicates and measured in technical duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Generation of site-specifically acetylated H1.2: Raw files were analyzed using the Mascot 2.5.1 search engine MS/MS ions search (Matrix Science). Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (K) were set as variable modifications and trypsin cleavage allowing up to two missed cleavages was chosen. AP-MS: Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 with match between runs and label-free quantification (minimum ratio count set to one) enabled. The minimal peptide length was set to five (further settings: default). For protein identification, the human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date: 2018-02-22) and the integrated database of common contaminants were used. Further data processing was performed using Perseus 1.6.1.3 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Affinity purification-mass spectrometry (ap-ms), Chromatin, Genetic code expansion, Linker histone h1, Histone code, Epigenetics, Posttranslational modification (ptm), Acetylation, Interactions

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Department of Biology – Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Spectrometry, University of Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Department of Biology – Cellular Proteostasis and Mass Spectrometry, University of Konstanz


