### Accession
PXD027875

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis encodes a YhhN family membrane protein with lysoplasmalogenase activity that protects against toxic effects of lysolipids

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb) resides in human macrophages where it exploits host lipids for survival. Little is known about the interaction between M.tb and macrophage plasmalogens, the subclass of glycerophospholipids having a vinyl-ether bond at sn-1. Lysoplasmalogens, produced from plasmalogens by hydrolysis at sn-2 by PLA2, are potentially toxic, but can be broken down by host lysoplasmalogenase, an integral membrane protein of the YhhN family that hydrolyzes the vinyl ether bond at sn-1 to release a fatty aldehyde and glycerophospho-ethanolamine or –choline. Curiously, M.tb encodes its own YhhN protein (MtbYhhN) despite having no endogenous plasmalogens. Here, the gene for MtbYhhN (Rv1401) was cloned and expressed in Mycobacterium smegmatis (M.smeg), and the partially purified protein exhibited abundant lysoplasmalogenase activity that was specific for lysoplasmenylethanolamine (pLPE) or lysoplasmenylcholine (pLPC) (Vmax~15.5 mol/min/mg; Km~83 M). Based on monitoring cell density by OD600, pLPE, pLPC, lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) and lysophosphatidylethanolamine (LPE) were not toxic to intact M.smeg cells, but pLPC and LPC were highly toxic to M.smeg spheroplasts, which are cell wall deficient (CWD) forms that lack the bacterial wall. Importantly, spheroplasts prepared from M.smeg cells overexpressing MtbYhhN were protected from membrane disruption/lysis by pLPC (but not by LPC), which was rapidly depleted from the media. Finally, overexpression of full-length MtbYhhN in M.smeg increased its survival within human macrophages by 2.6-fold compared to vector control at 24 h. These data provide support for the hypothesis that MtbYhhN protein confers a mycobacterial growth advantage in macrophages by cleaving toxic pLPC from the host cells into potentially energy-producing products.

### Sample Protocol
The predominant bands at ~23 kDa and 38 kDa from a Coomassie stained gel were excised and sent to the Keck MS & Proteomics Resource at Yale University School of Medicine where they were digested and analyzed for to identify peptides and their corresponding proteins. Briefly, the gel slices were first washed with 50% acetonitrile/50% water followed by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile/50% water. It was then dried, rehydrated with trypsin in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested at 37oC for 16 h. The resultant peptides were separated using a Waters Symmetry C18 trap column and a nanoAcquity UPLC separating column. Elution was performed with a 52 min linear gradient of 5-50% acetonitrile in 0.05% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
LC MS/MS data were analyzed utilizing Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine (Matrix Science LLC.).  positive protein identification were based on hits with two or more unique peptides per protein, and peptides were considered significant if the Mascot Score is better than the 95% confidence level.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogen Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb) resides in human macrophages, wherein it exploits host lipids for survival. However, little is known about the interaction between M.tb and macrophage plasmalogens, a subclass of glycerophospholipids with a vinyl ether bond at the sn-1 position of the glycerol backbone. Lysoplasmalogens, produced from plasmalogens by hydrolysis at the sn-2 carbon by phospholipase A<sub>2</sub>, are potentially toxic but can be broken down by host lysoplasmalogenase, an integral membrane protein of the YhhN family that hydrolyzes the vinyl ether bond to release a fatty aldehyde and glycerophospho-ethanolamine or glycerophospho-choline. Curiously, M.tb encodes its own YhhN protein (MtbYhhN), despite having no endogenous plasmalogens. To understand the purpose of this protein, the gene for MtbYhhN (Rv1401) was cloned and expressed in Mycobacterium smegmatis (M.smeg). We found the partially purified protein exhibited abundant lysoplasmalogenase activity specific for lysoplasmenylethanolamine or lysoplasmenylcholine (pLPC) (V<sub>max</sub>&#x223c;15.5&#xa0;&#x3bc;mol/min/mg; K<sub>m</sub>&#x223c;83&#xa0;&#x3bc;M). Based on cell density, we determined that lysoplasmenylethanolamine, pLPC, lysophosphatidylcholine, and lysophosphatidylethanolamine were not toxic to M.smeg cells, but pLPC and LPC were highly toxic to M.smeg spheroplasts, which are cell wall-deficient mycobacterial forms. Importantly, spheroplasts prepared from M.smeg cells overexpressing MtbYhhN were protected from membrane disruption/lysis by pLPC, which was rapidly depleted from the media. Finally, we found that overexpression of full-length MtbYhhN in M.smeg increased its survival within human macrophages by 2.6-fold compared to vector controls. These data support the hypothesis that MtbYhhN protein confers a growth advantage for mycobacteria in macrophages by cleaving toxic host pLPC into potentially energy-producing products.

### Keywords
Spheroplasts, Lysophospholipids, Cell-wall-deficient (cwd), Lysoplasmalogenase, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Yhhn protein, Phospholipase a, Cell injury and protection, Lysoplasmalogen, Macrophage, Mycobacterium tuberculosis rv1401 gene

### Affiliations
Yale University

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University


