### Accession
PXD039058

### Title
Proteomic characteristics and diagnostic potential of exhaled breath particles in patients with COVID-19

### Description
Background SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to predominantly infect the airways and the respiratory tract and too often have an unpredictable and different pathologic pattern compared to other respiratory diseases. Current clinical diagnostical tools in pulmonary medicine expose patients to harmful radiation, are too unspecific or even invasive. Proteomic analysis of exhaled breath particles (EBPs) in contrast, are non-invasive, sample directly from the pathological source and presents as a novel explorative and diagnostical tool.  Methods Patients with PCR-verified COVID-19 infection (COV-POS, n=20), and patients with COVID-19 symptoms but with >2 negative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests (COV-NEG, n=16) and healthy controls (HCO, n=12) were prospectively recruited. EBPs were collected using a “particles in exhaled air” (PExA 2.0) device. Particle per exhaled volume (PEV) and size distribution profiles were compared. Proteins were analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. A random forest machine learning classification model was then trained and validated on EBP data achieving an accuracy of 0.92. Results Significant increases in PEV and changes in size distribution profiles of EBPs was seen in COV-POS and COV-NEG compared to healthy controls. We achieved a deep proteome profiling of EBP across the three groups with proteins involved in immune activation, acute phase response, cell adhesion, blood coagulation, and known components of the respiratory tract lining fluid, among others. We demonstrated promising results for the use of an integrated EBP biomarker panel together with particle concentration for diagnosis of COVID-19 as well as a robust method for protein identification in EBPs Conclusion Our results demonstrate the promising potential for the use of EBP fingerprints in biomarker discovery and for diagnosing pulmonary diseases, rapidly and non-invasively with minimal patient discomfort.

### Sample Protocol
Particles were collected using a PExA 2.0 device (PExA, Gothenburg, Sweden) using a specialized breathing maneuver. EBP samples were incubated in 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) in 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C with subsequent addition of 400 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) and further incubation. Alkylation was performed in the dark with the addition of 800 mM iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) after which 12% aqueous phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2%. Peptides were collected onto S-TRAP columns (Protifi, Farmingdale, USA) with a mixture of 90% methanol and 100 mM TEAB. Digestion of proteins was performed with 1 µg of Lys-C (Lys-C, Mass Spec Grade, Promega, Fitchburg, USA) incubated at 37°C for 2 hours after which 1 µg of trypsin (Promega sequence grade) was added overnight with addition of 0.45 µg Trypsin after 12h. Peptides where then eluted with 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid (FA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.2% formic acid and dried by speedvac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 45°C and re-dissolved in 20 uL of 0.1% FA and 2% ACN solution.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v2.0.20, Max Planck institute of biochemistry, city, Germany) using the Andromeda database search algorithm was used to analyze raw MS data (13). Spectra files were searched against the UniProt filtered and reviewed human protein database using the following parameters: Type: TIMS-DDA LFQ, Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term). Digestion, Trypsin/P, Match between runs: False. FDR was set at 1% for both protein and peptide levels. MS1 match tolerance was set as 20 ppm for the first search and 40 ppm for the main search. Data was first normalized with NormalyzerDE using robust linear regression normalization (14). Perseus (v2.0.5.0, Max Planck institute of biochemistry, Germany) and RStudio (v4.2.0, RStudio, Boston, MA, US) were used for downstream analysis of proteomics data. Proteins denoted as decoy hits, contaminants, only identified by site were removed. Next proteins identified in less than 45% of samples in at least one group were removed. Significant differences in protein intensities between groups were determined with an ANOVA q-value of < 0.05 and post hoc Tukey’s test of the log2-transformed LFQ intensities. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using and s0 of 0.1 and FDR of 0.05. For the heatmap LFQ values where normalized with a Z-score and rendered in RStudio using the pheatmap package using euclidean clustering. Protein-protein interaction and Reactome Pathways were analyzed using STRING v11.5 using the stringApp within Cytoscape v3.9.1. Subcellular location determined with CellWhere v.1.1 (15).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Covid-19, Lung, Exhaled breath particles

### Affiliations
Lund University
Lund Univeristy

### Submitter
Gabriel Hirdman

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra Lindstedt
Lund Univeristy


