### Accession
PXD027819

### Title
Nanoparticles and photochemistry for Native-like transmembrane protein footprinting

### Description
Mass spectrometry based footprinting can probe higher order structure of proteins. We bond photocatalytic nanoparticles to a lipid bilayer that, upon laser irradiation, produce high local concentrations of radicals that penetrate the lipid layer made permeable by a simultaneous laser-initiated PB reaction. This approach achieves high footprinting coverage for membrane proteins in liposomes, helps locate both ligand-binding residues in a transporter and ligand-induced conformational changes, and reveals structural aspects of the flexible unbound state. Overall, this approach proves highly effective in intramembrane footprinting and forges a connection between materials science and biology.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared and analysed by mass spectrometry as described in the method section of the related manuscript. Briefly, protein-liposome systems were prepared and incubated with TiO2 nanoparticles for 60 minutes and then submitted to the flow system of Fast Photochemical Oxidation of Proteins (FPOP). After footprinting, the samples were collected, purified and digested via a modified FASP (filter-aided sample preparation) procedure. The digested samples were seperated by nHPLC and analysed by Thermo Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The nHPLC-MS/MS raw files were processed by the Byonic software (protein metrics, San Carlos, CA, USA) to reveal sequence coverage (20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 60 ppm fragmentation mass tolerance, and CID/HCD fragmentation for searching). The automatically searched results were checked manually with a custom program, Thermo Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and only the peptides with high quality MS2 were selected. Modification fractions on peptide and residue levels were calculated by manually selecting the EIC area.

### Publication Abstract
Mass&#xa0;spectrometry-based footprinting can probe higher order structure of soluble proteins in their native states and serve as a complement to high-resolution approaches. Traditional footprinting approaches, however, are hampered for integral membrane proteins because their transmembrane regions are not accessible to solvent, and they contain hydrophobic residues that are generally unreactive with most chemical reagents. To address this limitation, we bond photocatalytic titanium dioxide&#xa0;(TiO<sub>2</sub>)&#xa0;nanoparticles to a lipid bilayer. Upon laser irradiation, the nanoparticles produce local concentrations of radicals that penetrate the lipid layer, which is made permeable by a simultaneous laser-initiated Patern&#xf2;-B&#xfc;chi reaction. This approach achieves footprinting for integral membrane proteins in liposomes, helps locate both ligand-binding residues in a transporter and ligand-induced conformational changes, and reveals structural aspects of proteins at&#xa0;the flexible unbound state. Overall, this approach proves effective in intramembrane footprinting and forges a connection between material science and biology.

### Keywords
Footprinting, Membrane protein

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Jie Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Michael L. Gross
Department of Chemistry, Washington University in St. Louis


