### Accession
PXD008104

### Title
Secretomes of Cancer-Associated Myofibroblasts and Normal Tissue Myofibroblasts in hypoxia and normoxia C4PR_LIV

### Description
Cancer-associated fibroblasts are a major component of the cancer stroma. Here we focus on gastric cancer associated myofibroblasts (CAMs). CAMs secrete factors that increase the migration, invasion and proliferation of cancer cells when compared to adjacent tissue myofibroblasts (ATMs), or normal tissue myofibroblasts (NTMs). In this study we identified and quantified the proteins secreted by normoxic (21% O2) and hypoxic (1% O2) myofibroblast cells.

### Sample Protocol
Human primary myofibroblasts were derived from resected gastric tumours (CAMs) and adjacent tissue (ATMs) obtained from patients undergoing gastric cancer surgery. CAM and NTM hypoxic conditioned media and CAM and NTM normoxic conditioned media were prepared by incubating the cells in serum-free media for 24 hours in normal (21% O2) and hypoxic (1% O2) conditions. Cell debris was collected by centrifugation and the resulting conditioned media containing secreted proteins was snap frozen and stored at -80°C. For mass spectrometry analysis, 4mL of each conditioned media sample was concentrated onto Strataclean resin and digested 'on-bead' using trypsin. Peptides were analysed using the ‘Top 20’ protocol on an Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at the Centre for Proteome Research (University of Liverpool).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was analysed using MaxQuant software with Andromeda as a search engine against the reference human proteome (Uniprot proteome ID UP000005640, containing 42112 reviewed canonical and isoform protein entries) and 123 potential contaminants. Default processing parameters were used in MaxQuant. Protein quantification was obtained using MaxQuant intensity-based label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Potential contaminants identified in the mass spectrometry data were manually examined and proteins associated with Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) or trypsin rejected.

### Publication Abstract
Although hypoxia is known to contribute to several aspects of tumour progression, relatively little is known about the effects of hypoxia on cancer-associated myofibroblasts (CAMs), or the consequences that conditional changes in CAM function may have on tumour development and metastasis. To investigate this issue in the context of gastric cancer, a comparative multiomic analysis was performed on populations of patient-derived myofibroblasts, cultured under normoxic or hypoxic conditions. Data from this study reveal a novel set of CAM-specific hypoxia-induced changes in gene expression and secreted proteins. Significantly, these signatures are not observed in either patient matched adjacent tissue myofibroblasts (ATMs) or non-cancer associated normal tissue myofibroblasts (NTMs). Functional characterisation of different myofibroblast populations shows that hypoxia-induced changes in gene expression not only enhance the ability of CAMs to induce cancer cell migration, but also confer pro-tumorigenic (CAM-like) properties in NTMs. This study provides the first global mechanistic insight into the molecular changes that contribute to hypoxia-induced pro-tumorigenic changes in gastric stromal myofibroblasts.

### Keywords
Protein secretion, Gastric cancer, Tumour microenvironment

### Affiliations
EBI
Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK

### Submitter
Andrew Jarnuczak

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Chris Sanderson
Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK


