### Accession
PXD024602

### Title
LILRA3-GFP and GFP only Transfected HEK293T cells LC-MSMS

### Description
The leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor A3 (LILRA3) is a soluble protein primarily expressed by peripheral blood monocytes and is abundant in sera of healthy donors. Extracellular LILRA3 is anti-inflammatory and displays neuro-regenerative functions in vitro. However, its intracellular expression, distribution and function(s) remain unknown. Using a combination of high-resolution confocal and super-resolution microscopy, we identified intracellular expression of native LILRA3 in the nucleus of peripheral blood monocytes and in vitro derived macrophages. This unexpected nuclear localisation of LILRA3 was confirmed in LILRA3-GFP transfected HEK293T cells. Western blot of proteins fractionated from primary macrophages and the transfected HEK293T cells confirmed nuclear localisation of the native and expressed LILRA3 proteins. Interestingly, most of the LILRA3 in the nucleus was in a monomeric form like the biologically active secreted protein, while those in the other cellular compartments were mixed monomeric, dimeric, and oligomeric forms. The predominant presence of monomeric LILRA3 in the nucleus was independently corroborated in transfected live HEK293T cells using number and molecular brightness (N&B) analysis method. Immunoprecipitation and Mass spectrometric peptide sequencing studies revealed that nuclear LILRA3 co-immunoprecipitated with several nuclear proteins involved in host protein synthesis machinery via direct interaction to a key multifunctional RNA binding protein, the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 protein (EWS).

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear protein enriched cell pellets were prepared from transiently LILRA3-EGFP or EGFP alone transfected HEK293T. Nuclear pellets were then resuspended in 0.5ml PBS each, solubilised by 3x10 seconds sonication at high setting with 30 second pauses whilst being kept on ice throughout. The lysates were centrifuged at 9,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C, the resultant nuclear protein enriched supernatants from each cell line were split into 2 fresh pre-chilled Eppendorf tubes. 20µg/ml (10µl of slurry) of magnetic beads conjugated anti-GFP rat mAb was added to one tube from each cell line and magnetic beads conjugated irrelevant rat IgG was added to the second tube. Tubes were then incubated over night at 4°C rotating and placed onto Dyna Mag 2 multi-rack magnetic particle concentrator for 1 minute and the unbound protein pipetted out and the magnetic particles sequentially washed with 1 ml of 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.1% bovine haemoglobin in TSA [10mM Tris HCl, 140mM NaCl, 0.025% NaNa3, pH 8.0]), TSA and 50mM Tris HCl, pH 6.8 by repeatedly removing from the concentrator, brief vortex, placing to the concentrator and removing supernatant. Magnetic beads immunoprecipitated nuclear proteins were then eluted with 50µl of 100mM glycine, pH 2.5 and transferred into new pre-chilled Eppendorf tubes containing 50µl of 100mM glycine, pH 9.0. The nuclear protein eluents were reduced, alkylated, and digested overnight with trypsin. Digest peptides were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system. Samples (2.5 µl) were concentrated and desalted onto a micro C18 precolumn (300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex) with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % TFA) at 15 µl/min.  After a 4 min wash the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port UPLC valve, Valco, Houston, TX) into line with a fritless nano column (75µ x ~15cm) containing C18AQ media (1.9µ, 120 Å).  Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 200 nl/min over 30 min.

### Data Protocol
High voltage (2000 V) was applied to low volume Titanium union (Valco) with the column oven heated to 45°C (Sonation) and the tip positioned ~ 0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=300°C) of a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the QExactive operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA).  A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired (resolution = 70,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 1,000,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003).  Up to the 10 most abundant ions (>80,000 counts, underfill ratio 10%) with charge states > +2 and <+7 were sequentially isolated (width m/z 2.5) and fragmented by HCD (NCE = 30) with a AGC target of 100,000 ions (resolution = 17,500 at m/z 200).  M/z ratios selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Peak lists were generated using Mascot Daemon/Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science) with set search parameters and submitted to the database with search program Mascot version 2.5.1. The set search parameters were precursor tolerance 5 ppm and product ion tolerances ± 0.05 Da; Met(O) carboxyamidomethyl-Cys specified as variable modification, enzyme specificity (trypsin) and acceptance of 1 missed cleavage and human only restricted sequences (Uniprot, Feb 2018). High MASCOT score peptides identified in nuclear proteins from LILRA3-EGFP transfected HEK293T cells that were immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP  magnetic beads were stringently filtered against  all 3 relevant control samples including nuclear proteins from LILRA3-EGFP transfected cells and immunoprecipitated with negative control IgG magnetic beads, nuclear proteins from EGFP-alone transfected cells immunoprecipitated with anti-GFP beads and nuclear proteins from EGFP alone transfected cells immunoprecipitated with negative control IgG beads. Peptides found only in the LILRA3-EGFP transfected cells immunoprecipitated with the anti-GFP mAb across two independent experiments were considered as specific LILRA3 binding proteins. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to establish enriched canonical pathways (QIAGEN) and Cystoscape software was used to visualise enriched molecular, cellular, and functional networks.

### Publication Abstract
The leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor A3 (LILRA3) is a soluble protein primarily expressed by peripheral blood monocytes and is abundant in sera of healthy donors. Extracellular LILRA3 is anti-inflammatory and displays neuro-regenerative functions in vitro. However, its intracellular expression, distribution, and function(s) remain unknown. Using a combination of high-resolution confocal and super-resolution microscopy, we identified intracellular expression of native LILRA3 in the nucleus of peripheral blood monocytes and in vitro-derived macrophages. This unexpected nuclear localization of LILRA3 was confirmed in LILRA3-GFP-transfected HEK293T cells. Western blot of proteins fractionated from primary macrophages and the transfected HEK293T cells confirmed nuclear localization of the native and expressed LILRA3 proteins. Interestingly, most of the LILRA3 in the nucleus was in a monomeric form like the biologically active secreted protein, while that in the other cellular compartments was in mixed monomeric, dimeric, and oligomeric forms. The predominant presence of monomeric LILRA3 in the nucleus was independently corroborated in transfected live HEK293T cells using the number and molecular brightness (N&amp;B) analysis method. Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric peptide sequencing studies revealed that nuclear LILRA3 co-immunoprecipitated with several nuclear proteins involved in host protein synthesis machinery via direct interactions to a key multifunctional RNA-binding protein, the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 protein (EWS) (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD024602). The biological significance of the nuclear expression of LILRA3 and its interaction with these key proteins remain to be elucidated.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Hek293t cells, Lilra3

### Affiliations
Mechanisms of Diseases & Translational Research, School ofMedical Sciences, Department of Pathology, UNSW, Sydney,  Australia
The University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Nicodemus Tedla

### Lab Head
Dr Nicodemus Tedla
Mechanisms of Diseases & Translational Research, School ofMedical Sciences, Department of Pathology, UNSW, Sydney,  Australia


