### Accession
PXD002448

### Title
Composition of Rosenthal fibers in Alexander disease patients and mouse models

### Description
Alexander disease (AxD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the presence in astrocytes of protein aggregates called Rosenthal fibers (RFs).  In this work, we used a new biochemical fractionation method to enrich for RFs followed by analysis of this fraction using quantitative iTRAQ mass spectrometry.  This work identified 77 proteins not previously associated with RFs.  Multiple proteins selected for follow-up were confirmed by immunobloting to be enriched in the RF fraction of both the AxD mouse models and human AxD patients including receptor for activated protein C kinase 1 (RACK1), G1/S-specific cyclin D2, and ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX3X.

### Sample Protocol
RF enriched fractions from samples with RFs (either AxD patients or mouse models) were compared to samples that lacked RFs (wild type mice or control human subjects) to identify proteins significantly enriched in the RF fractions of AxD patients or mouse models as putative RF protein components - see accompanying manuscript for a description of the biochemical enrichment procedure.  RF fractions were boiled in Laemmli sample buffer for 5 min.  To facilitate comparisons, equal percentages of each RF fraction prepared starting with equal milligram amounts of human tissue or mouse whole brains were electrophoresed in a 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel (Pierce) at 120 volts for 5 min.  Then the gels were rinsed three times briefly with deionized water and incubated with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 protein stain [0.05% (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250, 50% methanol, 10% acetic acid] for 1 hr at room temperature on an orbital shaker.  Gels were destained for 2 hr in 15% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) glacial acetic acid on an orbital shaker at room temperature.  The destained gels were then placed in ACROS HPLC water and each sample gel lane dissected into approximately 1 mm cubes and placed into 1.5 mL centrifuge tubes for processing at room temperature unless otherwise noted.  The gel slices were then incubated twice for 15 min in protein destaining solution containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile followed by incubation overnight in the same buffer.  The following day the protein destaining solution was carefully removed and new protein destaining solution added and the gel slices incubated another 4 hr to completely remove the Coomassie stain.  The protein destaining solution was then removed and acetonitrile was added for 5 min to completely dehydrate the gel pieces.  The acetonitrile was then removed and the gel slices dried in a Speed Vac for 5 min.  The samples were then reduced by the addition of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min.  The DTT solution was then removed and an equal volume of 100 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 30 min in the dark.  The iodoacetamide solution was then removed and acetonitrile was added and incubated 5 min to dehydrate the gel slices and remove residual iodoacetamide.  The gel slices were then placed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min followed by acetonitrile treatment for 5 min.  The acetonitrile was then removed and the gel slices dried in a vacuum centrifuge for 5 min.  The fully dried gel slices were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in a 1:20 trypsin to protein ratio determined from a BCA assay of each fraction loaded for SDS-PAGE.  After digestion overnight at 37 °C, the trypsin digest solutions were transferred to fresh tubes and the gel slices incubated for 1 hr in 50% aqueous acetonitrile, 5% formic acid.  The acetonitrile/formic acid solution was then combined with the overnight trypsin digests and vacuum centrifuged for 2 hr to dry the peptides.  The peptides were then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and bound to a  P10 C18 Zip Tip (Millipore, Billerica, MA) followed by eluting in 50% aqueous acetonitrile.  The peptides were then vacuum centrifuged to dryness and resuspended in isopropanol followed by labeling with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For analysis of the mouse samples, RF fractions obtained from four different 25 day old wild type mice were labeled with reporter ions 113, 115, 117, and 119 and four 25 day old AxD model mice were labeled with 114, 116, 118, and 121.  For analysis of the human RF fractions, labels used were changed in a duplicate run to determine if the labeling process affected the results.  The samples were labeled as follows [patient mutation (run 1 label, run 2 label)]: R79C (113, 121), R239H (114, 119), R239C (115, 118), S247P (116, 117), R416W (117, 116), 14 yr old control (118, 115), 50 yr old control (119, 114), and 1 yr old control (121, 113).  Similar fold-enrichments for RF proteins relative to the controls were obtained with the two labeling schemes.  Following iTRAQ labeling, the samples were combined, vacuum centrifuged and redissolved in 0.5% formic acid and Zip Tipped to remove excess iTRAQ reagent and eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  The iTRAQ labeled peptides were then vacuum centrifuged to dryness, redissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Protein Pilot Software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and searched with the Mascot Server against the human or mouse SwissProt database released on 7/9/2012.  For the Mascot search, N-terminal and K residue iTRAQ 8-plex labeling and carbamidomethylation of C residues were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of Met residues was set as a variable modification.  A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed.  The human data were analyzed with the 5600 TripleTOF precursor and MS/MS tolerance, and the mouse data were analyzed with Orbitrap precursor and MS/MS tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Alexander disease (AxD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by astrocytic protein aggregates called Rosenthal fibers (RFs). We used mouse models of AxD to determine the protein composition of RFs to obtain information about disease mechanisms including the hypothesis that sequestration of proteins in RFs contributes to disease. A method was developed for RF enrichment, and analysis of the resulting fraction using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation mass spectrometry identified 77 proteins not previously associated with RFs. Three of five proteins selected for follow-up were confirmed enriched in the RF fraction by immunobloting of both the AxD mouse models and human patients: receptor for activated protein C kinase 1 (RACK1), G1/S-specific cyclin D2, and ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX3X. Immunohistochemistry validated cyclin D2 as a new RF component, but results for RACK1 and DDX3X were equivocal. None of these was decreased in the non-RF fractions compared to controls. A similar result was obtained for the previously known RF component, alphaB-crystallin, which had been a candidate for sequestration. Thus, no support was obtained for the sequestration hypothesis for AxD. Providing possible insight into disease progression, the association of several of the RF proteins with stress granules suggests a role for stress granules in the origin of RFs.

### Keywords
Itraq 8-plex, Alexander disease, Rosenthal fibers

### Affiliations
Professor of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
Michael Brenner

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Brenner
Professor of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA


