### Accession
PXD021633

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis in adult parrot and chicken plasma and cerebrospinal fluid identifies gene products involved in neurogenesis, neural cell differentiation and synaptic plasticity.

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins regulate neurogenesis, homeostasis and participate in active signalling during neuroinflammation. Components of CSF are mostly blood-derived, but partially also secreted from the brain cells. While various birds may represent suitable models for the investigation of adult constitutive neurogenesis, proteomic studies of the avian CSF examined so far solely chicken embryos. On this basis, we explored the proteomic composition of CSF and plasma in adult parrots, budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus) and cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus) and chickens (Gallus gallus) using liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). To overcome the lack of a complete cockatiel genome information, we compared the MS/MS identification success rates after mapping all spectra from all three species against the reference proteomes of three model avian species: chicken, budgerigar and zebra finch.  We show highest efficiency (8.8-4.7%) for the closest reference proteome, although part of the proteins (7.2-18%) were mapped only with other references. After filtering the selected datasets, we identified up to 746 proteins represented in the CSF and plasma of chicken, budgerigar and cockatiel. Enrichment analysis of the core proteome of these datasets revealed various metabolic and signalling pathways. Comparative analysis of CSF and plasma for each species then indicated clusters of proteins preferentially upregulated into CSF that were involved in neurogenesis, neural development and neural differentiation pathways. This study provides the first insight into the proteomics of adult avian CSF and plasma and brings novel molecular evidence supporting the adult neurogenesis in birds.

### Sample Protocol
Nano reversed phase columns were used to elute peptide cations using the same method as Cerna et al 2017 1. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (at 200m/z) with a 5×105 ion count target. Tandem MS/MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30 and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS/MS ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with a charge state of 2−6 were sampled for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10-ppm tolerance around the selected pre-cursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on and the instrument was run at top speed with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
All data were collected and quantified using MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.432. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for identification of all peptides and proteins. We set a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Gallus gallus Uniprot reference proteome (downloaded on March 2020, containing  27540 entries), Melopsittacus undulatus Uniprot reference proteome (downloaded on February 2020, containing 23704 entries) and Taeniopygia guttata Uniport reference proteome (downloaded on February 2017, containing 23455 entries), with all duplicates removed. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds3 and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Quantifications were performed with the label-free quantification algorithms using a combination of unique and razor peptides2.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins regulate neurogenesis, brain homeostasis and participate in signalling during neuroinflammation. Even though birds represent valuable models for constitutive adult neurogenesis, current proteomic studies of the avian CSF are limited to chicken embryos. Here we use liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) to explore the proteomic composition of CSF and plasma in adult chickens (Gallus gallus) and evolutionarily derived parrots: budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus) and cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus). Because cockatiel lacks a complete genome information, we compared the cross-species protein identifications using the reference proteomes of three model avian species: chicken, budgerigar and zebra finch (Taeniopygia guttata) and found the highest identification rates when mapping against the phylogenetically closest species, the budgerigar. In total, we identified 483, 641 and 458 unique proteins consistently represented in the CSF and plasma of all chicken, budgerigar and cockatiel conspecifics, respectively. Comparative pathways analyses of CSF and blood plasma then indicated clusters of proteins involved in neurogenesis, neural development and neural differentiation overrepresented in CSF in each species. This study provides the first insight into the proteomics of adult avian CSF and plasma and brings novel evidence supporting the adult neurogenesis in birds.

### Keywords
Nymphicus hollandicus, Melopsittacus undulatus, Gallus gallus

### Affiliations
Charles University
Division of Animal Evolutionary Biology, Department of Zoology Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague Viničná 7, 128 44 Praha, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Vinkler
Division of Animal Evolutionary Biology, Department of Zoology Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague Viničná 7, 128 44 Praha, Czech Republic


