### Accession
PXD022675

### Title
Extracellular whole cell cross-liking of B cells (JY)

### Description
We performed XL-MS on the extracellular region of whole B cells (JY). The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) was the most cross-linked membrane protein where the most common interactor of and HLA was another HLA. We were able to model HLA-HLA interaction using the structural information the cross-links provide.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell extracellular crosslinking  2.5 × 108 JY cells were harvested, gently washed four times with 50 mL warm PBS. Cells were further washed with 20 mL crosslinking buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl), and resuspended in crosslinking buffer at a density of 1 × 108 cells/mL. DSSO was added to a final concentration of 1mM, and cell suspension was crosslinked for 15min with end-to-end inversion at room temperature. The cross-linking reaction was quenched with 10 mM Tris pH 8.5 for 10 min. Cross-linked cells were then pelleted at 2000 g for 1 min (with slow deceleration) and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen until further processing. Plasma membrane fractionation  Plasma membrane was enriched using Abcam kit (ab 65400). Plasma membrane pellets were resuspended in 8 M Urea, 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2% Sodium deoxycholate, and then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Proteolytic Digestion  The protein content of plasma membrane lysates was estimated with a Bradford assay (BioRad, CA, USA).  240 μg of plasma membrane proteins were reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 min, alkylated with 16 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark which was then quenched with another 4 mM DTT. Alkylated proteins were diluted 5 times (lowering Urea concentration) with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested with Lys C (ratio 1:75; Wako, Japan) and trypsin (ratio 1:50; Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Digested peptides were acidified to 5% formic acid and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min, precipitating the Sodium deoxycholate. The clear supernatant was desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, MA, USA), vacuum-dried, and stored at –80 °C. Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) chromatography  The desalted peptides were dissolved in 10% formic acid, 2% DMSO and loaded on a Luna 100A SCX column (50 mm × 2mm, 5 μm, Phenomenex product number 00B-4398-B0) with the help of a C18 Opti-Lynx trap column (4.6mm × 5 mm, 49 μm, Optimize Technologies product number 11-02874-TA). Solvent A consisted of 0.05% formic acid, 20% acetonitrile in water and solvent B consisted of 0.05% formic acid, 20% acetonitrile, and 0.5 M NaCl. The SCX gradient was: 0-10% B for 10 min, 10-40% B in 15 min, 40-80% B in 5 mi, 80-100% B in 20 min, 100% B for 10 min.  One-minute fractions were collected and pooled into 20/21 fractions according to UV intensities such that each fraction mean UV signal is 45 mAU. The pooled fractions were desalted with Oasis HLA 96-well μElution plate (Waters, MA, USA), vacuum-dried and stored at –80 °C.  LC-MS/MS   Desalted SCX fractions were analyzed in triplicates by reversed-phase (RP) LC-MS/MS with an UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent, CA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, CA, USA). Peptides were trapped on a homemade 2 cm × 100 μm pre-column packed with Reprosil C18 (3 μm) and separated on a homemade 50 cm × 75 μm column packed with Poroshell EC-C18 (2.7 μm). The resolving gradient was established by mixing solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile). To maximize peptide separation in each fraction, the resolving gradients varied between 5-32% Solvent B to 8-39% Solvent B. The gradient was as follows: 5 min at 100% A (trapping), 97 min resolving gradient, 2 min up to 100% B, 5 min hold at 100% B, 1 min lower to 100% A, 10 min equilibrate for next sample at 100% A. In all cases, the flow was passively split to ~200 nL/min.  MS1 was performed at 60,000 resolution, from 310 to 1600 m/z, after accumulation of 5 × 105 ions (125%) in a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Top 10 most intense precursors with a minimum intensity of 2 × 104 and a charge of 3-8 were selected for MS2 by CID fragmentation (30% collision energy). MS2 was performed using the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution with automatically defined m/z range (normal setting) and 5 × 104 AGC target, in a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Signature peaks of DSSO with a targeted mass difference of 31.9721 were selected for MS3 and fragmented by HCD (30% collision energy). MS3 was performed using the ion trap in rapid mode, automatically defined m/z range (normal setting) and 1 × 104 AGC target in a maximum injection time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (version 2.4. 1.15) using the integrated XlinkX nodes. The DSSO_MS2_MS3 analysis template was used with the following modifications: minimum precursor mass 350 Da and minimal peptide mass of 300 Da; two peptides were considered for each spectrum; deamidation on N/Q and N-terminal acetyl were considered as variable modification. Data of each of the six replicates (two biological experiments measured in triplicates) was grouped in a processing workflow which were all under the same consensus workflow. The data was search against the SwissProt human database (downloaded on 09/2019, containing 20,442 protein sequences, curated to match the JY HLA type (see first 17 sequences in supplementary data 2). Signal peptides and mitochondrial transit peptides as annotated in UniProt were removed to allow for correct mapping of crosslinks to the N-terminus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xl-ms, Plasma membrane, Human leukocyte antigen (hla)

### Affiliations
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Gad Armony

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands 2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


