### Accession
PXD035141

### Title
Pharmacoproteomics of non-human primate cerebrospinal fluid after BACE inhibition

### Description
The protease BACE1 is a major drug target for Alzheimer’s disease, but chronic BACE1 inhibition is associated with non-progressive worsening that may be caused by modulation of unknown physiological BACE1 substrates. To identify in vivo-relevant BACE1 substrates we applied pharmacoproteomics to non-human-primate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) after acute treatment with BACE inhibitors. Besides SEZ6, the strongest, dose-dependent reduction was observed for the pro-inflammatory cytokine receptor gp130/IL6ST, which we establish as a new in vivo BACE1 substrate. Gp130 was also reduced in human CSF from a clinical trial with a BACE inhibitor and in plasma of BACE1-deficient mice. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that BACE1 directly cleaves gp130, thereby attenuating membrane-bound gp130 and increasing soluble gp130 abundance and controlling gp130 function in neuronal IL-6 signaling and neuronal survival upon growth-factor withdrawal. In conclusion, BACE1 is a new modulator of gp130 function. The BACE1-cleaved, soluble gp130 may serve as a pharmacodynamic BACE1 activity marker to reduce the occurrence of side effects of chronic BACE1 inhibition in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) with in-dwelling cisterna magna cannulas were administered single oral doses of the BACE inhibitor MBI-4 (10 mg/kg, 30 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg; N=3/dose level) and a vehicle control (N=3) (0.4% hydroxypropylmethylcellulose )  as described previously (Kennedy et al., 2016). CSF collected in that study at time points of -24, -1, 12 and 24 h relative to compound dosing was taken for MS analysis. Time points were based on the CSF Abeta and sAPPbeta biomarker profiles previously described (Kennedy et al., 2016). Overall, 48 samples were subjected to proteolytic digestion and LC-MS analysis. 50 µL of each CSF sample was enzymatically digested with 0.5 µg LysC and 0.5 µg trypsin using the filter assisted sample preparation (FASP). Subsequently, the proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction (STAGE) with C18 tips. The purified peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. Peptide yield was estimated by absorption at 280 nm using a nanoDrop photometer (Thermo Scientific, US). Each sample was analyzed by LCMS analysis. A peptide amount of 1 µg was separated on a nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US) using an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size, Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US) with a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 5 min., 5% B; 185 min., 25% B; 230 min, 35% B; 250 min, 60% B; 255 min., 95% B; 270 min., 95% B) at 55°C column temperature. The nanoLC was coupled online via an Easy spray (Proxeon – part of Thermo Scientific, US) electrospray ion source to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 2.0×104 were chosen for collision induced dissociation. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion of 60 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed by the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 1.5.0.12 92. The MS data was searched against a reverse concatenated fasta database including isoforms of Macaca mulatta from UniProt (download: July 23rd 2014, 35572 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-terminus as well as oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Csf, Cerebrospinal fluid, Beta secretase, Alzheimer's disease, Bace

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 München Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 München Germany


