### Accession
PXD042680

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Streptococcus mutans after RpoA-K173R mutation

### Description
Functional experiments have found a significant increase in EPS synthesis upon the elimination of lactylation at RpoA Lys173. Thus we investigated the regulatory mechanisms by proteomic approah.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction After 24h growing in the media with sucrose, the cells were collected by centrifugation and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were placed in ground liquid nitrogen to break the cell wall. Four times the volume of lysis buffer (8M urea, 1% proteinase inhibitor cocktail, 3 μM trichostatin A, 50 mM nicotinamide) was added to resuspend them. The samples were then sonicated and centrifuged (12000 × g at 4 ℃ for 10 min) for removing cellular debris. The supernatants were transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was determined a with bicinchoninia acid (BCA) kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, JiangSu, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion The same amount of protein from each sample was separated for digestion. One volume of precooled acetone was initially added to the samples. Four times the volume of acetone was then added after mixing thoroughly with a vortex and allowing them to precipitate at -20 ℃ for 2 h. Then, centrifugation was performed for 5 min, and the supernatants were discarded. The precipitation was washed twice with precooled acetone. Next, 200 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) was added to dry precipitation and sonicate for dispersion. Trypsin was added at a 1:50 (trypsin: protein) mass ratio and digested overnight at 37 ℃. The peptides were then reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide in darThe peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) and a NanoElute UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for separation. The gradient comprised 6%–22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) in 0–40 min, 22%–30% in 40–52 min, 30%–80% in 52–56 min, climbing to 80% in 56–60 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min. The eluted peptides were subjected to a capillary nanospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in timesTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics). The electrospray voltage applied was 1.65 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed using the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range of 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro tool was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states of 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 times of PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 24 s.  Database search

### Data Protocol
Database search Fragmentation data were then processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.15.0) against the Blast Streptococcus mutans serotype C (UA159/ATCC700610) containing 1,953 sequences and concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to four missing cleavages and 5 modifications per peptide. The mass error for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 20 ppm for the main search. The mass error for fragment ions was set to 20ppm. Peptides with a length of at least seven amino acid residues were used for further analysis. Carbamidomethyl Cys was specified as fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-terminal, lysine malnoylation and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) threshold for proteins, peptides, and the spectrum was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, lactate produced during glycolysis is involved in regulating multiple metabolic processes through lysine lactylation (Kla). To explore the potential link between metabolism and Kla in prokaryotes, we investigated the distribution of Kla in the cariogenic bacterium <i>Streptococcus mutans</i> during planktonic growth in low-sugar conditions and in biofilm-promoting, high-sugar conditions. We identified 1869 Kla sites in 469 proteins under these two conditions, with the biofilm growth state showing a greater number of lactylated sites and proteins. Although high sugar increased Kla globally, it reduced lactylation of RNA polymerase subunit &#x3b1; (RpoA) at Lys<sup>173</sup>. Lactylation at this residue inhibited the synthesis of extracellular polysaccharides, a major constituent of the cariogenic biofilm. The Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) superfamily enzyme GNAT13 exhibited lysine lactyltransferase activity in cells and lactylated Lys<sup>173</sup> in RpoA in vitro. Either GNAT13 overexpression or lactylation of Lys<sup>173</sup> in RpoA inhibited biofilm formation. These results provide an overview of the distribution and potential functions of Kla and improve our understanding of the role of lactate in the metabolic regulation of prokaryotes.

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Streptococcus mutans

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University
Sichuan university

### Submitter
Xian Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Xian Peng
Sichuan university


