### Accession
PXD018143

### Title
Human nucleolar RNA pol I interacting proteins identified by immuno-precipitation and mass spectrometry

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a highly regulated multistep process that controls cell growth and proliferation. The first and key regulatory step of ribosome biogenesis is represented by the transcription of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes by RNA polymerase (pol) I in the nucleolus. Activity of RNA pol I is tightly regulated by interactions with many auxiliary factors that mediate promoter recognition and contribute to transcription initiation, elongation and termination. In this study we were able to identify by mass spectrometry some of the known components of the RNA pol I transcribing machinery, and at the same time we identify some novel interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Nucleoli from human HCT116 cells were purified as described by Andersen et al. (Andersen, J.S., Lam, Y.W., Leung, A.K., Ong, S.E., Lyon, C.E., Lamond, A.I. and Mann, M. (2005) Nucleolar proteome dynamics. Nature, 433, 77-83.). For mass-spectrometry (MS) analysis, RNA pol I subunit RP4194 was immunoprecipitated from nucleolar extracts of HCT116 cells. Immunoprecipitation with normal IgGs was performed as negative control. Co-immunoprecipitated complexes were eluted by incubation in 5% SDS in PBS at 95°C. Afterwards samples were reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55°C for 30 min., and alkylated with chloroacetamide (CAA) 40 mM for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. 2 µl (10 µg/µl) of a 1:1 mix of the Hydrophilic and hydrophobic Sera-Mag carboxylate-modified magnetic particles (GE Healthcare) were added to the reduced samples and then acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a 50% final concentration. The samples were then incubated at room temperature for 8 min and placed on a magnetic rack for 2 min. Supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 70% Ethanol (EtOH) and once with 100% ACN. The beads were then air-dried and reconstituted in 5µl of trypsin and LysC, 0.1 µg/µl in 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C. Afterwards, ACN was added to 95% final concentration and the samples were incubated at room temperature for 8 min and then placed on a magnetic rack for 3 min. Supernatants were removed and the beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 100% ACN. Peptides were eluted from the beads by the addition 9 µl 4% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and sonication for 5 min. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack and the supernatants were transferred to new tubes. This step was repeated once to ensure complete removal of magnetic beads. Peptides were acidified by the addition of 1 µl 10% formic acid and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analysis. All samples wereanalyzed on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm —75 μm I.D., filled with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) that was operated at 50°C using a constant flowrate of 250 nl/min. with the following gradient: 240 min. 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 40min, 30-50% solvent B within 8 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. Peptide precursors were dynamically excluded for 10 sec. MS1 survey scans were acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing maximum injection times of 110 ms (60 min gradient). Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant15 (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Originally identified as an RNA polymerase II interactor, Che-1/AATF (Che-1) has now been recognized as a multifunctional protein involved in cell-cycle regulation and cancer progression, as well as apoptosis inhibition and response to stress. This protein displays a peculiar nucleolar localization and it has recently been implicated in pre-rRNA processing and ribosome biogenesis. Here, we report the identification of a novel function of Che-1 in the regulation of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) synthesis, in both cancer and normal cells. We demonstrate that Che-1 interacts with RNA polymerase I and nucleolar upstream binding factor (UBF) and promotes RNA polymerase I-dependent transcription. Furthermore, this protein binds to the rRNA gene (rDNA) promoter and modulates its epigenetic state by contrasting the recruitment of HDAC1. Che-1 downregulation affects RNA polymerase I and UBF recruitment on rDNA and leads to reducing rDNA promoter activity and 47S pre-rRNA production. Interestingly, Che-1 depletion induces abnormal nucleolar morphology associated with re-distribution of nucleolar proteins. Finally, we show that upon DNA damage Che-1 re-localizes from rDNA to TP53 gene promoter to induce cell-cycle arrest. This previously uncharacterized function of Che-1 confirms the important role of this protein in the regulation of ribosome biogenesis, cellular proliferation and response to stress.

### Keywords
Human rnapoli interactors from nucleoli

### Affiliations
Uniklinik Köln
University of Cologne - Internal Medicine II

### Submitter
Francesca Fabretti

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer
University of Cologne - Internal Medicine II


