### Accession
PXD042385

### Title
Trace sample analysis using Data-Dependent Acquisition Without Dynamic Exclusion

### Description
In this study, we report the application of turboDDA in improving trace sample analysis. Using different amount of K562 samples, we detected increases in identified protein number of more than 20% compared to all samples analyzed by standard DDA with dynamic exclusion.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were directly loaded at 800 nL/min onto 15 cm 100 μm ID emitter tips packed in-house with 3.5 μm Reprosil C18 (Dr. Maische). The peptides were eluted from the column at 400 nL/min over a 90 min gradient generated by a 425 NanoLC (Eksigent, Redwood, CA, USA) and analyzed on a TripleTOF 6600 instrument (AB SCIEX, Concord, Ontario, Canada). The gradient started at 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and increased to 35% acetonitrile over 90 min, followed by a 15 min wash at 80% acetonitrile and a 15 min equilibration at 2% acetonitrile, for a total of 120 min. Each sample was analyzed on a TripleTOF 6600 in DDA mode with and without DE. DDA with DE consisted of one 250 ms MS1 TOF survey scan from 400–1250 Da followed by 10 × 100 ms MS2 candidate ion scans from 100–1800 Da in high sensitivity mode. Only ions with a charge of 2+ to 5+ that exceeded a threshold of 300 cps were selected for MS2, and former precursors were excluded for 7 s after one occurrence. For DDA mode without DE, precursors that exceeded a threshold of 100 cps were selected for MS2 and 100 × 30 ms MS2 candidate ion scans from 100–1800 Da were acquired in high sensitivity mode, using the same acquisition parameters otherwise.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data generated were stored, searched, and analyzed using the ProHits laboratory information management system platform. Within ProHits, WIFF files were converted to an MGF format using the WIFF2MGF converter and to a mzML format using ProteoWizard (V3.0.10702) and the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter (V1.3 beta). The data were then searched using Mascot (V2.3.02) and Comet (V2016.01 rev.2). The spectra were searched against the human and adenovirus sequences in the RefSeq database (version 57, January 30th, 2013) acquired from NCBI, supplemented with “common contaminants” from the Max Planck Institute (http://lotus1.gwdg.de/mpg/mmbc/maxquant_input.nsf/7994124a4298328fc125748d0048fee2/$FILE/contaminants.fasta) and the Global Proteome Machine (GPM; https://www.thegpm.org/crap/), forward and reverse sequences (labeled “gi|9999” or “DECOY”), sequence tags (BirA, GST26, mCherry, and green fluorescent protein (GFP)) and streptavidin, for a total of 72,481 entries. Database parameters were set to search for tryptic cleavages, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites per peptide with a mass tolerance of 35 ppm for precursors with charges of 2+ to 4+ and a tolerance of 0.15 amu for fragment ions. Deamidated asparagine and glutamine and oxidized methionine were selected as variable modifications. Results from each search engine were analyzed through the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v.4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 1) via the iProphet pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Despite continuous technological improvements in sample preparation, mass-spectrometry-based proteomics for trace samples faces the challenges of sensitivity, quantification accuracy, and reproducibility. Herein, we explored the applicability of turboDDA (a method that uses data-dependent acquisition without dynamic exclusion) for quantitative proteomics of trace samples. After systematic optimization of acquisition parameters, we compared the performance of turboDDA with that of data-dependent acquisition with dynamic exclusion (DEDDA). By benchmarking the analysis of trace unlabeled human cell digests, turboDDA showed substantially better sensitivity in comparison with DEDDA, whether for unfractionated or high pH fractionated samples. Furthermore, through designing an iTRAQ-labeled three-proteome model (i.e., tryptic digest of protein lysates from yeast, human, and <i>E. coli</i>) to document the interference effect, we evaluated the quantification interference, accuracy, reproducibility of iTRAQ labeled trace samples, and the impact of PIF (precursor intensity fraction) cutoff for different approaches (turboDDA and DEDDA). The results showed that improved quantification accuracy and reproducibility could be achieved by turboDDA, while a more stringent PIF cutoff resulted in more accurate quantification but less peptide identification for both approaches. Finally, the turboDDA strategy was applied to the differential analysis of limited amounts of human lung cancer cell samples, showing great promise in trace proteomics sample analysis.

### Keywords
K562, High ph fractionation, De-dda, Turbodda

### Affiliations
Clinical Reaseach center for Reproduction and Genetics in Hunan Province, Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of CITIC-XIANGYA, Changsha, Hunan, China
Research specialist

### Submitter
Ci Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Shen Zhang
Clinical Reaseach center for Reproduction and Genetics in Hunan Province, Reproductive and Genetic Hospital of CITIC-XIANGYA, Changsha, Hunan, China


