### Accession
PXD005156

### Title
Discovery of gastric cancer-specific biomarkers by the application of serum proteomics

### Description
The aims of this study are to compare the proteomes of serum samples from patients with gastric cancers and normal controls, and to develop useful tumor markers of gastric cancer by quantitative proteomic analysis

### Sample Protocol
MARS was used to remove the top 6 abundant proteins in the serum to reduce complexity, including albumin, transferrin, IgF, IgA, anti-trypsin, and haptoglobin, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We applied 200μg of depleted serum samples onto a C4 column (250 mm x 4.5 mm, Grace Vydac, Deerfield, IL, USA) packed with C4 (5 µm, 200Å) reversed phase resin and separated by RP-HPLC. A linear gradient of 3-50% buffer B over 45 min was performed and followed by 50-90% buffer B over 10 min (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 μL/min. In total, 60 fractions were collected via the flow-through in 250 μL fractions, using a fraction collector at one-minute intervals for 70 min of run time. Finally, all of the fractions were pooled into 30 fractions and lyophilized using a Speed-Vac and suspended with 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ammonium bicarbonate) for in-solution tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched using SEQUEST search engine (rev. 3.3.1 sp1, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) and X! Tandem (GPMDB, Canada) by the target decoy search strategy with the human database from NCBI (which included 33,458 human protein sequence entries for peptide identification. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. The variable modification of methionine oxidation and the fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine were assigned as the search parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Current diagnostic markers for gastric cancer are not sufficiently specific or sensitive for use in clinical practice. The aims of this study are to compare the proteomes of serum samples from patients with gastric cancers and normal controls, and to develop useful tumor markers of gastric cancer by quantitative proteomic analysis. We identified a total of 388 proteins with a &#x2264;1% FDR and with at least two unique peptides from the sera of each group. Among them, 215, 251, and 260 proteins were identified in serum samples of patients in an advanced cancer group, early cancer group, and normal control group, respectively. We selected differentially expressed proteins in cancer patients compared with those of normal controls via semiquantitative analyses comparing the spectral counts of identified proteins. These differentially expressed proteins were successfully verified using an MS-based quantitative assay, multiple reactions monitoring analysis. Four proteins (vitronectin, clusterin isoform 1, thrombospondin 1, and tyrosine-protein kinase SRMS) were shown to have significant changes between the cancer groups and the normal control group. These four serum proteins were able to discriminate gastric cancer patients from normal controls with sufficient specificity and selectivity.

### Keywords
Human, Biomarker, Serum, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Applied Chemistry College of Applied Sciences, Kyung Hee University
KHU

### Submitter
Joon won Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang Pyo Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry College of Applied Sciences, Kyung Hee University


