### Accession
PXD012085

### Title
bovine liver iTRAQ -  Integrative hepatic metabolomics and proteomics reveal insights into the mechanism of different feed efficiency with high or low dietary forage levels in Holstein heifers

### Description
12 Holstein dairy heifers were limit-fed with high or low forage diets, and integrative hepatic metabolomics and proteomics were used to reveal insights into the mechanism of different feed efficiency behind that.

### Sample Protocol
Liver biopsies (500–1000 mg) from each heifer were obtained after local anesthesia by percutaneous needle biopsy 28 days after feeding. Tissues were ground separately with a −20℃ pre-cooled pestle and mortar in the presence of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate, and proteasome inhibitor). The samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4℃. The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined using a Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Shanghai Beyotime Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Filter-aided proteome preparation was performed according to a previous report. Proteins were reduced with DL-dithiothreitol (final concentration of 20 mM) at 37℃ for 1 h. Then, the sample was alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and kept in the dark for 1 h at room temperature. Finally, the proteins were digested on filters with a 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio at 37℃ for 12 h. Digested fractions were collected and stored at −80℃ without further treatment until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot_Bovin_170221 (Bos taurus) database for peptide identification and quantification using Sequest HT and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). The parameters were set as follows: 1) proteins with at least two unique peptides and false discovery rate (FDR, q-value) < 0.01; 2) peptide mass tolerance of ± 15 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da; 3) enzyme specificity set as trypsin, with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed; 4) methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications; 5) carbamidomethyl (C) and iTRAQ 8-plex on N-terminal residue, lysine (K), and tyrosine (Y) as fixed modifications; 6) proteins quantified based on the total intensity of the assigned peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Feed efficiency (FE) can be affected by dietary composition, management, and metabolic conditions. The liver is the central metabolic organ in cattle; however, specific metabolic changes in the liver under different dietary forage levels have not been clarified. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the hepatic physiology mechanisms of high or low dietary forage levels (80% or 20% forage, namely S80 and S20) on FE in dairy heifers using integrative metabolomic and proteomic methods. Feed efficiency was lower in the S80 group than the S20 group. A total of 29 metabolites and 60 proteins were significantly different between the liver samples of the two groups. Fourteen selected proteins were analyzed using parallel reaction monitoring to confirm the reliability of proteomic analysis. Integrative functional analysis of differentially expressed metabolites/proteins confirmed the enhanced hepatic ability of fatty acid oxidation, amino acid metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway, gluconeogenesis, ketone bodies synthesis, and oxidative stress defense in the S80 heifers. These metabolic pathways are associated with FE in ruminants. Thus, our results suggested that the aforementioned metabolic pathways may be responsible for the reduced FE in heifers fed high levels of forage. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Improving the efficiency of animal production is a continuously urgent mission of all agricultural producers. Limit-feeding high concentrate diets to heifers is considered as an effective way to improve feed efficiency in heifers' raising, which can not only decrease the feeding and management cost but also relieve some environmental problems. However, the detailed metabolic and physiological changes and mechanisms associated with this strategy remain to be further characterized even some transcriptomics and microbiology work have been done. For extending the knowledge towards this strategy, an integrative metabolomic and proteomic method was used to investigate the hepatic physiology mechanisms of high or low dietary forage levels on feed efficiency in dairy heifers. Enhanced hepatic ability of fatty acid oxidation, amino acid metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway, gluconeogenesis, ketone bodies synthesis, and oxidative stress defense were found in high forage consumed heifers, which were all related to energy utilization in ruminants and might be responsible for the reduced feed efficiency. Understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating the hepatic metabolism in high or low forage fed heifers may help to design alternative feeding or management strategies that improve feed efficiency.

### Keywords
Bovine, Liver, Itraq

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Beijing Engineering Technology Research Center of Raw Milk Quality and Safety Control, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, P. R. China
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jun Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yajing Wang
State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Beijing Engineering Technology Research Center of Raw Milk Quality and Safety Control, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, P. R. China


