### Accession
PXD010539

### Title
Data in support of proteomics of EVs ámd mimetic vesicles from

### Description
Exosomes (EXOs) are a biological subset of extracellular vesicles of 50-200 nm in size which are released by most cells upon fusion of multivehicular bodies with plasma membrane.Mimetic-Nanovesicles (M-NVs) have higher yield compare to exosomes. In addition, M-NVs can untangle the difficulties associated with the isolation and purification of cell culture exosomes. M-NVs is consist of membranouslipid bilayer  which could be derived from extrusion of cells through filter membrane. Several studies have used M-NVs for therapeutic delivery of genetic materials and drug. The proteomic content of these vesicles with regard to protein identities and post-translational modifications remain uncharacterized and proteomic data is presented in this dataset.

### Sample Protocol
Fraction 6 of the M-NVs and collected exosomes(exos) were lysed in 0.1 % RapiGest in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate by 2 min sonication and incubation at 95 °C for 5 min. Reduction and alkylation was performed by adding 12.5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 12.5 mM chloroacetamide, respectively with 30 min incubation at 37 °C followed by tryptic digestion (2 µg, Pierce™) overnight. The digests were then vacuum centrifugation and storages at -20 °C.  The whole cell samples were lysed in 1:1 volume of PBS and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate using same methods as the exos and M-NV. Protein concentration was determined by protein A280 using BSA as standard (ThermoSci Nanogrop GS200). 100 µg from each sample was transferred to Microcon-10kDa Centrifugal Filter Units, where buffer exchanges to 0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate using centrifugation. The reduction, alkylation and digestion were performed as with the exos and M-NV. After digestion the peptides was collected by centrifugation and collection of the flow-trough. SDC removal was performed as in (Innate Immun. 2017 Aug;23(6):524-536. doi: 10.1177/1753425917719995.) and stored at -20 °C..   The samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA, 0.1% TFA. A peptide pool was made group wise using 2 µl from each sample. The samples were then analysed per LC-MS analysis, in a random sample order and duplicates of the pooled was distributed, so a pool was analysed every seventh run. The samples were analysed using a UPLC-nanoESI MS/MS setup with a NanoRSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The system was coupled online with an emitter for nanospray ionization (New objective picotip 360-20-10) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptide material was loaded onto a 2 cm trapping reversed phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Dionex), and separated using an analytical 75 cm reversed phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Dionex). Both columns were kept at 60°C. The sample was eluted with a gradient of 96% solvent A (0.1% FA) and 4% solvent B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN), which was increased to 10% solvent B on a 1 minutes ramp gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Subsequently, the gradient was raised to 50% solvent B, on a 60 min ramp gradient for exos and M-NV samples and 90 min for cell samples. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode, selecting up to 6 precursor ions for general samples and 15 precursor ions for the pooled samples, both with a mass window of m/z 1.6 based on highest intensity for HCD fragmenting, at a normalized collision energy of 27. Selected precursors were dynamically excluded for fragmentation for 6 sec.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the MS raw-files of the samples and pooled samples were searched in MaxQuant ((Cox and Mann 2008);v1.5.8.3 using standard setting including match-between-runs against UP000005640 Homo sapiens UP000005640 Homo sapiens Uniprot database (2/22/2017, 20.347 proteins) and reversed database for FDR investigation. Cell samples was searched separate from the M-NV and Exos. All standard settings were employed with carbamidomethyl (C) as a static modification as well as protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. All proteins are reported below 1% FDR. The output was processed using R((R Core Team 2015);v3.4.3). Initially, all reverse hits were removed, non-zero quantitation value in more than half of the samples was required for a further processing. A venn diagram was generated to compare the proteins identified. The label free quantification data was filtered for two unique peptides or more, non-zero quantitation value in more than half of the samples group wise and then log2-transformed.   Principle component analysis (PCA)(R Core Team 2015) including all three groups was performed, where miss values was dealt with by multivariate imputation by chained equations using predictive mean matching(Buuren and Groothuis-Oudshoorn 2011). Relative quantification comparison between M-NV and Exos was made in R as well, where all the data were included and filtered as mentioned earlier. The technical replicates were then averaged and a hierarchical clustering analysis (HCA) was made, where miss values was dealt with as mentioned before. To investigate the differences in the expression of proteins between the two groups, unpaired two-tailed t-tests were performed and the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used to adjust the p-value for multiple testing correction(R Core Team 2015). Significant ± 1 log2 differences were used for further analysis and a volcano plot was made to illustrate how the protein content differs in the Exos compared to M-NV and the significant changes is highlighted. GO annotation in FunRich ((Pathan et al. 2017); v3.1.3) was made and compared using the significant enriched proteins in the two groups from the R processing. Using a literature based generated list of proteins associated to exosome and exosome function, the associated significantly enriched protein was isolated in R, and their label free expression values was plotted in a heatmap in order of their associations. Unique proteins were found using the restrictions that the protein was to be found quantifiable in all biological replicates of one group and none in the other. These was investigated using the literature-based list as well.    Protein Translational Modification Identification and Quantitation Data Analysis For protein translational modification identification, the MS raw-files of the samples and pooled samples from M-NV and Exos were searched in PEAKS ((Zhang et al. 2012); v8.5) against the Homo sapiens Uniprot database mentioned earlier. In the initial PTM search, all standard settings were employed with carbamidomethyl (C) as a static modification and oxidation (M) as variable modifications for the database search. The PTM identification was used with standard settings as well. The most abundant modification was then search separately in database searches as variable modifications to ensure full coverages. All modifications reported are with FDR below 1% and annotation score (A) > 20 (Zhang et al. 2012). The label free modification outputs were combined and processed using prior mentioned R. Common contaminants were removed and the ratio between modified and unmodified peptides was calculated and log2 transformed as well as non-zero quantitation value in more than half of the samples was required for a further analysis. HCA analysis was made on the averaged technical replicates, and missing values was dealt with using same procedure as for the protein quantification data. Significant differences between the two groups found using same procedure as for the protein quantification data. The significantly enriched PTMs was ordered by PTMs, where from a heatmap to illustrate the distribution by colour coding sidebar was made. The proteins with significant regulated PTMs was then annotated using the generated list of proteins associated to exosome and exosome function to see if any was exosome related. RAW data file structure are cells (1,3); EV (2,4,5) folowed by replicate number and maxQuant search output txt folder zipped ínto one file.

### Publication Abstract
Issues associated with upscaling exosome production for therapeutic use may be overcome through utilizing artificial exosomes. Cell-derived mimetic nanovesicles (M-NVs) are a potentially promising alternative to exosomes for clinical applicability, demonstrating higher yield without incumbent production and isolation issues. Although several studies have shown that M-NVs have similar morphology, size and therapeutic potential compared to exosomes, comprehensive characterization and to what extent M-NVs components mimic exosomes remain elusive. M-NVs were generated through the extrusion of cells and proteomic profiling demonstrated an enrichment of proteins associated with membrane and cytosolic components. The proteomic data herein reveal a subset of proteins that are highly abundant in M-NVs in comparison to exosomes. M-NVs contain proteins that largely represent the parental cell proteome, whereas the profile of exosomal proteins highlight their endosomally derived origin. This advantage of M-NVs alleviates the necessity of endosomal sorting of endogenous therapeutic proteins or RNA into exosomes. This study also highlights differences in protein post-translational modifications among M-NVs, as distinct from exosomes. Overall this study provides key insights into defining the proteome composition of M-NVs as a distinct from exosomes, and the potential advantage of M-NVs as an alternative nanocarrier when spontaneous endosomal sorting of therapeutics are limited.

### Keywords
Microvesicles proteomics

### Affiliations
laboratory for medical massspectrometry
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
laboratory for medical massspectrometry


