### Accession
PXD004665

### Title
Jurkat 2D-LC-MS/MS -  Enzyme Kinetics for Complex System Enables Accurate Determination of Specificity Constants of Numerous Substrates in a Mixture by Proteomics Platform

### Description
We found the ratio of substrate depletion is independent of other coexisted substrates under specific condition with the application of self-developed iteration approach. The further established simplified model was applied to determine the catalytic efficiencies of peptide substrates of a protease in a complex reaction system.

### Sample Protocol
The enzyme kinetics experiments were performed by incubating the obtained tryptic peptides with Glu-C for different reaction times. The tryptic digest (50 μg) was dissolved in 4 mL of buffer (pH 8.09) containing 50 mM HEPES-NaOH. Glu-C (16 μg) was added for hydrolysis at 37 °C. After digested for 30 and 60 min, aliquots (1.6 mL) of samples were removed from the reaction tube respectively. To prevent the further digestion, formic acid (10 μL) was added to drop the pH of the mixture below 2. Another sample was prepared as the internal standard with the addition of 40 μg Glu-C and incubated at 37 °C for 20 h. Then, the three samples above were desalted by SPE column, lyophilized, dissolved in HEPES-NaOH (200 μL, pH 8.09) and labeled with light, intermediate and heavy dimethyl, respectively for quantitative proteomics analysis.For the 2D-LC-MS/MS system, a capillary monolithic column (5 cm×200 μm) with phosphate functional groups was applied as an SCX trap column in the first dimension. Peptide samples were redissolved in 0.1% FA in water and automatically loaded onto the monolithic SCX trap column, and then the trap column was equilibrated with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water for 10 min. After that, a series of stepwise elution with salt concentrations of 100, 200, 300, 500, 1000 mM NH4Ac were applied to elute peptides from the SCX monolithic column to the second dimensional analytical column. Each elution lasted 15 min and followed by equilibrium by 0.1% FA in water for additional 10 min. Each elution step was followed by a subsequent RP-LC-MS/MS analysis with a 127 min gradient from 5-35% ACN. For the RPLC separation, 0.1% FA in water and in acetonitrile were used as mobile phases A and B, and the separation capillary column with a 75 μm i.d. was in-house packed with C18 particles (3 μm, 120 Å) to 14 cm length. The MS analysis was performed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo, San Jose, CA) at a resolution of 60 000. The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set at 250 °C. The parameters were set as: ion spray voltage, 2.0 kV; MS range, 400-2000 m/z at a resolution of 60 000; normalized collision energy, 35%; the 20 most intense precursors were selected for subsequent fragmentation (CID) using a data-dependent acquisition mode. The dynamic exclusion settings: repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, and exclusion duration 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files generated by the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos were analyzed with software MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5, which were developed by Matthias Mann’s lab. The MS/MS spectras were searched against the Uniprot human database (released on December 11, 2013 and containing 88473 protein sequences), supplemented by frequently observed contaminants, and concatenated with reversed versions of all sequences. Mixed Glu-C and trypsin specificity (KR/P, DE) was adopted, and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Carbamidomethyl was chosen for fixed modifications, and oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modifications. The maximum false-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The mass tolerances for the precursor ions and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. For quantification, stable isotope dimethyl labeling, different quantification modes (light, intermediate and heavy) were selected, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Many important experiments in proteomics including protein digestion, enzyme substrate screening, enzymatic labeling, etc., involve the enzymatic reactions in a complex system where numerous substrates coexists with an enzyme. However, the enzyme kinetics in such a system remains unexplored and poorly understood. Herein, we derived and validated the kinetics equations for the enzymatic reactions in complex system. We developed an iteration approach to depict the enzymatic reactions in complex system. It was validated by 630 time-course points from 24 enzymatic reaction experiments and was demonstrated to be a powerful tool to simulate the reactions in the complex system. By applying this approach, we found that the ratio of substrate depletion is independent of other coexisted substrates under specific condition. This observation was then validated by experiments. Based on this striking observation, a simplified model was developed to determine the catalytic efficiencies of numerous competing substrates presented in the complex enzyme reaction system. When coupled with high-throughput quantitative proteomics technique, this simplified model enabled the accurate determination of catalytic efficiencies for 2369 peptide substrates of a protease by using only one enzymatic reaction experiment. Thus, this study provided, in the first time, a validated model for the large scale determination of specificity constants which could enable the enzyme substrate screening approach turned from a qualitative method of identifying substrates to a quantitative method of identifying and prioritizing substrates. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004665.

### Keywords
Catalytic efficiency, Jurkat, Glu-c

### Affiliations
Dalian institue of chemical physics
Division of Biotechnology,Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics,Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Zhenzhen Deng

### Lab Head
Dr Mingliang Ye
Division of Biotechnology,Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics,Chinese Academy of Sciences


