### Accession
PXD007000

### Title
p62 sustains a protumorigenic gene signature in melanoma opposing mRNA-dependent decay

### Description
p62/SQSTM1 was identified as a modulator of metastatic genes selectively enriched in melanoma in autophagy independent manner. iTRAQ quantitative proteomic approach was performed in melanoma cell lines (SK-Mel-103 and UACC-62) deficient for p62 to identify downstream effectors of p62. Similar studies were performed for ATG5, a core component of autophagy, as a reference for autophagy-associated changes in protein abundance. Additionally, melanoma cells were subjected to affinity purification (AP-MS) to identify the interactors of p62. Overall, these studies underscore a novel unexpected role of p62 regulating the stability of prometastatic factors via the interaction with RNA Binding Proteins, thus leading to the inhibition of protein translation.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (wm164, wm164, SK-MEL-28, x, SK-MEL-147, z, 451LU, Y) were digested using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol1. Briefly, the equivalent to 60 µg of each sample was loaded on the filter, reduced 10 mM DTT  and alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested overnight using endoproteinase Lys-C (1:50) and trypsin (1:100) for 6h . Each tryptic digest was labeled according to the manufacturer's instructions (AB Sciex) with one 8-plex isobaric amine-reactive tag per cell line. After two hours of incubation, labeled samples were pooled, and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. The iTRAQ sample was cleaned up using a Sep- Pak C18 cartridge.Peptides were fractionated in 24 fractions using offgel technique.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by on-line reversed-phase nanoscale capillary LC and analyzed by electrospray MS/MS. The Impact (Bruker Daltonics) was coupled online to a nanoLC Ultra system (Eksigent. The MS acquisition time used for each sample was 155 min. The QqTOF Impact was operated in a data dependent mode. The spray voltage was set to 1.35 kV (1868 nA) and the temperature of the source was set to 150º C. The MS survey scan was performed at a spectra rate of 2.5 Hz in the TOF analyzer scanning a window between 150 and 1600 m/z. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to a normalized threshold of 500 counts. The 20 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 and m/z > 350 from the survey scan were sequentially isolated with an isolation window of 2 m/z and fragmented in the collision cell by collision induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 23 – 56 eV  as function of the m/z value. MS/MS accumulation times were corrected in function of the measured precursor MS intensities. The m/z values triggering MS/MS with a repeat count of 1 were put on an exclusion list for 30 s using the rethinking option. Raw files were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot isoform human database (41171 entries) using SequestHT as the search engine through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) software. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was included as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was included as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 30 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.075 Da. Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were validated with Percolator and filtered to 1% FDR (peptide-level).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Itraq, Melanoma cell lines

### Affiliations
Cnio
Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Spain.

### Submitter
Nuria Ibarz

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Spain.


