### Accession
PXD000774

### Title
Mitral Valve Tissue Shotgun Proteomics

### Description
In this study, we carried out a large-scale proteome profiling of human mitral valve tissues resected from patients with mitral valve prolapse.

### Sample Protocol
The mitral valve tissues were ground using a Sample Grinding kit  with lysis solution consisting of 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 10mM Tris, 50ug/ml DNase I, 50ug/ml RNase A and protease inhibitor cocktail. Each sample was then centrifuged at 106,120 x g for 2hrs at 15oC to remove the resin and cellular debris. 100μg of proteins from each tissue lysate were digested using trypsin. The peptide digest of each samples were then subjected to clean-up and desalting using a strong cation exchange cartridge and a Sep-Pak cartridge. The peptide separation was carried out on an Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra and cHiPLC-Nanoflex system. The sample was loaded on a 200μm x 0.5mm trap column and eluted on a 75μm×150mm analytical column. Both trap and analytical columns were made of Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3μm. The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 LC-MS/MS system in Information Dependent Mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 400-1800m/z in high resolution mode (>30000) using 250ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 20 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum with 100ms minimum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 15s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution >15000) with rolling collision energy on.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out on the ProteinPilot 4.5 software using the Paragon database search algorithm and the integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function. The data were searched using the Swiss-Prot human database (released on June, 2013; 40,514 entries). The search parameters applied in the ProteinPilot software were: Sample Type as Identification; Cys alkylation by MMTS; Digestion by trypsin; Species as Homo sapiens. The processing method included ID Focus, Biological Modifications, and Thorough Search. For FDR determination, the MS/MS data were searched against a database generated by in silico reversal of Swiss-Prot human (released on June 2013) automatically by the ProteinPilot software for decoy sequences. The detected protein threshold [Unused ProtScore (Conf)] in the software was set at 1.30 to achieve at least 95% confidence. The identified proteins were grouped by the ProGroup algorithm in the software to minimize redundancy. Only proteins at ≤1% global FDR and distinct peptides at ≤5% local FDR were selected for further analysis. In addition, the proteins must be matched to at least two peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Degenerative mitral valve disease (DMVD), which includes the syndromes of mitral valve prolapse (MVP) and flail leaflet, is a common valvular condition which can be complicated by mitral regurgitation and adverse cardiovascular outcomes. Although several genetic and other studies of MVP in dog models have provided some information regarding the underlying disease mechanisms, the proteins and molecular events mediating human MVP pathogenesis have not been unraveled. In this study, we report the first large-scale proteome profiling of mitral valve tissue resected from patients with MVP. A total of 1134 proteins were identified, some of which were validated using SWATH-MS and western blotting. GO annotation of these proteins confirmed the validity of this proteome database in various cardiovascular processes. Among the list of proteins, we found several structural and extracellular matrix proteins, such as asporin, biglycan, decorin, lumican, mimecan, prolargin, versican, and vinculin, that have putative roles in the pathophysiology of MVP. These proteins could also be involved in the cardiac remodeling associated with mitral regurgitation. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000774 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000774).

### Keywords
Tissue, Mitral valve, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Biochemistry, YLL School of Medicine, NUS

### Submitter
Hwee Tong Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Hwee Tong Tan
Biochemistry, YLL School of Medicine, NUS


