### Accession
PXD041792

### Title
BioID screening experiment to map proteins linked to PHYHD1

### Description
PHYHD1 is a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase. To shed light on the cellular function of human PHYHD1, we performed a BioID screening experiment to map proteins linked to PHYHD1 functionally. For that, we used HEK293T cells transiently expressing either BirA* or BirA*-tagged PHYHD1 in the absence or presence of biotin.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the endogenous proteins promiscuously biotinylated by BirA*- PHYHD1, streptavidin-coupled magnetic beads were used to purify biotinylated proteins (as described by Roux et al,2012 (PMID: 22412018) which were then analysed by mass spectrometry (MS). In brief, on-bead trypsinolysis was followed by peptide desalting with a Sep-Pak C18 96-well plate (Waters) and vacuum centrifugation to lyophilize peptides, which were stored at -20 ⁰C. The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 3 μm 120 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) or acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A 50 min gradient was used to elute peptides (in 28 min from 5% to 21% solvent B, in 22 min from 21 % to 36 % solvent B, followed by wash stage with 100% of solvent B).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by a data independent acquisition (DIA) LC-MS/MS method. MS data was acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each duty cycle contained one full scan (400–1000 m/z) and 25 DIA MS/MS scans covering the mass range 400–1000 with variable width isolation windows. Direct DIA data analysis was performed with Spectronaut software (Biognosys; version 16.0.220606.53000). DirectDIA approach was used to identify proteins and label-free quantifications were performed with MaxLF.Q

### Publication Abstract
Human phytanoyl-CoA dioxygenase domain-containing 1 (PHYHD1) is a 2-oxoglutarate (2OG)-dependent dioxygenase implicated in Alzheimer's disease, some cancers, and immune cell functions. The substrate, kinetic and inhibitory properties, function and subcellular localization of PHYHD1 are unknown. We used recombinant expression and enzymatic, biochemical, biophysical, cellular and microscopic assays for their determination. The apparent K<sub>m</sub> values of PHYHD1 for 2OG, Fe<sup>2+</sup> and O<sub>2</sub> were 27, 6 and &gt;&#x2009;200&#x2009;&#x3bc;m, respectively. PHYHD1 activity was tested in the presence of 2OG analogues, and it was found to be inhibited by succinate and fumarate but not R-2-hydroxyglutarate, whereas citrate acted as an allosteric activator. PHYHD1 bound mRNA, but its catalytic activity was inhibited upon interaction. PHYHD1 was found both in the nucleus and cytoplasm. Interactome analyses linked PHYHD1 to cell division and RNA metabolism, while phenotype analyses linked it to carbohydrate metabolism. Thus, PHYHD1 is a potential novel oxygen sensor regulated by mRNA and citrate.

### Keywords
Bioid, Phyhd1, Hek293t

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
University of Oulu Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine Oulu, Finland

### Submitter
Elitsa Dimova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peppi Karppinen
University of Oulu Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine Oulu, Finland


