### Accession
PXD015880

### Title
Exploring the impact of PARK2 mutations on the total and mitochondrial proteome of human skin         fibroblasts

### Description
Mutations in PARK2 gene are the most frequent cause of familial forms of Parkinson’s disease (PD). This gene encodes Parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in several cellular mechanisms, such as the mitophagic process. Mutations in this gene, which cause the loss of function of Parkin, are responsible for the accumulation of damaged mitochondria. This improper disposal may generate increased levels of ROS, lower ATP production and apoptosis activation. Given the importance of mitochondrial dysfunctions and mitophagy impairment in PD pathogenesis, the aim of the present project was to investigate both whole-cell and mitochondrial proteome alterations in human skin fibroblasts of PARK2-mutated patients. To this purpose, total and mitochondrial-enriched protein fractions from fibroblasts of five PARK2-mutated patients and five control subjects were analyzed by quantitative shotgun proteomics, in order to identify proteins specifically altered by Parkin loss. Both the network-based and the GSEA analysis of proteomics results pointed out the importance of pathways in which Rab GTPase proteins are involved. An alteration of their levels also in the mitochondrial fraction may indicate a re-localization of these GTP/GDP molecular switches, master regulators of membrane trafficking. To have a more comprehensive view of the mitochondrial alterations due to PARK2 mutations, we investigated the impact of Parkin loss on mitochondrial function and network morphology. We unveiled that the mitochondrial membrane potential was reduced in PARK2-mutated patients. Nevertheless, PINK1 did not accumulate on depolarized mitochondria. Even after the treatment with CCCP, an ionophore that triggers mitophagy, the accumulation of PINK1 was less efficient in PARK2-mutated patients than in controls derived fibroblasts. The analysis of the mitochondrial network morphology showed a filamentous network with mitochondria distributed all over the cell that was comparable between PARK2-mutated patients and control subjects. Thus, our results suggested that the network morphology was not influenced by the mitochondrial depolarization and by the lack of Parkin, revealing a possible impairment of fission and, more in general, of mitochondrial dynamics. In conclusion, the present work highlighted new molecular factors and pathways altered by PARK2 mutations. Furthermore, we obtained a definition of the mitochondrial landscape and molecular mechanisms underlying the PARK2 form of Parkinson’s disease, which will help to unravel possible biochemical pathways altered also in the sporadic form of the disease. Indeed, it is known that in sporadic cases the genetic/epigenetic background and the environment lead over time to mitochondria impairment and to the accumulation of damaged organelles.

### Sample Protocol
All whole cell pellets and mitochondrial-enriched fractions were lysed and digested in 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactants (Waters Corp) solution, as previously described. Briefly, after reduction (10 mM TCEP for 30 minutes at 55°C) and alkylation (20 mM for 30 minutes at RT) steps, tryptic digestion was performed overnight at 37°C in RapiGest SF, using a final protease:protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) of sequence-grade trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were then diluted in a solution of 0.1% formic acid (FA), 3% Acetonitrile (ACN)

### Data Protocol
Separated peptides were analyzed in a shotgun experiment on a Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer (Waters Corp), directly coupled to the chromatographic system, with data-independent acquisition (DIA) by High Definition Mode (HDMSe). Continuum LC-MS data from three replicate experiments for each sample were processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using Protein Lynx Global Server v.3.0.3 (PLGS, Waters Corp) and Progenesis QIP v.4.1.6 (Non Linear Dynamics, Waters Corp) in the expression analysis mode. The qualitative identification of proteins was obtained by searching in Homo Sapiens database (e.g. neXtProt release 2017_08_01).  The following processing parameters have been applied: oxidation of methionines set as variable modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as fixed modification and False Discovery Rate (FDR) at protein level < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in <i>PARK2</i> gene are the most frequent cause of familial forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). This gene encodes Parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in several cellular mechanisms, including mitophagy. Parkin loss-of-function is responsible for the cellular accumulation of damaged mitochondria, which in turn determines an increment of reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, lower ATP production, and apoptosis activation. Given the importance of mitochondrial dysfunction and mitophagy impairment in PD pathogenesis, the aim of the present study was to investigate both total and mitochondrial proteome alterations in human skin fibroblasts of <i>PARK2</i>-mutated patients. To this end, both total and mitochondria-enriched protein fractions from fibroblasts of five <i>PARK2</i>-mutated patients and five control subjects were analyzed by quantitative shotgun proteomics to identify proteins specifically altered by Parkin mutations (mass spectrometry proteomics data have been submitted to ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD015880). Both the network-based and gene set enrichment analyses pointed out pathways in which Rab GTPase proteins are involved. To have a more comprehensive view of the mitochondrial alterations due to <i>PARK2</i> mutations, we investigated the impact of Parkin loss on mitochondrial function and network morphology. We unveiled that the mitochondrial membrane potential was reduced in <i>PARK2</i>-mutated patients, without inducing PINK1 accumulation, even when triggered with the ionophore carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP). Lastly, the analysis of the mitochondrial network morphology did not reveal any significant alterations in <i>PARK2</i>-mutated patients compared to control subjects. Thus, our results suggested that the network morphology was not influenced by the mitochondrial depolarization and by the lack of Parkin, revealing a possible impairment of fission and, more in general, of mitochondrial dynamics. In conclusion, the present work highlighted new molecular factors and pathways altered by <i>PARK2</i> mutations, which will unravel possible biochemical pathways altered in the sporadic form of PD.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Immunoprecipitation, Park2 mutation, Human skin fibroblast, Shotgun proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Proteomic and Metabonomic Laboratory, IRCCS-Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy Via del Fosso di Fiorano 64/65, 00143, Rome, Italy +3906/501703215
Catholic University of Sacred Heart (Rome)

### Submitter
Federica Marini

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Pieroni
Proteomic and Metabonomic Laboratory, IRCCS-Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy Via del Fosso di Fiorano 64/65, 00143, Rome, Italy +3906/501703215


