### Accession
PXD007904

### Title
Lipid rafts can form in the inner and outer membranes of Borrelia burgdorferi and have different properties and associated proteins.

### Description
Analyze the biochemically-defined proteome of lipid rafts from the inner membrane and outer membrane of Borrelia burgdorferi.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 8 M urea and 0.1 M NH4HCO3, reduced with 4 mM DTT and then alkylated with 8.4 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were subsequently digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) at a 25:1 protein:trypsin mass ratio, incubating for 16 h at 37 °C.  The digests were brought to 2% formic acid (FA) and desalted with Supel-Tips C18 Micropipette Tips (Sigma-Aldrich) using FA containing solutions with varied acetonitrile (ACN) essentially as described in vendor’s bulletin.  The solvent was removed from the eluted peptides using a vacuum centrifuge and the resultant dried peptide was stored at -80 °C. The eluted peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer A) for analysis by automated microcapillary liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS).  Fused-silica capillaries (100 µm inner diameter - i.d.) were pulled using a P-2000 CO2 laser puller (Sutter Instruments,) to a 5 µm i.d. tip and packed with 10 cm of 5 µm ProntoSil 120-5-C18H (Bischoff Chromatography) using a pressure bomb. The samples were loaded via an Dionex WPS-3000 autosampler, part of an Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Germering). The column was installed in-line with a Dionex LPG-3000 Chromatography HPLC pump running at 300 nL min-1. The peptides were eluted from the column by applying a 5 min linear gradient from 0% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) to 10% buffer B, followed by a 120 min linear gradient from 10% buffer B to 45% buffer B. The gradient was switched from 45% to 80% buffer B over 10 min. Finally, the gradient was changed from 80 % buffer B to 0 % buffer B over 10 min, and then held constant at 0 % buffer B for 20 more minutes. The application of a 2.2 kV distal voltage electrosprayed the eluting peptides directly into an LTQ Orbitrap XL ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a nano-liquid chromatography electrospray ionization source. Full mass spectra (MS) were recorded on the peptides over a 400 to 2000 m/z range at 60,000 resolution, followed by top-five MS/MS scans in the ion-trap. Charge state dependent screening was turned on, and peptides with a charge state of +2 or higher were analyzed. Mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). MS/MS spectra were extracted from the RAW file with ReAdW.exe (http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi). The resulting mzXML data files were searched with GPM X!Tandem against a recent Unitprot Borrelia burgdorferi (strain ATCC 35210 / B31 / CIP 102532 / DSM 4680) proteome database. The data was also analyzed and collated with Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software, Inc).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from the RAW ﬁle with ReAdW.exe (http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version X! Tandem Sledgehammer (2013.09.01.2)). X! Tandem was set up to search the BORBU_b31_cc database (2914 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and tryptophan and dioxidation of methionine and tryptophan were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Lipid rafts are microdomains present in the membrane of eukaryotic organisms and bacterial pathogens. They are characterized by having tightly packed lipids and a subset of specific proteins. Lipid rafts are associated with a variety of important biological processes including signaling and lateral sorting of proteins. To determine whether lipid rafts exist in the inner membrane of Borrelia burgdorferi, we separated the inner and outer membranes and analyzed the lipid constituents present in each membrane fraction. We found that both the inner and outer membranes have cholesterol and cholesterol glycolipids. Fluorescence anisotropy and FRET showed that lipids from both membranes can form rafts but have different abilities to do so. The analysis of the biochemically defined proteome of lipid rafts from the inner membrane revealed a diverse set of proteins, different from those associated with the outer membrane, with functions in protein trafficking, chemotaxis and signaling.

### Keywords
Lyme disease, Borrelia, Lipid rafts, Microdomains

### Affiliations
Stony Brook University
Rutgers University, NJ, USA

### Submitter
Alvaro Toledo

### Lab Head
Dr Alvaro M. Toledo
Rutgers University, NJ, USA


