### Accession
PXD001555

### Title
Differentiation-inducing factor (DIF) SILAC

### Description
A global quantitative screen for phosphorylation changes that occur within the first minutes after addition of DIF-1 (differentiation inducing factor) to Dictyostelium cells, using a triple-label SILAC approach. Ax2 cells were labelled in light, medium and heavy medium then starved (5 hr) before DIF treatment. Cells were harvested at 1,5,8,15 minute post treatment to allow time-course of stimulation to be constructed from 2 overlapping triplex experimental samples A(0,1,8 min) amd B(0,5,15) with each experiment repeated in biological triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled SILAC samples were digested with trypsin, fractionated by SCX and phophopeptides enriched with TiO2 beads. Samples were analysed in technical duplicate by high acuracy LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data analysis using MaxQuant to identify and quantify phosphorylation sites

### Publication Abstract
Differentiation-inducing factor-1 (DIF-1) is a polyketide that induces Dictyostelium amoebae to differentiate as prestalk cells. We performed a global quantitative screen for phosphorylation changes that occur within the first minutes after addition of DIF-1, using a triple-label SILAC approach. This revealed a new world of DIF-1-controlled signaling, with changes in components of the MAPK and protein kinase B signaling pathways, components of the actinomyosin cytoskeletal signaling networks, and a broad range of small GTPases and their regulators. The results also provide evidence that the Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase calcineurin plays a role in DIF-1 signaling to the DimB prestalk transcription factor. At the global level, DIF-1 causes a major shift in the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation equilibrium toward net dephosphorylation. Of interest, many of the sites that are dephosphorylated in response to DIF-1 are phosphorylated in response to extracellular cAMP signaling. This accords with studies that suggest an antagonism between the two inducers and also with the rapid dephosphorylation of the cAMP receptor that we observe in response to DIF-1 and with the known inhibitory effect of DIF-1 on chemotaxis to cAMP. All MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001555.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Dictyostelium, Silac, Dif-1

### Affiliations
Cell & Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Chris Sugden

### Lab Head
Dr JEFF WILLIAMS
Cell & Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK


