### Accession
PXD010467

### Title
Integrative analysis of mesenchymal stromal cell conversion by breast cancer secretomes in blank slate 3D microenvironments

### Description
The ability of primary tumour cells to invade and metastasise is responsible for over 90% of cancer patient deaths. During tumour growth and progression, cancer cells secrete factors that recruit and reprogram otherwise healthy cells to facilitate the formation of a favourable tumour microenvironment. Here, we have investigated how breast cancer cells convert normal mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) into tumour-associated MSCs (TA-MSCs) using unbiased global approaches. We compared the secretomes produced by non-invasive MCF-7 cells with invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, and identified extracellular matrix and exosome components associated with invasion. We then treated MSCs cultured in fully-defined, synthetic 3D hydrogels with invasive/non-invasive cancer secretomes and analysed their responses by kinase activity profiling and RNA sequencing, which led us to identify an invasion-associated signature of MSC conversion. Finally, we investigated whether there is an organ-specific metastasis-associated reprogramming of MSCs, and found that breast cancer cells from different metastatic sites have different secretome profiles that induce reprogramming of MSCs. These data describe at a systems-level how breast cancer cells with different invasion and metastatic abilities secrete molecules that activate MSCs and convert them into TA-MSCs.

### Sample Protocol
10kDa MW cutoff filtration of conditioned media. Buffer exchange into 6M GdCl, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 50mM HEPES pH8.5. Two step digest with lysC and Trypsin, subsequent StageTip C18 purification

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 and standard settings. Briefly, label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled with a requirement of 2 unique peptides per protein, and iBAQ quantitation was also enabled during the search. Variable modifications were set as Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-term). Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C), false discovery rate was set to 1% and “match between runs” was enabled, with a 2 minute alignment window.

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) are key contributors of the tumour microenvironment and are known to promote cancer progression through reciprocal communication with cancer cells, but how they become activated is not fully understood. Here, we investigate how breast cancer cells from different stages of the metastatic cascade convert MSCs into tumour-associated MSCs (TA-MSCs) using unbiased, global approaches. Using mass spectrometry, we compared the secretomes of MCF-7 cells, invasive MDA-MB-231 cells, and sublines isolated from bone, lung, and brain metastases and identified ECM and exosome components associated with invasion and organ-specific metastasis. Next, we used synthetic hydrogels to investigate how these different secretomes activate MSCs in bioengineered 3D microenvironments. Using kinase activity profiling and RNA sequencing, we found that only MDA-MB-231 breast cancer secretomes convert MSCs into TA-MSCs, resulting in an immunomodulatory phenotype that was particularly prominent in response to bone-tropic cancer cells. We have investigated paracrine signalling from breast cancer cells to TA-MSCs in 3D, which may highlight new potential targets for anticancer therapy approaches aimed at targeting tumour stroma.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Secretome

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Erler
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


