### Accession
PXD024906

### Title
Spatial discordances between mRNAs and proteins in the intestinal epithelium

### Description
We obtained a spatial measurement of RNA and Proteins in the small intestinal epithelium along the crypt-villus axis. We found that both were spatially heterogeneous, yet often spatially anti-correlated. We developed a Bayesian approach to infer protein translation and degradation rates from the combined spatial profiles, and demonstrate that space-independent protein-synthesis delays can explain the mRNA-protein discordances. Our work provides a proteomic spatial blueprint of the Intestinal epithelium and highlights the importance of protein measurements for inferring states of tissue cells that operate outside of steady state

### Sample Protocol
Mice were sacrificed via cervical dislocation. Small intestinal tissue dissected was dissected, Jejunum was estimated as a 8-cm region, taken about 8 cm distal to the pyloric sphincter. The intestinal segment was longitudinally cut open and washed with cold PBS and lightly rinsed to remove residual luminal contents. Tissue was chopped using scissors to ~1 cm size pieces and then incubated in DPBS containing 5 mM/l EDTA on ice for 10 min. Next, tissue was transferred to a 15-ml conical tube containing 5 mM/l EDTA and DNase I recombinant, incubated at 37°C for 10 min, then gently shaken by hand along the tube's long axis. Shaking frequency and duration were standardized to ~2 shakes per second for 15s. After shaking, the dissociated cells were filtered using 100-μm mesh with additional 10-ml of ice cold DPBS and the remnant muscle layer shreds ware removed. Cells were pelleted at 400 g for 5 min, resuspended in cold FACS buffer (2mM EDTA, 0.1% BSA in DPBS) in a concentration of 107 cells in 2ml. Next, cells were incubated with antibody cocktail as FACS sorted using FACSAriaII sorter (BD) using a 100-μm nozzle and 1.5 natural density (ND) filter. 100,000 cells from each spatial populationwere collected into FACS buffer, and resuspended twice with PBS to wash away serum proteins. Pellets were flash frozen and then subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using the suspension trapping (S-trap). Briefly, cells were suspended in lysis buffer containing  5% SDS in 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. Lysates were incubated at 96°C for 5 min, followed by six cycles of 30 s of sonication (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode, USA). Protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA), reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein) for 1.5 h at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37°C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were kept at−80°C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from each mouse was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.043. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against a database containing Mus musculus protein sequences as downloaded from Uniprot, and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, protein N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation of asparagines and glutamines. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy (MaxQuant’s “Revert” module). The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Normalization was not performed and iBAQ calculation was checked. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out. For each mouse, a MaxQuant proteinGroups table was produced. For entries with multiple proteins, the protein with the highest mRNA fraction in a published single-cell RNA sequencing survey of the small intestinal epithelium was selected, resulting in 3,270 unique proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Small intestine; epithelium; crypt-villus axis; spatial heterogeneity; rna-protein dynamics; bayesian modeling

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Faculty of Biology Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel
The Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Shalev Itzkovitz
Department of Molecular Cell Biology Faculty of Biology Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel


