### Accession
PXD024132

### Title
Long-term changes following pre-conditioned circulating angiogenic cells therapy in critical limb ischemia

### Description
Critical limb ischemia (CLI), results from a severe blockade of the arterial vessels, is usually correlated to atherosclerosis. Circulating angiogenic cells (CACs) constitute a good alternative as CLI cell therapy due to their vascular regenerative potential, although the mechanisms of action of these cells as well as their response to pathological conditions remains unclear. Previously, we have shown that the incubation ex vivo of CACs with factors secreted by atheroma plaques promotes the activation and mobilization of these cells. Herein, we have evaluated the long-term effect of CACs administration in CLI mice, whether pre-stimulated or not with atherosclerotic factors.

### Sample Protocol
In order to identify proteins differently expressed between ischemic vs non ischemic conditions, and moreover, in response to CACs treatment (with/without atherosclerotic pre-conditioning), all groups were compared by a MS-based label free quantitative approach. Low back muscles from left limbs were resuspended in lysis buffer and homogenized by mechanical procedure for protein extraction. Proteins were precipitated and pellets were resuspended, reduced and alkylated before in solution digestion with Lys-C and trypsin. Finally, the digestion was quenched before peptide purification with R3/C18 columns. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X coupled to an EASY-LC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Dta analysis was done with Proteome Discoverer v.2.4. The database search was performed with Mascot v.2.6. against the Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy: Mus musculus).

### Publication Abstract
Critical limb ischemia (CLI), the most severe form of peripheral artery disease, results from the blockade of peripheral vessels, usually correlated to atherosclerosis. Currently, endovascular and surgical revascularization strategies cannot be applied to all patients due to related comorbidities, and even so, most patients require re-intervention or amputation within a year. Circulating angiogenic cells (CACs) constitute a good alternative as CLI cell therapy due to their vascular regenerative potential, although the mechanisms of action of these cells, as well as their response to pathological conditions, remain unclear. Previously, we have shown that CACs enhance angiogenesis/arteriogenesis from the first days of administration in CLI mice. Also, the incubation ex vivo of these cells with factors secreted by atherosclerotic plaques promotes their activation and mobilization. Herein, we have evaluated the long-term effect of CACs administration in CLI mice, whether pre-stimulated or not with atherosclerotic factors. Remarkably, mice receiving CACs and moreover, pre-stimulated CACs, presented the highest blood flow recovery, lower progression of ischemic symptoms, and decrease of immune cells recruitment. In addition, many proteins potentially involved, like CD44 or matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), up-regulated in response to ischemia and decreased after CACs administration, were identified by a quantitative proteomics approach. Overall, our data suggest that pre-stimulation of CACs with atherosclerotic factors might potentiate the regenerative properties of these cells in vivo.

### Keywords
Atherosclerotic secretome, Circulating angiogenic cells, Neovascularization, Critical limb ischemia, Immune cells

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz and Institute of reserach and innovation in biomedical sciences of Cadiz
University of Cádiz
Institute of Biomediccal Research of Cádiz

### Submitter
Lucía Beltrán-Camacho

### Lab Head
Dr Mª Carmen Duran-Ruiz
University of Cadiz and Institute of reserach and innovation in biomedical sciences of Cadiz


