### Accession
PXD030327

### Title
Enhanced competition at the nano-bio interface enables comprehensive characterization of protein corona dynamics and deep coverage of proteomes 

### Description
We demonstrate the importance of the protein to NP-surface ratio (P/NP) and model protein corona formation dynamics, which determine the competition between proteins for binding.

### Sample Protocol
For this experiment, we investigated a single pooled human plasma of deidentified healthy individuals. Protein coronas were isolated and processed in a fully automated fashion using the Proteograph. Peptides were identified and quantified with a trapped ion mobility LC-MS/MS pipeline (timsTOF-Pro).

### Data Protocol
DIA data was processed using the DIA-NN analytical software (version 1.8) in library-free mode with the “--relaxed-prot-inf” tag enabled. Mass accuracy and MS1 accuracy were set to 10 ppm as it was recommended for diaPASEF datasets. The rest of the parameters were set to default. The FDR cutoff at both precursor and protein level (Lib.Q.Value and Lib.PG.Q.Value) was set to 0.01. Data was analyzed in R (v4.0.5), and visualized with ggplot2.

### Publication Abstract
Introducing engineered nanoparticles (NPs) into a biofluid such as blood plasma leads to the formation of a selective and reproducible protein corona at the particle-protein interface, driven by the relationship between protein-NP affinity and protein abundance. This enables&#xa0;scalable systems that leverage protein-nano interactions to&#xa0;overcome current limitations of deep plasma proteomics in large cohorts. Here the importance of the protein to NP-surface ratio (P/NP) is demonstrated and protein corona formation dynamics are modeled, which determine the competition between proteins for binding. Tuning the P/NP ratio significantly modulates the protein corona composition, enhancing depth and precision of a fully automated NP-based deep proteomic workflow (Proteograph). By increasing the binding competition on engineered NPs, 1.2-1.7&#xd7; more proteins with 1% false discovery rate are identified on the surface of each NP, and up to 3&#xd7; more proteins compared to a standard plasma proteomics workflow. Moreover, the data suggest P/NP plays a significant role in determining the in vivo fate of nanomaterials in biomedical applications. Together, the study showcases the importance of P/NP as a key design element for biomaterials and nanomedicine in vivo and as a powerful tuning strategy for accurate, large-scale NP-based deep proteomic studies.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Vroman effect, Proteomics, Machine learning, Nano-bio interactions, Mass spectrometry, Protein corona

### Affiliations
Seer
Seer Inc.

### Submitter
Theo Platt

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Hornburg
Seer Inc.


