### Accession
PXD025585

### Title
Identification and relative quantification of hFSH glycoforms in women sera by PRM MS based approach.

### Description
This study presents an alternative preliminary strategy to identify and quantify serum hFSH glycoforms based on immunopurification assay and mass spectrometry (MS) using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis. In this study, we provide MS-PRM data acquisition method for hFSH glycopeptides identification with high specificity and their quantification by extracting the chromatographic traces of selected fragments of glycopeptides. Once set up in all its features, the proposed method could be transferred to the clinic to improve the fertility treatments and follow-ups in men and women.

### Sample Protocol
2.1. Immunopurification FSH from serum  As hFSH glycosylation differ significantly in the different stages of women’s fertility [11], in this study we choose to analyse a serum pool to test the applicability of the method on a range of glycoforms as wide as possible. To this purpose, 54 fertile women serum samples (age range: 29 ± 3), supplied by Istituto Nazionale Tumori (INT) “Fondazione G. Pascale” of Naples, were pooled and hFSH immunopurification protocol was carried out. 500 l of anti hFSH sepharose CL-4B immunoresin were washed in binding buffer (BB: Tris-HCl 0.1M, NaCl 0.5M, NaN3 0.02%). 500 l of serum pool were diluted 5 times in BB and incubated in batch with immunoresin at 4°C for 18h. The immunoresin was washed 5 times with AMBIC 0.1 M and eluted in NH4OH 1M. The eluted fraction was desalted with PD-10 Desalting Columns contain Sephadex G-25, and lyophilized. Three different aliquots of sera samples were spiked with known amount of standard FSH in order to be able to calculate IP recovery.Dried pellet from immunopurification was treated with 100 µl of 8 M guanidine chloride buffer (GuCl), 1mM EDTA, 130 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. The disulfuric bond reduction was performed by adding 6 µl of 500 mM Dithiothreitol under stirring for 60 minutes at 37°C. The samples were subsequently alkylated by adding 12 µl of 500 mM Iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. The reduced and alkylated sample was then purified from excess of reagent by CHCl3/CH3OH/H2O precipitation. Enzymatic hydrolysis was carried out in 50 µl digestion buffer (2M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.0) using Chymotrypsin (Roche) with an enzyme:substrate ratio 1:50 at 37°C for 16 h. As positive control, 30 g of recombinant standard FSH (RHS_FSH), provided from Merck KGaA, were digested following the same protocol described above. The peptide and glycopeptides mixture from hFSH immunopurified from serum (IP_hFSH) and standard RHS_FSH were resuspended in 10% ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis.1/20 of chymotryptic digested samples (IP_hFSH and RHS_FSH) were analyzed using a nano-RSLC‐Q Exactive PLUS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm reversed‐phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Dionex) with 60 min gradient. The remaining part of the IP_hFSH sample was enriched by mixture of lectins using modified Yang, Z. & Hancock W. S. (2004) multi-lectin affinity column protocol. Concanavalina A (ConA), wheat germ agglutinin (WGA), Ricinus communis agglutinin (RCA), purchased from Sigma, were chosen to enrich all common human FSH N-glycans. The sample was resuspended in 40 µl Binding Buffer (BB: 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 1 mM MnCl2 1 mM CaCl2, 150 mM NaCl) and transferred on a filer unit (Micron YM-30). 36 µl of C.W.R. (15µl of [ConA]= 6 mg/ml + 15 µl of [WGA]= 6mg/ml + 6 µl of [RCA]= 18.89 mg/ml) mix were added to the filter unit, mixed at 600 rpm in a thermo-mixer for 1 min and incubate without mixing for 60 min at room temperature. The peptides were washed 4 times by adding 200 µl BB and discarded centrifuging at 14000 x g for 10 min. Glycopeptides were eluted in 200 µl elution buffer (EB: 20 mM Tris, 0.5 M NaCl, 0.17 M methyl-α-D-mannopyranoside, 0.17 M N-Acetyl-glucosamine and 0.27 M galactose, PH= 7.4). The buffer of eluted fraction containing glycopeptides was then exchanged against water and concentrated using Amicon Ultracel 3k centrifugal filters. 1/30 of eluted enriched glycopeptides was injected in the mass spectrometer nanoRSLC‐Q Exactive PLUS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) described before and analysed using PRM modality.

### Data Protocol
Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top ten acquisition method. Instrument settings: resolution was set to 70 000 for MS scans and 17 500 for the MS/MS scans. The MS automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3.106counts with 60 ms for the injection time, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with 120 ms for the injection time. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. The mass spectrometry data were analysed by Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Scientific) against human subset from UniProtKB/Swiss‐Prot complete proteome database using the Byonic node search engine (v3.6.0 Protein Metrics, PMI-Suite) with following settings:  Fixed and variable modification: Carbamidomethyl (+57.021464 @ C |fixed), Oxidation  (+15.994915 @ M |variable), Gln->pyro-Glu (-17.026549 @ NTerm Q |variable); Glycan modification: N-glycan 132 human.txt @ NGlycan; Cleavage residues: FLWY; Digest cutter: C-terminal cutter; Maximum number of missed cleavages: 2; Fragmentation type: QTOF/HCD; Precursor tolerance: 5.0 ppm; Fragment tolerance: 0.05 Da.  Byonic automatically filters both peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins by default; PSMs were filtered by checking the “Automatic score cut” box. The threshold will be in the range 200 – 400. The protein FDR was set at 1 % (or 20 reverse count).For the PRM method, two scan events were used for each cycle: one full scan followed by a time-scheduled PRM scan. The full scan was acquired at resolution of 35 000 at m/z 200. The AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with 60 ms for the injection time. The MS range was from 150 to 2000 m/z. The time-scheduled PRM scans were acquired at resolution of 17 500 at m/z 200. Other parameters included an AGC target of 2.105 counts with 100 ms for the injection time. Fragmentation was performed using a normalized collision energy of 35 eV. The inclusion list containing the precursor ions was used to trigger the acquisition with a 5 min scheduled scan windows. To determine the ion’s start and end scan times, we used the data acquired in full scan mode. The cycle time was 2 s and the number of points per chromatographic peak were around ten.

### Publication Abstract
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is a glycohormone synthesized by adenohypophysis, and it stimulates ovulation in women and spermatogenesis in men by binding to its receptor (FSHR). FSHR is involved in several mechanisms to transduce intracellular signals in response to the FSH stimulus. Exogenous FSH is currently used in the clinic for ovarian hyperstimulation during in vitro fertilization in women, and for treatment of infertility caused by gonadotropin deficiency in men. The glycosylation of FSH strongly affects the binding affinity to its receptor, hence significantly influencing the biological activity of the hormone. Therefore, the accurate measurement and characterization of serum hFSH glycoforms will contribute to elucidating the complex mechanism of action by which different glycoforms elicit distinct biological activity. Nowadays ELISA is the official method with which to monitor serum hFSH, but the test is unable to distinguish between the different FSH glycovariants and is therefore unsuitable to study the biological activity of this hormone. This study presents a preliminary alternative strategy for identifying and quantifying serum hFSH glycoforms based on immunopurification assay and mass spectrometry (MS), and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis. In this study, we provide an MS-PRM data acquisition method for hFSH glycopeptides identification with high specificity and their quantification by extracting the chromatographic traces of selected fragments of glycopeptides. Once set up for all its features, the proposed method could be transferred to the clinic to improve fertility treatments and follow-ups in men and women.

### Keywords
Prm-mass spectrometry; fsh; glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Naples Federico II
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris –Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.

### Submitter
Chiara Melchiorre

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris –Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France.


