### Accession
PXD019468

### Title
Molecular investigation of Tuscan sweet cherries sampled over three years: gene expression analysis coupled to metabolomics and proteomics

### Description
Sweet cherry (Prunus avium L.) is a stone fruit widely consumed and appreciated for its organoleptic properties, as well as its nutraceutical potential. We here investigated the characteristics of six non-commercial Tuscan varieties of sweet cherry maintained at the Regional Germplasm Bank of the CNR-IBE in Follonica (Italy) and sampled at maturity over three consecutive years (2016-2017-2018). We adopted an approach merging genotyping and targeted gene expression profiling with metabolomics. To complement the data, a study of the soluble proteomes was also performed on two varieties showing the highest content of phenolics. The results obtained revealed that the highest differences were observed in the expression of genes involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway during the three years and among the varieties, while metabolomics identified the presence of flavanols and proanthocyanidins in highest abundance in the varieties Morellona and Crognola. Finally, proteomics on these two varieties showed differences in proteins involved in stress response, primary metabolism, and cell wall expansion. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first multi-pronged study focused on Tuscan sweet cherry varieties providing insights into the differential abundance of genes, proteins and metabolites.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling of sweet cherries (four biological replicates each consisting of a pool of 5 fruits) was carried out in the morning (between 9:00-10:00 am) on May the 16th 2016, May 19th 2017 and May 18th 2018 (temperatures: min 12°C-max 22°C in 2016, min 13°C-max 26°C in 2017, min 8°C-max 24°C in 2018). The fruits were sampled ca. 60 dpa (days post anthesis). Eighteen-year-old cherry trees (ancient local varieties of P. avium on P-HL-B rootstocks) were grown in the experimental field of the CNR-IBE (GR, Italy, coordinates 42° 55′ 59″ N, 10° 45′ 57″ E). One variety, Benedetta, gave fruits only in 2016. The commercial variety Durone, here included for comparative purposes, was purchased at a local grocery shop in Siena. After removing the stem, the fruits were immersed in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C

### Data Protocol
The gel spots were picked with an Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare)  in 96-well plates and trypsinised using an EVO2 workstation (Tecan) . The dried samples were resuspended in 0.7 µL of the α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamate solution and loaded onto a MALDI plate.  A MALDI mass spectrum was acquired using the SCIEX 5800 TOF/TOF (Sciex). The 10 most abundant peaks, excluding known contaminants, were automatically selected and fragmented.  MS and MS2 were submitted to an in-house MASCOT server (version 2.6.1; Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com) for database-dependent identifications against the NCBI non-redundant protein sequence database (NCBInr) limited to the taxonomy P. avium (taxID4229; 10 July 2019; 35758 sequences). The parameters were as follows: peptide mass tolerance 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification (alkylation was performed during the equilibration step between IEF and second dimension) and methionine or tryptophan oxidation, double oxidation of tryptophan and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Kynurenine, resulting from tryptophan oxidation, is an artefact often observed during automatic digestion in the laboratory where the analysis was performed (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology-LIST). Up to two miscleavages were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Sweet cherry (Prunus avium L.) is a stone fruit widely consumed and appreciated for its organoleptic properties, as well as its nutraceutical potential. We here investigated the characteristics of six non-commercial Tuscan varieties of sweet cherry maintained at the Regional Germplasm Bank of the CNR-IBE in Follonica (Italy) and sampled ca. 60 days post-anthesis over three consecutive years (2016-2017-2018). We adopted an approach merging genotyping and targeted gene expression profiling with metabolomics. To complement the data, a study of the soluble proteomes was also performed on two varieties showing the highest content of flavonoids. Metabolomics identified the presence of flavanols and proanthocyanidins in highest abundance in the varieties Morellona and Crognola, while gene expression revealed that some differences were present in genes involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway during the 3 years and among the varieties. Finally, proteomics on Morellona and Crognola showed variations in proteins involved in stress response, primary metabolism and cell wall expansion. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first multi-pronged study focused on Tuscan sweet cherry varieties providing insights into the differential abundance of genes, proteins and metabolites.

### Keywords
Sweet cherry; tuscany; phenylpropanoid pathway; metabolomics; qpcr; proteomics; functional molecules

### Affiliations
ERTP (Environmental Research and Technology Platform), Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN) Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), 41, Rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg
Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Sebastien Planchon

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jenny Renaut
ERTP (Environmental Research and Technology Platform), Environmental Research and Innovation (ERIN) Department, Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), 41, Rue du Brill, L-4422 Belvaux, Luxembourg


