### Accession
PXD000459

### Title
Identification of SUMO sites by LC-MSMS

### Description
We developed a novel method for the identification of SUMO sites by expression of His-tagged SUMO mutants and affinity purification of SUMOylated proteins, followed by trypsin digestion and immunocapture of peptides containing diglycine signature tags.        Lab Head: Dr Pascale Cossart, pascale.cossart@pasteur.fr Institut Pasteur Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Inserm U604, INRA USC2020 25 rue du Dr. Roux  75015 Paris France

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling allowed to distinguish peptides reporting true SUMO sites from ubiquitin, NEDD8 or ISG15 sites. We identified a total of 331 SUMO1 sites of which the large majority was downregulated upon treatment with a bacterial toxin, listeriolysin O.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer operated in standard data-dependent mode. CID fragmentation spectra were recorded in the LTQ analyzer and used to create Mascot generic files (mgf) by the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.4.3.3). Generated peak lists were then searched with Mascot (version 2.3.0) against the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of March 6 2013). Three independent searches were performed to identify light, medium and heavy labeled SILAC peptides. For all three searches variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine residues. Carbamidomethyl formation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Depending on the search, additional variable modifications included di-glycine modification of lysine residues (+114.042927, light search), SILAC modification of lysine residues and di-glycine modification of SILAC labeled lysine residues (+4.025107 and +118.068034, medium search; +8.014199 and +122.057126, heavy search). SILAC modification of arginine residues was set as additional fixed modification for the medium (+6.020129) and heavy (+10.008269) search. For all searches mass tolerance of the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and mass tolerance of the fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. The peptide charge was set to 2+, 3+ and 4+, and up to three missed tryptic cleavage sites were allowed. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. For processing of all MS data the ms_lims software platform was used (version 7.7.7).

### Publication Abstract
SUMOylation is an essential ubiquitin-like modification involved in important biological processes in eukaryotic cells. Identification of small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO)-conjugated residues in proteins is critical for understanding the role of SUMOylation but remains experimentally challenging. We have set up a powerful and high-throughput method combining quantitative proteomics and peptide immunocapture to map SUMOylation sites and have analyzed changes in SUMOylation in response to stimuli. With this technique we identified 295 SUMO1 and 167 SUMO2 sites on endogenous substrates of human cells. We further used this strategy to characterize changes in SUMOylation induced by listeriolysin O, a bacterial toxin that impairs the host cell SUMOylation machinery, and identified several classes of host proteins specifically deSUMOylated in response to this toxin. Our approach constitutes an unprecedented tool, broadly applicable to various SUMO-regulated cellular processes in health and disease.

### Keywords
Immunocapture, Hela cells, Sumo, Lc-msms, Silac

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Francis Impens

### Lab Head


