### Accession
PXD005714

### Title
The histone acetyltransferase Mst2 protects active chromatin from epigenetic silencing by acetylating the ubiquitin ligase Brl1

### Description
Faithful propagation of functionally distinct chromatin states is crucial for maintaining cellular identity, and its breakdown can lead to diseases such as cancer. Whereas mechanisms that sustain repressed states have been intensely studied, regulatory circuits that protect active chromatin from inactivating signals are not well understood. Here we discover a self-reinforcing feedback loop that preserves the transcription-competent state of RNA polymerase II transcribed genes. We found that the chromatin reader Pdp3 recruits the histone acetyltransferase Mst2 to H3K36me3 marked chromatin. Thereby, Mst2 binds to all transcriptionally active regions genome-wide. Besides acetylating histone H3K14, Mst2 also acetylates Brl1, a component of the histone H2B ubiquitin ligase complex. Brl1 acetylation results in increased histone H2B ubiquitination, which together with H3K14ac positively feeds back on transcription and prevents assembly of ectopic heterochromatin. Our work uncovers a molecular pathway that secures epigenome integrity and highlights the importance of opposing feedback loops for the partitioning of chromatin into transcriptionally active and inactive states.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains were grown to mid-late growth phase harvested in lysis buffer and frozen in liquid N2. Cells were ground in a liquid nitrogen-chilled steel container in presence of 1% NP-40 and 0.1% Na-deoxycholate. Cell lysates were incubated at 4ºC for 15 min and then centrifuged for 15 minutes at 8’000 g. Proteins in the supernatant were precipitated with >4 volumes of acetone overnight at -20ºC. Protein pellets were resuspended in 8M guanidine hydrochloride and 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Approximately 80-120 mg of proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and Trypsin (ThermoFisher) at 37ºC. Peptides were purified using a SEP-PAK (Waters) and eluted in 50 % acetonitrile in water. 15 mg of peptides were subjected to immunoprecipitation using the PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit from Cell Signalling Kit (13416S). Acetylated peptides were enriched and eluted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were labeled with TMT 10plex isobaric labeling reagents (Thermo Fisher) as described in the manufacturer’s instructions. To determine global proteome changes 20 g of each sample prior acetyl enrichment was labeled with TMT reagents. TMT labeled peptides were subjected to high pH off-line fractionation on a YMC Triart C18 0.5 x 250 mm column (YMC Europe GmbH) using the Agilent 1100 system (Agilent Technologies). 72 fractions were collected for each experiment and concatenated into 24 fractions as previously described (Wang et al., 2011). For each LC-MS analysis, approximately 1 µg of peptides were loaded onto a PepMap™ 100 C18 2 cm trap (Thermo Fisher) using the Proxeon NanoLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher). On-line peptide separation was performed on the 15 cm EASY-Spray™ C18 column (ES801, Thermo Fisher) by applying a liniear gradient of increasing ACN concentration at a flow rate of 150 nL/min.  An Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode and TMT reporter ions were quantified using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS3 technology, as previously described (McAlister et al., 2014). In brief, the top 10 most intense precursor ions from the Orbitrap survey scan were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation. The ion-trap analyzer was used to generate the MS2 CID spectrum from which the notches for the MS3 scan were selected. The MS3 spectrum was recorded using the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 60000.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher), as described in the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, the Sequest search engine was used to search the MS2 spectra against the Schizosaccharomyces pombe UniProt database (downloaded on 30/01/2015) supplemented with common contaminating proteins. For total proteome analysis, cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT tags on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications, whereas oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. For acetyl-lysine enriched sample analysis, lysine acetylation and lysine TMT tags were set as variable modifications, while other modifications were set the same as for the proteome analysis. The assignments of the MS2 scans were filtered to allow 1% FDR. For reporter quantification, the S/N values were corrected for isotopic impurities of the TMT reagent using the values provided by the manufacturer. The sums across all TMT reporter channels were normalized assuming equal total protein content in each sample for proteome analysis, whereas for acetylome analysis normalization was based on total amount of acetylated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Faithful propagation of functionally distinct chromatin states is crucial for maintaining cellular identity, and its breakdown can lead to diseases such as cancer. Whereas mechanisms that sustain repressed states have been intensely studied, regulatory circuits that protect active chromatin from inactivating signals are not well understood. Here we report a positive feedback loop that preserves the transcription-competent state of RNA polymerase II-transcribed genes. We found that Pdp3 recruits the histone acetyltransferase Mst2 to H3K36me3-marked chromatin. Thereby, Mst2 binds to all transcriptionally active regions genome-wide. Besides acetylating histone H3K14, Mst2 also acetylates Brl1, a component of the histone H2B ubiquitin ligase complex. Brl1 acetylation increases histone H2B ubiquitination, which positively feeds back on transcription and prevents ectopic heterochromatin assembly. Our work uncovers a molecular pathway that secures epigenome integrity and highlights the importance of opposing feedback loops for the partitioning of chromatin into transcriptionally active and inactive states.

### Keywords
Mst2, Heterochromatin, Acetylome, Brl1, Acetylation, Ms3

### Affiliations
Group Leader in Epigenetics, Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Vytautas Iesmantavicius

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bühler
Group Leader in Epigenetics, Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland


