### Accession
PXD039305

### Title
Eugenol modulates the NOD1- NF-κB signaling pathway via targeting NF-κB protein in triple breast cancer cells

### Description
Background: The most aggressive subtype of breast cancer, triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), has a worse prognosis and a higher probability of relapse since there is a narrow range of treatment options. Identifying and testing potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of TNBC is of high priority. Methods: Using a transcriptional signature of triple-negative breast cancer collected from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), CMap was utilized to reposition compounds for the treatment of TNBC. CCK8 and colony formation experiments were performed to detect the effect of the candidate drug on the proliferation of TNBC cells, while flow cytometry was used to detect cell apoptosis. Meanwhile, transwell assay was implemented to detect cell metastasis change caused by the candidate drug. Moreover, the proteomic approach was presently ongoing to evaluate the underlying mechanism of the candidate drug in TNBC. Furthermore, drug affinity responsive target stability (DARTS) coupled with LC-MS/MS was carried out to explore the potential drug target candidate in TNBC cells. Results: We found that the most widely used medication, eugenol, reduced the growth and metastasis of TNBC cells. According to the underlying mechanism revealed by proteomics, eugenol could inhibit TNBC cell proliferation via the NOD1-NF-κB signaling pathway. DARTS experiment further revealed that eugenol may bind to NF-κB in TNBC cells. Concludes: Our findings pointed out that eugenol was a potential candidate drug for the treatment of TNBC.

### Sample Protocol
Collect the cells according to the routine operation. After ultrasonic crushing, centrifuge to extract the total protein of the cells. After protein quantification with BCA, 50 μg protein was taken from each group for DTT and IAA treatment, and was digested by trypsin overnight. After concentrating the sample, loading 2 μg sample for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software was used to search the database of all human protein sequences retrieved from UniProt (Homo sapiens) against the raw files. The search was conducted using the following criteria: Trypsin was fully digested; up to three missed cleavages; 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.025 Da product ion mass tolerance; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214); variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949). The false discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide and protein identifications were assessed using the target-decoy method, and the accuracy of peptide identifications was managed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA), which integrates several parameters including XCorr, precursor mass error, and charge state.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Darts, Cmap, Target protein., Eugenol, Triple-negative breast cancer

### Affiliations
Yantai university
Macau University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Medicine, Macau, Macau SAR China

### Submitter
Shi xiaoyu

### Lab Head
Dr chengliang yin
Macau University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Medicine, Macau, Macau SAR China


