### Accession
PXD010145

### Title
Acid bone lysates: what we eliminate by preparing demineralized bone matrix

### Description
Demineralized bone matrix is a widely used allograft where not only the inorganic mineral but also embedded growth factors are removed by hydrochloric acid. The cellular response to the growth factors released during the preparation of demineralized bone matrix, however, has not been studied. Here we investigated the in vitro impact of acid bone lysates (ABL) prepared from porcine cortical bone chips on oral fibroblasts. Proteomic analysis of ABL revealed a large spectrum of bone-derived proteins including TGF-β1. Whole genome microarrays and RT-PCR together with the pharmacologic blocking of TGF-β receptor type I kinase with SB431542 showed that ABL activates the TGF-β target genes interleukin 11, proteoglycan 4, and NADPH oxidase 4. Interleukin 11 expression was confirmed at the protein level by ELISA. Immunofluorescence and Western blot showed the nuclear localization of Smad2/3 and increased phosphorylation of Smad3 with ABL, respectively. This effect was independent of whether ABL was prepared from mandible, calvaria or tibia. ABL prepared with 0.1 N HCL was most effective compared to lysates obtained with 0.01 N and also 1.0 N HCl. These results demonstrate that TGF-β is a major growth factor that is removed upon the preparation of demineralized bone matrix.

### Sample Protocol
Five grams of wet bone chips were incubated while being stirred with 10 ml of 0.01, 0.1 or 1.0 N HCl (50% weight/volume) at room temperature. ABL were harvested after 16 h, centrifuged, and pH neutralized. After another centrifugation, ABL were filtered sterile and kept frozen at −20°C. The stocks were thawed immediately before each experiment. Human gingiva was harvested from extracted wisdom teeth from patients who had given informed and written consent. An approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna (EK NR 631/2007). A total of three strains of fibroblasts were established by explant cultures and fewer than 10 passages were used for the experiments. Calvaria-derived osteoblasts were obtained according to a standard protocol previously described 25. Briefly, mouse pups less than 5 days old were euthanized and their calvaria collagenase digested through a series of sequential digestions. The first 2 digests were discarded, and the subsequent digests were pooled and plated. Cells were seeded at a concentration of 30,000 cells/cm² onto culture dishes one day prior to stimulation. If not otherwise indicated, cells were exposed to 5% ABL in serum-free medium for 16 h. The inhibitor for the TGF-βRI kinase, SB431542 (Calbiochem, Merck, Billerica, MA) was used at 10 µM. Extracted proteins were precipitated using methanol/dichloromethane and digested with trypsin.Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and protein concentration was determined using the DeNovix DS-11 Microvolume Spectrophotometer (Wilmington, USA). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were separated using a nano RSLC UltiMate3000 (ThermoScientific, Vienna, Austria) separation system and detected with a Q-Exactive Plus Biopharma mass spectrometer.  A user defined injection program was used for sample injection and additional injector and trap column wash. Every sample injection was followed by two blank runs with injections of 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol for removal of possible sample remains in the injector or on the trap column and prevention of carryover in the separation system.

### Data Protocol
All database searches were performed using the in-house Mascot 2.6 and the most recent version of the Sus scrofa SwissProt database. All search results were refined and researched using Scaffold 4.6.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). For the classification of the proteins the Panther system Version 13.1 (http://pantherdb.org) was used. To predicted protein-protein interactions we have used String database (https://string-db.org) Statistical analysis All experiments were repeated three to five times. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of the cumulative data from all experiments. Statistical analysis was based on Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn`s multiple comparisons correction. Analyses were performed using Prism v7 (GraphPad Software, La Jolia, CA). Significance was set at p<0.05

### Publication Abstract
Demineralized bone matrix is a widely used allograft from which not only the inorganic mineral but also embedded growth factors are removed by hydrochloric acid (HCl). The cellular response to the growth factors released during the preparation of demineralized bone matrix, however, has not been studied. Here we investigated the in vitro impact of acid bone lysate (ABL) prepared from porcine cortical bone chips on oral fibroblasts. Proteomic analysis of ABL revealed a large spectrum of bone-derived proteins including TGF-&#x3b2;1. Whole genome microarrays and RT-PCR together with the pharmacologic blocking of TGF-&#x3b2; receptor type I kinase with SB431542 showed that ABL activates the TGF-&#x3b2; target genes interleukin 11, proteoglycan 4, and NADPH oxidase 4. Interleukin 11 expression was confirmed at the protein level by ELISA. Immunofluorescence and Western blot showed the nuclear localization of Smad2/3 and increased phosphorylation of Smad3 with ABL, respectively. This effect was independent of whether ABL was prepared from mandible, calvaria or tibia. These results demonstrate that TGF-&#x3b2; is a major growth factor that is removed upon the preparation of demineralized bone matrix.

### Keywords
Acid bone lysates, Bone matrix, Growth factors

### Affiliations
Head Proteomics Core Facility Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine
Medizinische Universität Wien

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Mitulović
Head Proteomics Core Facility Medical University of Vienna Clinical Department of Laboratory Medicine


