### Accession
PXD004588

### Title
ZIKV infection of human neurospheres

### Description
Zika virus (ZIKV) has been associated with microcephaly and other brain abnormalities; however, the molecular consequences of ZIKV to human brain development are still not fully understood. Here we describe alterations in human neurospheres derived from induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells infected with the strain of Zika virus that is circulating in Brazil. Combining proteomics and mRNA transcriptional profiling, over 500 proteins and genes associated with the Brazilian ZIKV infection were found to be differentially expressed. These genes and proteins provide an interactome map, which indicates that ZIKV controls the expression of RNA processing bodies, miRNA biogenesis and splicing factors required for self-replication. It also suggests that impairments in the molecular pathways underpinning cell cycle and neuronal differentiation are caused by ZIKV. These results point to biological mechanisms implicated in brain malformations, which are important to further the understanding of ZIKV infection and can be exploited as therapeutic potential targets to mitigate it.

### Sample Protocol
Neurospheres were lysed in RIPA buffer,followed by in gel trypsin digestion. Qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses were performed in a bidimensional nanoUPLCtandem nanoESI-UDMSE platform by multiplexed data-independent acquisitions (DIA) experiments

### Data Protocol
For proper spectra processing and database searching conditions, we used Progenesis QI 3.0 for proteomics software package with Apex3D, peptide 3D, and ion accounting informatics (Waters). Proteins were identified and quantitative data were processed by using dedicated algorithms and cross-matched with the Uniprot human proteome database, version 2015/11 (70,225 entries), with the default parameters for ion accounting and quantitation. The following parameters were considered in identify- ing peptides: (1) Digestion by trypsin allowing one missed cleavage; (2) methionine oxidation was considered a variable modification and carbamidomethylation (C), fixed modification; (3) false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) has been associated with microcephaly and other brain abnormalities; however, the molecular consequences of ZIKV to human brain development are still not fully understood. Here we describe alterations in human neurospheres derived from induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells infected with the strain of Zika virus that is circulating in Brazil. Combining proteomics and mRNA transcriptional profiling, over 500 proteins and genes associated with the Brazilian ZIKV infection were found to be differentially expressed. These genes and proteins provide an interactome map, which indicates that ZIKV controls the expression of RNA processing bodies, miRNA biogenesis and splicing factors required for self-replication. It also suggests that impairments in the molecular pathways underpinning cell cycle and neuronal differentiation are caused by ZIKV. These results point to biological mechanisms implicated in brain malformations, which are important to further the understanding of ZIKV infection and can be exploited as therapeutic potential targets to mitigate it.

### Keywords
Human, Ipsc, Microcephaly, Zika

### Affiliations
University of Campinas
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil ( lab head )

### Submitter
Caroline Teles

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Lab of Neuroproteomics, Institute of Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil ( lab head )


