### Accession
PXD031062

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics of inner ear

### Description
To determine whether scISOr-seq isoforms are translated into proteins, we extracted protein samples from the organ of Corti and identified using Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For evaluation of the isoforms that could translate into proteins, the organ of Corti from P26–30 wild type mice were treated with ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer plus a protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In total, 200 μg of protein was used for MS sample preparation. After reduction (DTT) and alkylation (IAA), proteins were digested by trypsin (1:40 (w/w)) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were fractionated by basic reverse phase liquid chromatography using ﻿using Ultimate 3000 system (ThermoFisher scientific, MA, USA) connected to a reverse phase column (XBridge C18 column, 4.6 mm x 250 mm, 5 μm, (Waters Corporation, MA, USA). ﻿Twenty-four fractions were collected，﻿each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step. Peptides were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry performed on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An Acclaim PepMap C18 (75 μm x 25 cm) column was equilibrated with solvent A (A: 0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The appropriate peptides were loaded and separated with a 60-min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was run in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode and automatically switched between MS and MS/MS modes.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were processed by Spectronaut (Version 14, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with default settings. Spectronaut was set up to search our ScISOr-seq predicted ORFs database and/or UniProt database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inner ear; cochlear

### Affiliations
1.Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China 2.Ear Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China 3.Shanghai Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine on Ear and Nose Diseases, Shanghai, China
 Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Huihui Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Huihui Liu
1.Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China 2.Ear Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China 3.Shanghai Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine on Ear and Nose Diseases, Shanghai, China


