### Accession
PXD043702

### Title
Silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix) dorsal muscle LC-MSMS data

### Description
China produces more than 77.9% of the world's production of silver carp in 2020 with the production of 3812.9 kiloton.3 The high consumption of silver carp in China is mainly by using its edible muscles for manufacture of surimi-based seafoods or other muscle foods, which may contribute high quality protein resource and other valuable nutrients in human diets. This project is to understanding the muscle composition of slaughtered fish skeletal muscle use the proteomics methods. The proteomics was performed based on the improved DDA experiment with extensive fractionation and prolonged separation of peptides, and protein searching database was informed by the Iso-seq transcriptomics.

### Sample Protocol
The fish were mechanically stunned by an accurate blow to the head in the most humane manner possible and pieces of excised muscle dropped immediately into liquid nitrogen and stored at -80℃ until following analysis. The muscle tissue was grinded with liquid nitrogen and the resulting tissue powder were mixed with a 4-fold volume of lysis buffer, and the supernatant was collected for digestion and further proteomics analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). MS/MS spectra and protein identification were searched against the above transcriptome database of H. molitrix (totally 30,108 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
The coverage of the protein database directly determines the results of shotgun proteomics. In this study, PacBio single-molecule real-time sequencing technology was performed on postmortem silver carp muscle transcripts. A total of 42.43 Gb clean data, 35,834 nonredundant transcripts, and 15,413 unigenes were obtained. In total, 99.32% of the unigenes were successfully annotated and assigned specific functions. PacBio long-read isoform sequencing (Iso-Seq) analysis can provide more accurate protein information with a higher proportion of complete coding sequences and longer lengths. Subsequently, 2671 proteins were identified in deep 4D proteomics informed by a full-length transcriptomics technique, which has been shown to improve the identification of low-abundance muscle proteins and potential protein isoforms. The feature of the sarcomeric protein profile and information on more than 30 major proteins in the white dorsal muscle of silver carp were reported here for the first time. Overall, this study provides valuable transcriptome data resources and the comprehensive muscle protein information detected to date for further study into the processing characteristic of early postmortem fish muscle, as well as a spectral library for data-independent acquisition and data processing. This batch of muscle-specific dependent acquisition data is available via PRIDE with identifier PXD043702.

### Keywords
Silver carp, 4d-proteomics, Muscle, Tims-tof pro

### Affiliations
School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China;
Jiangnan University

### Submitter
Xidong Jiao

### Lab Head
Dr Daming Fan, Xidong Jiao
School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China;


