### Accession
PXD019338

### Title
NefCD4AP2 Complex Crosslinking with DSSO for Integrative Structure Determination

### Description
Objective: HIV-1 Nef suppresses immune surveillance mechanisms to promote viral pathogenesis.  Cellular receptor CD4 is essential for HIV entry into host cells, though becomes problematic at later stages in the virus replication cycle. CD4 at the plasma membrane is targeted by Nef for endocytosis and lysosomal degradation via recruitment of clathrin adaptor complex 2 (AP2 complex).  Our goal is to use cross-linking mass spectrometry and integrative modeling to aid in structure determination of flexible portions of the Nef-CD4-AP2 complex. Methods: We use disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO), a MS-cleavable, bifunctional amine-reactive small molecule, to cross-link proximal Lys residues or N-termini of a purified reconstituted Nef-CD4 C-terminal domain fusion protein bound to the AP2Δμ2-CTD complex. Cross-linked proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, excised from the gel and digested with trypsin.  The resulting peptides were analyzed by specialized LC-MS3 experiments for identification of cross-linked residues using MSconvert (to obtain individual MS2 and MS3 level mgf files), ProteinProspector (to obtain peptide identification results files), and XLTools (to identify cross-linked peptides from results, MS2, and MS3 files).  Additional scripts were used to summarize cross-linked results. Results: We find that an intricate combination of conformational changes occurs in both Nef and AP2 to enable CD4 binding and downregulation. A pocket on Nef previously identified as crucial for recruiting class I MHC is also responsible for recruiting CD4, revealing a potential approach to inhibit two of Nef’s activities and sensitize the virus to immune clearance.

### Sample Protocol
Purified complexes were cross-linked with DSSO, separated by SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin, and desalted using Agilent C18 OMIX tips.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were extracted at MS2 and MS3 level (mgf format).  MS3 data was searched by Protein Prospector and reported in tab delimited text format.  Cross-linked peptides were identified by XLTools which matches MS2 and MS3 mgf files with text results files to identify cross-linked peptides.  Additional scripts were used in the formatting of text files and summarizing the XLTools output.

### Publication Abstract
The HIV-1 Nef protein suppresses multiple immune surveillance mechanisms to promote viral pathogenesis and is an attractive target for the development of novel therapeutics. A key function of Nef is to remove the CD4 receptor from the cell surface by hijacking clathrin- and adaptor protein complex 2 (AP2)-dependent endocytosis. However, exactly how Nef does this has been elusive. Here, we describe the underlying mechanism as revealed by a 3.0-&#xc5; crystal structure of a fusion protein comprising Nef and the cytoplasmic domain of CD4 bound to the tetrameric AP2 complex. An intricate combination of conformational changes occurs in both Nef and AP2 to enable CD4 binding and downregulation. A pocket on Nef previously identified as crucial for recruiting class I MHC is also responsible for recruiting CD4, revealing a potential approach to inhibit two of Nef's activities and sensitize the virus to immune clearance.

### Keywords
Cd4, Ap2, Xlms, Dsso, Hiv-1 nef

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Robyn Kaake

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J. Krogan
University of California San Francisco


