### Accession
PXD023684

### Title
Allotype-specific glycosylation and cellular localization of HLA class I proteins

### Description
Presentation of self- and foreign peptide antigens by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complexes at the cell surface is a key process in our immune response. The alpha-chain, the part of the HLA class I complex that contains the peptide binding groove, is one of the most polymorphic proteins in the human proteome. All HLA class I alpha-chains carry a conserved N-glycosylation site, but little is known about its nature and function. Here, we report an in-depth characterization of the N-glycosylation features in HLA class I molecules.  In three cell lines we observe that different HLA-A alpha-chains carry similar glycosylation, distinctly different from the HLA-B, HLA-C and HLA-F alpha-chains. HLA-B alpha-chains carry mostly mature glycans, HLA-C and HLA-F alpha-chains carry predominantly high-mannose, whereas HLA-A molecules display the broadest variety of glycan characteristics. We hypothesized that these glycosylation features are directly linked to the cellular localization of the HLA complexes. Analyzing HLA class I complexes from plasma and inner membrane enriched fractions revealed confirmed that most HLA-B complexes can be found in the plasma membrane, most HLA-C and HLA-F molecules  reside in the ER and Golgi membrane and HLA-A molecules are more equally distributed over all these cellular compartments. As peptide-binding and specificity is cellular compartment dependent, we corroborate from our data that standard measurements of HLA peptide-antigens from whole cell extracts likely do not exclusively capture the antigen repertoires presented at the cell surface, but also those still within the cell. Our data indicate that standard protein quantification of HLA alpha-chains does not correlate with cell surface expression levels, while analysis of glycopeptides provides allotype and compartment specific quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Glycoproteomics data were acquired using an Agilent 1290 UHPLC (Agilent) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Proteomics data were acquired using an equivalent UPHPLC setup, but on a Q-exactive™ HF (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped on a 2cm x 100 μm Reprosil C18 trap column (3 µm particle size), followed by separation on a 50 cm x 75 µm Poroshell EC-C18 analytical column (2.7 µm). Trapping was performed for 5 minutes 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and eluted with a gradient using 80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid (Solvent B). Gradient: 13% B to 40% B over 48 min. 40% B to 100% over 1 min holding at 100% B for 4 min.  For proteomics the mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode using a top 15 method. Full MS scans were captured using 60000 resolution at 200 m/z, mass range 310 - 1600 m/z, with an AGC target of 3e6, and max injection time of 20 ms. MS2 scans were triggered on charge states 2 – 5 and excluded for 12 sec after selection. A selection window of 1.4 m/z was used followed by HCD fragmentation at 27 normalized collisional energy. Fragmentation scans were captured at 30000 resolution, with a fixed first mass of 120 m/z, with an AGC target of 1e5 and 50 ms max injection time.  For glycoproteomics the mass spectrometer was operated in a product ion triggered data dependent mode using a 3 sec cycle type. Full MS scans were captured on the Orbitrap at 60000 resolution at 200 m/z, mass range 350 – 2000 m/z, with an ACGC target of 4e5, and max injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans were triggered on charge states 2 – 8 and excluded for 30 sec after selection. A selection window of 1.6 m/z was used followed by fragmentation used HCD at 30% collisional energy. Fragmentation Sscans were captured on the Orbitrap at 30000 resolution, with mass range 120 - 4000 m/z. For stepping HCD and EThcD triggering methods a targeted mass trigger was configured with a mass list of common glycan oxonium ion fragments as reported by  Reiding, K.R., et al. (32). When at least 3 ions were detected another MS2 scan was triggered on the same precursor. These scans used the same isolation and resolution parameters. For EThcD calibrated charge dependent ETD parameters were used and 25% supplemental activation, stepping HCD used collisional energies of 10, 25 and 40%. EThcD and Stepping HCD scans used AGC target of 400% and 250 ms max injection time.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of proteomics data was performed using MaxQuant (v.1.6.17.0) and the Andromeda search engine. Data was searched against a Swissprot human database (20431 entries, downloaded on Sept 18, 2019) appended with the specific HLA allotypes found in each cell line. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification of carbamidomethyl at C and variable modifications oxidation at M and N-terminal acetylation were used. An FDR rate of 0.01 was set for both protein and peptide identification. Label free quantification was performed using IBAQ.  Data analysis of glycoproteomics data was performed using PMi-Byonic (Protein Metrics) (v3.6). Byonic settings were as follows, fully specific c-terminal of RK with up to 2 missed cleavages. 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance both HCD and EThcD were applicable with fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Modifications, oxidation variable at M, carbamidomethyl fixed at C, and using the Byonic N-glycan 132 human database for identification of glycosylation. Precursor isotope off by x was set to ‘Too high or low (narrow)’ with a maximum precursor mass of 10,000 Da. Precursor assignment was computed from MS1 with a maximum of 2 precursors per MS2. A 1 % FDR (or 20 reverse count) cutoff was used with decoys added in the database. For the protein database, a fasta file was created containing all HLA class I and class II allotypes for the specific cell lines. Subsequent analysis was performed with Python 3.8 using Pandas 1.1.3 (53), Numpy 1.19.2 (54), Matplotlib 3.3.2 (55) and Seaborn 0.11. Glycopeptides were selected with a minimum Byonic score of 150 and absolute log probability higher than 1. In addition, a glycan needed to be detected at least 6 times per HLA protein per cell line. Glycans were assigned categories based on compositional requirements. Paucimannose: HexNAc ≤ 2, Hex ≤ 3. High mannose: HexNAc = 2, Hex > 3, Hybrid/Asymmetric: HexNAc = 3, Diantennary: HexNAc = 4, Bisected: HexNAc ≥ 5, Hex ≤ 5, Extended: HexNAc ≥ 5, Hex > 5. Distributions of glycan categories were calculated based on glycan peptide spectral match (PSM) counts.

### Publication Abstract
Presentation of antigens by human leukocyte antigen (HLA) complexes at the cell surface is a key process in the immune response. The &#x3b1;-chain, containing the peptide-binding groove, is one of the most polymorphic proteins in the proteome. All HLA class I &#x3b1;-chains carry a conserved N-glycosylation site, but little is known about its nature and function. Here, we report an in-depth characterization of N-glycosylation features of HLA class I molecules. We observe that different HLA-A &#x3b1;-chains carry similar glycosylation, distinctly different from the HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-F &#x3b1;-chains. Although HLA-A displays the broadest variety of glycan characteristics, HLA-B &#x3b1;-chains carry mostly mature glycans, and HLA-C and HLA-F &#x3b1;-chains carry predominantly high-mannose glycans. We expected these glycosylation features to be directly linked to cellular localization of the HLA complexes. Indeed, analyzing HLA class I complexes from crude plasma and inner membrane-enriched fractions confirmed that most HLA-B complexes can be found at the plasma membrane, while most HLA-C and HLA-F molecules reside in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi membrane, and HLA-A molecules are more equally distributed over these cellular compartments. This allotype-specific cellular distribution of HLA molecules should be taken into account when analyzing peptide antigen presentation by immunopeptidomics.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Mhc, Hla

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands
Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Max Hoek

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, Utrecht 3584 CH, The Netherlands


