### Accession
PXD023788

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveals Dormancy Related Proteins Mediated Attenuation Program in Mycobacterium Strain

### Description
To better understand the virulence difference among different MTB strains and identify new targets for therapeutic intervention under hypoxia condition, we compared the global protein expression at the protein level by quantitative proteomics among H37Rv, H37Ra and BCG.

### Sample Protocol
H37Rv, H37Ra and BCG were grown in Lowenstein-Jensen medium. The three strains were harvested at logarithmic mid-late phase and washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) three times. Lysis was performed in lysis buffer (9 M Urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 30 mM NaCl, 50 mM IAA, 5 mM Na4P2O7, 100 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 8.0), 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM sodium glycerophophate, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 3, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. Then the total lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4℃ to remove debris. The technical replicate was set in H37Rv samples as H37Rv1-1and H37Rv1-2, and we had at least three biological replicates in each strain. The same amount of proteins (120 μg) from each total sample was reduced with 5 mM of DTT, alkylated with 20 mM of iodoacetamide, precleaned with 10% SDS-PAGE (0.7 cm), and digested in-gel with final concentration of 12.5 ng/μL trypsin (Meizhiyuan, Beijing, China) at 37 ℃ for 12 h. The tryptic peptides were labeled with TMT reagents (10plex) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The 127N, 127C, 128N and 128C TMT tags were used for the H37Rv samples, the 126, 129N and 129C tags were used for the H37Ra, and the 130N, 130C and 131 tags were used for the BCG samples, respectively.The TMT-labeled and combined samples were injected into a Durashell C18 column (150 Å, 5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm2) and eluted with a linear gradient in 60 min. The eluent was collected every 1 min and finally combined into 10 fractions and analyzed with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched with MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1) against the TubercuList reference proteome from M. tuberculosis H37Rv database along with 245 common contaminant protein sequences (http://www.maxquant.org/contaminants.zip). Fully tryptic peptides with as many as 2 missed were allowed. TMT 10-plex (N-Term/K) and cysteine carbamidomethyl were set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. The tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions were set to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Although members of the <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i>&#xa0;complex (MTBC) exhibit high similarity, they are characterized by differences with respect to virulence, immune response, and transmissibility. To understand the virulence of these bacteria and identify potential novel therapeutic targets, we systemically investigated the total cell protein contents of virulent H37Rv, attenuated H37Ra, and avirulent&#xa0;<i>M. bovis</i>&#xa0;BCG vaccine strains at the log and stationary phases, based on tandem mass tag (TMT) quantitative proteomics. Data analysis revealed that we obtained deep-coverage protein identification and high quantification. Although 272 genetic variations were reported in H37Ra and H37Rv, they showed very little expression difference in log and stationary phase. Quantitative comparison revealed H37Ra and H37Rv had significantly dysregulation in log phase (227) compared with stationary phase (61). While BCG and H37Rv, and BCG and H37Ra showed notable differences in stationary phase (1171 and 1124) with respect to log phase (381 and 414). In the log phase, similar patterns of protein abundance were observed between H37Ra and BCG, whereas a more similar expression pattern was observed between H37Rv and H37Ra in the stationary phase. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that the upregulated proteins detected for H37Rv and H37Ra in log phase were virulence-related factors. In both log and stationary phases, the dysregulated proteins detected for BCG, which have also been identified as&#xa0;<i>M. tuberculosis</i>&#xa0;response proteins under dormancy conditions. We accordingly describe the proteomic profiles of H37Rv, H37Ra, and BCG, which we believe will potentially provide a better understanding of H37Rv pathogenesis, H37Ra attenuation, and BCG immuno protection.

### Keywords
Qe-hf, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Tmt10tags

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206
Student

### Submitter
Sun jinshuai

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206


