### Accession
PXD020907

### Title
S. pombe LC-MS G4-binding proteins

### Description
Affinity-purification study of G-quadruplex binding proteins from the S. pombe proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated oligonucleotides (rDNA, rDNA-scr and rDNA-m4) were incubated for 1 h at 4°C with 0.5 mg of total or nuclear protein extract. A total of 200 µl of neutravidin beads werethen added to the sample and incubated for 1 h at 4°C to pull down the bound proteins. After several washing steps, the beads were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and heated for 10 min at 70°C before being loaded on a 12% acrylamide gel. The run was stopped as soon as the sample entered the separating gel so that all proteins from the sample were located within one single band. After Coomassie blue staining, the sample band was excised from the gel and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides for mass spectrometry analysis were generated by in-gel digestion for 1 h at 50°C in the presence of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.01% ProteaseMax (Promega), and 24 ng sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DDA (data-dependent acquisition) spectra were acquired using a Synapt G2si instrument (Waters) in the positive ion mode using the continuum data format and lock mass calibration.

### Data Protocol
atabase searches using the peak lists of the processed mass spectra were performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6) in the UniprotKB/Swissprot database (version 2017_01) with a taxonomy filter for S. pombe sequences and in the Mascot database of contaminants. The search parameters permitted a mass error of 5 ppm for MS mode and 0.05 Da for MS/MS mode. Modifications included fixed modification of cysteine residues by carbamidomethylation, variable oxidation of methionine, and variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of G-quadruplex (G4) binding proteins and insights into their mechanism of action are important for understanding the regulatory functions of G4 structures. Here, we performed an unbiased affinity-purification assay coupled with mass spectrometry and identified 30 putative G4 binding proteins from the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Gene ontology analysis of the molecular functions enriched in this pull-down assay included mRNA binding, RNA helicase activity, and translation regulator activity. We focused this study on three of the identified proteins that possessed putative arginine-glycine-glycine (RGG) domains, namely the Stm1 homolog Oga1 and the DEAD box RNA helicases Dbp2 and Ded1. We found that Oga1, Dbp2, and Ded1 bound to both DNA and RNA G4s in vitro. Both Dbp2 and Ded1 bound to G4 structures through the RGG domain located in the C-terminal region of the helicases, and point mutations in this domain weakened the G4 binding properties of the helicases. Dbp2 and Ded1 destabilized less thermostable G4 RNA and DNA structures, and this ability was independent of ATP but dependent on the RGG domain. Our study provides the first evidence that the RGG motifs in DEAD box helicases are necessary for both G4 binding and G4 destabilization.

### Keywords
Lc-mc, G-quadruplex, Schizosaccharomyces pombe

### Affiliations
Umeå University
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics,  Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden

### Submitter
Nasim Sabouri

### Lab Head
Dr Nasim Sabouri
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics,  Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden


