### Accession
PXD037150

### Title
Interplay between acetylation and ubiquitination of Isw1 confers multidrug resistance in Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
Lysine acetylation and ubiquitination are one of many protein modifications and play a crucial role in the biological regulation of many organisms, but little is known about the relationship between acetylation and ubiquitination few. Here, the Isw1 protein is an important member of the chromatin remodeling complex, and we performed single-protein modification mass spectrometry detection of the C. neoformans Isw1 protein and site mutations for both detected modifications. The data showed that the two modifications of Cryptococcus neoformans Isw1 protein have a balance of each other. Acetylation can maintain protein stability and maintain protein function, while ubiquitination can reduce protein level and maintain Isw1 protein expression. The expression level of Isw1 protein leads to resistance to antifungal drugs. These results reveal the resistance mechanism of Isw1 protein of Cryptococcus neoformans to antifungal drugs.

### Sample Protocol
The ISW1-FLAG complementation strains complementation strains were subcultured at 30 °C with 200μM MG-132(MedChemExpress) in 50 ml of YPD media at 30 °C, and cells in the mid-log phase were used. Cell proteins were extracted using lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, pH 7.5) with 1 X protease inhibitor cocktail (CWBIO) and 40 mM PMSF and lysed as Western Blot. All lysed protein samples were incubated with Anti-Flag Magnetic Beads (sigma) at 4°C overnight. The beads were washed by TBS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, pH 7.4) three times and the bound proteins were extracted in protein loading buffer (125 mM Tris-HCl, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol,pH 7.5) at 95 °C for 5 min. All protein samples were separated using 8% SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, and the protein gel was stained with Coomassive Brilliant Blue R-250(BBI Life Sciences), and then the gel strip was cut out.  For in-gel tryptic digestion, gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile (v/v) until clear. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 μl of 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, the liquid removed, and the gel pieces rehydrated in 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 60 min. Gel pieces were again dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, liquid was removed and gel pieces were rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were incubated at room temperature, in the dark for 45 min. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 10 ng/μl trypsin resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 on ice for 1 h. Excess liquid was removed and gel pieces were digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile /5% formic acid, followed by 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried to completion and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass spectra were searched against acetylation ubiquitination or sumoylation database. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Fixed modifications are set to cysteine alkylation; variable modifications are set to lysine acetylation, ubiquitination or sumoylation (QEQQTGG and QQQTGG), methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetylation; ubiquitination; multidrug resistance

### Affiliations
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China.
13940381361

### Submitter
meng yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Meng
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China.


