### Accession
PXD047089

### Title
Human IgG1 (B-cell receptor) Fc peptide glycan analysis, LC-MS

### Description
Since few data are available on glycans expressed by human BCRs, we aimed to analyze the Fc glycans of membrane-bound IgG after BCR capture and tryptic digestion by LC-MS. For this purpose, human B-cell lines from Burkitt Lymphoma (Ramos) expressing IgG1-BCRs in the presence or absence of Fc glycans (FcG) were analyzed. The B-cell lines were generated by transduction of the BCR-negative MDL-AID KO cell line with N(297) or mutant Q(297) IgG-BCRs. The BCR sequences used were derived from single-cell sorted human B cells isolated from patients with the autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis. Two BCRs were directed towards citrullinated antigens (2G9 and 3F3), while a third BCR was directed against tetanus toxoid (D2). In addition, we analyzed the Fc glycan profile of IgG secreted (sIgG) by human Ramos B cells for comparison.

### Sample Protocol
IgG-(BCR) protein bands were extracted from a SDS gel, to exclude glycosylated contaminants. Gel pieces were destained according to the SilverQuestTM Silver Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), followed by 100% ACN and, for protein reduction, incubated for 30 min at 56°C in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)/25 mM ABC. After reduction, gel pieces were washed with 100% ACN and, for alkylation, incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark in 55 mM iodoacetamide/25 mM ABC to block reactive cysteine groups. After washing with 25 mM ABC and 100% ACN, gel bands were dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. In gel proteins were digested by adding 16.5 µg/ml sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega; V5111) in 25 mM ABC, followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. Trypsinised IgG (1-2 µl) were separated on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Dionex/ Thermo Fisher Scientific, Breda, The Netherlands) coupled to a MaXis Impact HD quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (MS) (MaXis HD, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen Germany) equipped with a CaptiveSpray NanoBooster source (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Briefly, trypsinised samples were extracted by a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 100 µm by 2 cm, particle size of 5 µm, pore size 100 Å; Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed for 2 min with 15 µl/min of 0.1% formic acid (FA)/ 1% ACN. Samples were separated on a C18 analytical liquid chromatography (LC) column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 75 µm by 15 cm, particle size of 3 µm, pore size of 100 Å; Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific), and elution was performed at a flow rate of 700 nl/min with buffer A [0.1% FA (v/v)] and buffer B [95% ACN/ 0.1% FA (v/v)]. A gradient of 1% to 70% buffer B in 70 min was applied (t = 0 min, B = 1%; t = 5 min, B = 1%; t = 30 min, B = 50%; t = 31 min, B = 70%; t = 35 min, B = 70%; t = 36 min, B = 1%; t = 70 min, B = 1%). The CaptiveSpray NanoBooster was operated with ACN-enriched gas (0.2 bar) and dry gas (3 liters/min) at 180°C and a capillary voltage of 1150 V. Mass spectra were acquired within a mass range of m/z 550 to 1800. Data were collected using Compass 1.9 for OTOF version 4.0.15.3248 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH).

### Data Protocol
Glycan data were assessed using DataAnalysis (Bruker Daltonics) and the calculated masses of IgG1 Fc glycan peptides after tryptic digestion. Data processing, including peak integration, was performed using LaCyTools v1.1.0 (https://github.com/Tarskin/LaCyTools). Quality control (QC) was based on signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio above nine, a mass accuracy of +/-20, and an isotopic peak quality of 0.2. The degree of galactosylation (G), sialylation (S), fucosylation (F) and the frequency of bisecting N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc, N) were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Igg1 fc peptide glycans, B-cell receptor

### Affiliations
Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands

Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Theresa Kissel

### Lab Head
Dr Rene E.M. Toes
Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands


