### Accession
PXD039615

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of Bordetella pertussis fermentation

### Description
Bordetella pertussis is the bacterial causative agent of whooping cough, a serious respiratory illness. An extensive knowledge on its virulence regulation and metabolism is a key factor to ensure pertussis vaccine manufacturing process robustness. The aim of this study was to refine our comprehension of B. pertussis physiology along the fermentation process. A longitudinal multi-omics analysis was carried out over a 26-hour small-scale fermentation of B. pertussis. Fermentations were performed in batch mode and under culture conditions intending to mimic industrial processes. Putative cysteine and proline starvations were respectively observed at the beginning of the exponential phase (from 4h to 8h) and during the exponential phase (18h45). As revealed by multi-omics analyses, the proline starvation induced major molecular changes, including a transient metabolism with internal stock consumption. In the meantime, growth and specific total PT, PRN and Fim2 antigen productions were negatively affected. Interestingly, the master virulence-regulating two-component system of B. pertussis (BvgASR) was not evidenced as the sole virulence regulator in this in vitro growth condition. Indeed, novel intermediate regulators were identified as putatively involved in the expression of some virulence-activated genes (vags). Such longitudinal multi-omics analysis applied to B. pertussis fermentation process emerges as a powerful tool for characterization and incremental optimization of vaccine antigen production.

### Sample Protocol
1 ODu was sampled and centrifuged for 10 min at 4000 g at 4°C. Supernatants were eliminated, and pellets were washed twice with 5 ml of cold PBS.Frozen cell pellets were thawed by the addition of 130 µl lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)). After resuspension, the bacteria lysates were boiled at 95°C on a thermoshaker for 10 min. Following cooling at room temperature, lysates were transferred to Covaris tubes and subjected to ultrasonication on a Covaris® M220 Focused-ultrasonicator™ for 90 sec at 75 W, 20% duty factor, 200 burst per cycle. Next, samples were transferred to new 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g at 20°C. Protein amounts were determined using a Pierce™ Rapid Gold BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each samples, 50 µg of proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 20 min and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark, both at 37°C. Sample buffer was immediately removed using the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) as described previously (Müller et al., 2020). Briefly, 500 µg of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Hydrophilic (GE Healthcare) were added to samples (10/1 w/w beads-to-protein ratio), then acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 75%. The beads were agitated on a thermoshaker for 10 min at 500 rpm at room temperature followed by 2 min of incubation on a magnetic rack. The supernatant was removed, and beads were washed twice with 200 µl of 80% ethanol and once with 200 µl of neat ACN. Beads were resuspended in 90 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 1 µg of Trypsin/Lys-C Protease Mix (1/50 w/w enzyme-to-protein ratio) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Enzymatic digestion was carried out for 2 hours on a thermoshaker at 37°C with 500 rpm agitation. Following digestion, the samples were sonicated for 5 min in a sonic bath, centrifuged for 1 min, and incubated for 2 min on the magnetic rack, then 90 µl was transferred to a new plate and 10 µl of 20% ACN / 5% trifluoroacetic acid was added to quench enzymatic digestion. Reverse phase separation of 1 µg of digest was done on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano system using a 25 cm column (75 µm internal diameter, Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm phase, PepSep) at a flow rate of 500 nl.min-1 and maintained at 60°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. Gradient consisted of a first increase of solvent B from 10% to 30% over 83 min then from 30% to 55% over 17 min. Total run time including column wash and re-equilibration was 120 min.  Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy-Spray nanosource. A full scan was acquired between 350 and 1400 m/z (mass to charge ratio) at a resolution of 70,000 (automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3.106 ions or 50 ms maximal injection time). The top 20 precursors were then selected for MS2 analysis at a resolution of 17,500 (AGC target of 1.105 ions, 50 ms maximal injection time, normalized collision energy (NCE) 27%) with an isolation window of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Extraction and annotation of MS spectra were performed using Proteowizard (v. 3.0.9992) (Chambers et al., 2012), OpenMS (v. 2.4) (Röst et al., 2016) softwares, and BIOTRACS, an in-house solutions developed with MATLAB (R2019). Raw MS spectra were processed using peak picking algorithm to annotate most significant peaks using their m/z ratio and retention time (RT). All peaks below a predetermined background-intensity threshold of 1.104 were removed from data. This threshold was defined according to the mass spectrometer characteristics. The retention time of remaining features were next aligned across all samples to correct potential RT drifts during the chromatography. Peptides were identified by using MASCOT search engine against the Bordetella pertussis Tohama I proteome (proteome ID UP000002676) and regrouped in protein by Fido algorithm (Serang, MacCoss and Noble, 2010). Trypsin was specified as the enzyme, cleaving after all lysine and arginine residues and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+ 57.021 Da) was specified as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+ 15.995 Da) was considered as variable modification. A false discovery rate of less than 5% was applied to both peptide spectral matches and protein based on linear discriminant analysis using a target decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007).  A filter was applied to keep the features present in more than 80% of samples per group. Subsequently, using BIOTRACS, several QC analyses were performed on processed data mainly to validate homogeneity between samples, considering proteins identified per sample, peptides miss cleavages, samples intensity, and proportion of peptides number used for protein identification. Protein intensities were converted in Log2 scale and normalized by the subtraction of the median intensity of each sample (Dubois et al., 2022).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bordetella pertussis</i> is the bacterial causative agent of whooping cough, a serious respiratory illness. An extensive knowledge on its virulence regulation and metabolism is a key factor to ensure pertussis vaccine manufacturing process robustness. The aim of this study was to refine our comprehension of <i>B</i>. <i>pertussis</i> physiology during <i>in vitro</i> cultures in bioreactors. A longitudinal multi-omics analysis was carried out over 26 h small-scale cultures of <i>B</i>. <i>pertussis</i>. Cultures were performed in batch mode and under culture conditions intending to mimic industrial processes. Putative cysteine and proline starvations were, respectively, observed at the beginning of the exponential phase (from 4 to 8 h) and during the exponential phase (18 h 45 min). As revealed by multi-omics analyses, the proline starvation induced major molecular changes, including a transient metabolism with internal stock consumption. In the meantime, growth and specific total PT, PRN, and Fim2 antigen productions were negatively affected. Interestingly, the master virulence-regulating two-component system of <i>B</i>. <i>pertussis</i> (BvgASR) was not evidenced as the sole virulence regulator in this <i>in vitro</i> growth condition. Indeed, novel intermediate regulators were identified as putatively involved in the expression of some virulence-activated genes (<i>vags</i>). Such longitudinal multi-omics analysis applied to <i>B</i>. <i>pertussis</i> culture process emerges as a powerful tool for characterization and incremental optimization of vaccine antigen production.

### Keywords
Fermentation molecular profiling, Virulence, Longitudinal multi-omics, Cysteine starvation, Bordetella pertussis, Proline starvation, Bacterial fermentation, Antigen production

### Affiliations
Bioaster
CSO, Bioaster, France

### Submitter
Paul Anziani

### Lab Head
Dr Cyril GUYARD
CSO, Bioaster, France


