### Accession
PXD014524

### Title
A simple peptide quantification approach for MS-based proteomics quality control

### Description
Despite its growing popularity and use, bottom-up proteomics remains a complex analytical methodology. Its general workflow consists of three main steps: sample preparation, liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and computational data analysis. Quality assessment of the different steps and components of this workflow is instrumental to identify technical flaws and to avoid loss of precious measurement time and sample material. However, assessment of the extent of sample losses along the sample preparation protocol, in particular after proteolytic digestion, is not yet routinely implemented because of the lack of an accurate and straightforward method to quantify peptides. Here, we report on the use of a microfluidic UV/visible spectrophotometer to quantify MS-ready peptides directly in MS loading solvent, consuming only 2 µl of sample. We compared the performance of the microfluidic spectrophotometer with a standard device and determined the optimal sample amount for LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer using a dilution series of a commercial K562 cell digest. Careful evaluation of selected LC and MS parameters allowed us to define 3 µg as an optimal peptide amount to be injected on this particular LC-MS/MS system. Finally, using tryptic digests from human HEK293T cells and showed that injecting equal peptide amounts, rather than approximate ones, results in less variable LC-MS/MS and protein quantification data. The obtained quality improvement together with easy implementation of the approach makes it possible to routinely quantify MS-ready peptides as a next step in daily proteomics quality control.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells (5 x 5x106) were harvested, washed three times in PBS and resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea; 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Samples were sonicated by 10 pulses of 30 s at an amplitude of 20%, in a water bath kept at 10 ºC and centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000 g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. The protein concentration in the supernatants of each sample was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) and equal protein amounts (500 µg each) were used for further analysis. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 55˚C. Alkylation was performed by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were pre-digested with 5 µg endoLysC (Wako, 129-02541) (1/100, w/w) for 4 h at 37 °C. All samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg trypsin (V5111, Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were then purified on a SampliQ SPE C18 cartridge (Agilent), vacuum dried and kept at -20 ˚C until further use. All peptide concentration measurements were made on the Lunatic (Unchained labs) microfluidic spectrophotometer. Quantification of peptide mixtures was determined by the instrument’s “MS-peptide quant” tool, a software application that computes peptide concentration values based on UV-absorbance (280 nm) of aromatic amino acids.  To assess the optimal peptide sample amount for our LC-MS/MS setup, a commercially available K562 cell digest (Promega, V6951) was used to create a two-fold dilution series ranging from 0.013 to 1.0 µg/µl. Peptide amounts ranging from 0.06 µg up to 12 µg were loaded on a LC-MS/MS system. In parallel, the actual sample concentration values were assessed by Lunatic (see Figure 3a). The same experiment was repeated using a new K562 cell vial to prepare the dilution series and a different analytical column. To assess the quality of LC-MS/MS analysis under controlled sample loading conditions, five HEK293 protein digest samples were resuspended in 30 µl MS loading solvent (0.1% TFA in acetonitrile/water, 2/98 (v/v)) and measured on Lunatic. Two sets of LC-MS/MS analytical runs followed. In the first one, 3.0 µg of peptide mixture from each sample was loaded onto the LC-MS/MS system, while in the second one the same sample volume was used for all five injections, resulting in peptide amounts ranging from 2.50 to 3.55 µg (detailed in the Results section). The required volume of sample was loaded into an LC−MS/MS system through an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the needle (pulled in-house). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent (0.1% TFA in acetonitrile/water, 2/98 (v/v)) and eluted with a non-linear 150 min gradient of 2-56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This was followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% formic acid). The column temperature was kept constant at 50 °C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 3.0 kV and the capillary temperature was 250 °C. Full scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z, AGC target  3 x 106 ions, maximum ion injection time of 45 ms) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) in the orbitrap analyzer, followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution  15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1 x 105 ions, maximum ion injection time of 60 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3 x 104, exclusion of unassigned, singly and >7 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 28% of the normalized collision energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) (Cox & Mann, 2008). The Andromeda search engine was used with default settings, including peptide and protein false discovery rate set at 1% and match between runs disabled. Spectra were searched against the UniProt reference proteome release 2018_01 (UP000005640_9606) with a mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications, while S-carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, then quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software (Cox et al., 2014). A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Despite its growing popularity and use, bottom-up proteomics remains a complex analytical methodology. Its general workflow consists of three main steps: sample preparation, liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), and computational data analysis. Quality assessment of the different steps and components of this workflow is instrumental to identify technical flaws and avoid loss of precious measurement time and sample material. However, assessment of the extent of sample losses along with the sample preparation protocol, in particular, after proteolytic digestion, is not yet routinely implemented because of the lack of an accurate and straightforward method to quantify peptides. Here, we report on the use of a microfluidic UV/visible spectrophotometer to quantify MS-ready peptides directly in the MS-loading solvent, consuming only 2 &#x3bc;L of sample. We compared the performance of the microfluidic spectrophotometer with a standard device and determined the optimal sample amount for LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer using a dilution series of a commercial K562 cell digest. A careful evaluation of selected LC and MS parameters allowed us to define 3 &#x3bc;g as an optimal peptide amount to be injected into this particular LC-MS/MS system. Finally, using tryptic digests from human HEK293T cells and showing that injecting equal peptide amounts, rather than approximate ones, result in less variable LC-MS/MS and protein quantification data. The obtained quality improvement together with easy implementation of the approach makes it possible to routinely quantify MS-ready peptides as a next step in daily proteomics quality control.

### Keywords
Peptide quantitation, Quality control, Method optimization, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Teresa Mendes Maia

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. VIB Proteomics Core, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. Department for Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.


