### Accession
PXD043601

### Title
Prdm16 mutation determines sex-specific cardiac metabolism and identifies two novel cardiac metabolic regulators

### Description
Mutation of the PRDM16 gene causes human dilated and noncompaction cardiomyopathy. The PRDM16 protein is a transcriptional regulator that affects cardiac development via Tbx5 and Hand1, thus regulating myocardial structure. The biallelic inactivation of Prdm16 induces severe cardiac dysfunction with postnatal lethality and hypertrophy in mice. The early pathological events that occur upon Prdm16 inactivation have not been explored. This study performed in-depth pathophysiological and molecular analyses of male and female Prdm16csp1/wt mice that carry systemic, monoallelic Prdm16 gene inactivation. We systematically assessed early molecular changes through transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics. Kinetic modelling of cardiac metabolism was performed in silico with CARDIOKIN.

### Sample Protocol
The protein containing interphase from lipid extraction was pelleted, air dried, and solubilized in SDC lysis buffer [1% Sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT (dithiothreitol, Sigma), 40 mM CAA (2-chloroacetamide, Sigma)]. Samples were sonicated for 10 seconds, incubated at 95°C for 10 min, cooled down and treated with Benzonase (Merck, 50 units) for 15 min at 37°C. 50 μg of protein extract per sample was digested with 1 μg endopeptidase LysC (Wako) and 1 μg sequence-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration 1%) and peptides were desalted and cleaned up using stage tip purification protocol. For LC/MS-MS measurements, peptides were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and separated on a reversed-phase column [20 cm fritless silica microcolumns with an inner diameter of 75 µm, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)] using a 202 min gradient with a 250 nl/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) concentration (from 2% to 60%) on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using the following settings: full-scan automatic gain control (AGC) target 3e6 at 60,000 resolution; scan range 350–1800 m/z; Orbitrap full-scan maximum injection time 10 ms; MS2 scan AGC target 1e5 at 15,000 resolution; maximum injection time 22 ms; dynamic exclusion time 30 s; isolation window 1.3 m/z; precursor charge state 2–6, 20 MS2 scans per full scan. Each biological sample was analyzed in technical duplicates

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software package (v1.6.3.4) and a decoy mouse UniProt database (MOUSE.2019-07), containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q), and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of three missed cleavages was allowed. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the “Match between runs” option. The integrated LFQ (label-free) quantitation algorithm was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Cardiac metabolism, Mouse, Cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin Institute of Health at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Proteomics Platform, Berlin, Germany
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Berlin Institute of Health at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Proteomics Platform, Berlin, Germany


