### Accession
PXD008931

### Title
Comprehensive Proteome Analyses of Lysine Acetylation in Tea leaves by sensing Nitrogen nutrition

### Description
Acetylation of lysine is a highly dynamic and reversibly regulated post-translational modification (PTM), which changes protein function in multiple ways [1]. As one of the most common PTMs to proteins in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes [1, 2], lysine acetylation occurred on either the α-amino group at the N-terminus of the protein or the ε-amino group on the side chain of lysine residues[3]. Since the first reveal of lysine acetylome in mammalian cells [4], acetylome in eukaryotes has been reported and the mechanistic studies indicated that lysine acetylation impacted various cellular processes including transcriptional regulation and metabolic stability [5-8]. In addition, a growing number of studies indicated that lysine acetylation widely existed in prokaryotes, and functional annotation showed lysine acetylation plays a crucial role in metabolic pathways, stress responses and enzymatic activity regulations in bacteria [9-11].

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials  1-year-old tea seedling of Camellia sinensis cv. QN3 hydroponically cultivated with the Full Nutrient (FN) solution in an air-conditioned chamber at 25±2℃/15±2℃ (16 h day /8 h night), 80±5% relative humidity and 280 μM•m−2•s−1 photon flux density 16 h light. The nutrient solutions were continuously aerated with an air pump in each hydroponic box. After 7 days the FN solution was replaced with another fresh FN solution, whereas the 0.84 mM (NH4)2SO4 was removed, in which the tea plants were subjected to N starvation for 7 days. After the N starvation treatment, the tea plants were harvested as 0N sample. At the same time all other tea plants were supplied with fresh nutrient solution, whereas the 0.84 mM(NH4)2SO4 was replaced with 2.52 mM (NH4)2SO4 in which plants were re-supplied with N. The tea plants were harvested at 3h and 3d after N re-supply after the harvest, the tea plants(tea leaves) were washed thrice with distilled water and finally with deionized water [14, 15].  Protein Extraction  The samples were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) were added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) [17, 18]. Tandem mass spectra were searched against tea database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. First search range was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions, Main search range set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40 [12, 19].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tea, Starvation, Acetylome, Ptm, Resupply, Acetylation, Metabolism, Nitrogen

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong, China

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaotang Ding
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong, China


