### Accession
PXD040664

### Title
SWI/SNF is positively auto-regulated by an AT-hook in the catalytic subunit

### Description
The SWI/SNF ATP-dependent chromatin remodeler is a master regulator of the epigenome; controlling pluripotency, cell fate determination and differentiation. There is a sparsity of information on the autoregulation of SWI/SNF, the domains involved and their mode of action. We find a DNA or RNA binding module conserved from yeast to humans located in the C-terminus of the catalytic subunit of SWI/SNF called the AT-hook that positively regulates the chromatin remodeling activity of yeast and mouse SWI/SNF. The AT-hook in yeast SWI/SNF interacts with the SnAC and ATPase domains, which after binding to nucleosome switches to contacting the N-terminus of histone H3. Deletion of the AT-hooks in yeast SWI/SNF and mouse esBAF complexes reduces the remodeling activity of SWI/SNF without affecting complex integrity or its recruitment to nucleosomes. In addition, deletion of the AT-hook impairs the ATPase and nucleosome mobilizing activities of yeast SWI/SNF without disrupting the interactions of the ATPase domain with nucleosomal DNA. The AT-hook is also important in vivo for SWI/SNF-dependent response to amino acid starvation in yeast and for cell lineage priming in mouse embryonic stem cells. In summary, the AT-hook is shown to be an evolutionarily conserved autoregulatory domain of SWI/SNF that positively regulates SWI/SNF both in vitro and in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
SWI/SNF with Snf2 tagged at its C-terminus with two copies of the FLAG peptide was purified in a two-step process.  SWI/SNF was purified by M2 immunoaffinity chromatography and the FLAG peptide removed by cation exchange chromatography using SP-Sepharose.  Crosslinking reactions contained 35 nM FLAG tagged SWI/SNF, 35 nM 29-N-59 nucleosomes and 200 nM Gal4-VP16 in a final volume of 520 uls and BS3 (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate, an amine homobifunctional crosslinker from Thermo Scientific) was added to a final concentration of 115uM. After crosslinking at room temperature for 2 hr, the reaction was quenched by adding 20μL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate, precipitated by addition of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to 16.7% and further processed.  The integrity of the SWI/SNF-nucleosome complex was tested after crosslinking by to ensure BS3 did not disrupt SWI/SNF binding.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to mzXML by RawConverter software. We used the Comet search engine and the Trans-Proteomic Pipline (TPP, http://tools.proteomecenter .org/ wiki/index.php?title=Software:TPP) were used for identification of unmodified and BS3 mono-modified (monolinks) peptides. Two crosslink database search algorithms were used for crosslinked peptide searches: pLink2 and in-house designed Nexus with default setting against the wild type and modified protein sequences from yeast genome and their reverse decoy sequences. A 5% FDR cutoff were used for both pLink and Nexus searches. The results were combined and each spectrum was evaluated for the quality of the match to each peptide using the COMET/Lorikeet Spectrum Viewer (TPP). Crosslinked peptides were considered confidently if the majority of the observed ions are accounted for and at least 4 consecutive b or y ions were observed for each peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swi/snf at-hook nucleosomes

### Affiliations
Institute For Systems Biology
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute For Systems Biology


