### Accession
PXD040849

### Title
Comprehensive multi-omics analysis revealed WEE1 as a synergistic lethal target with hyperthermia through CDK super-activation

### Description
The role of hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is still controversial partly because of the poorly understood mechanism of action. Further an understanding of the underlying mechanisms could identify potential combination therapies. Here, we conduct a comprehensive multi-omics study (transcriptiome, proteome, and phosphoproteome) upon hyperthermia (HT) in ovarian cancer cells. Unbiased trans-omics approach deciphered a unique hyperthermia- induced molecular panorama and demonstrated rapid alterations in protein phosphorylation as the primary cell response upon HT. Based on the phospho-signature, we identified CDK kinases to be hyperactivated and responsible for the global signaling landscape upon HT. Molecular and functional experiments demonstrated the dynamic and reversible CDK activity, subsequent replication arrest, and early mitotic entry after HT. A follow-up drug screen identified WEE1 inhibition to synergistically kills cancer cells with HT. An in-house developed miniaturized devise delivered proof-of-concept that the combination of hyperthermia with WEE1i leads to dramatic anti-tumor responses in vivo. These findings provide new insights into how to improve the effectiveness of HIPEC in EOC.

### Sample Protocol
In total, 5 × 106 OVCAR8 cells were seeded into T175 culture flasks. After 24 h, medium was replaced with fresh medium pre-heated to 37°C or 42°C and then cells were incubated in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at either 37°C (control) or 42°C (HT) for 90min. Cells were washed three times with PBS and harvest with cell scrapers. >2 × 107 cells were harvested and frozen with liquid nitrogen for protein extraction. For each group, 3 independent biological replicates were prepared. Protein extraction Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin digestion  For following digestion, the protein solution was slowly added to the final concentration of 20% (m/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma) to precipitate protein, then vortexed to mix and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The precipitated protein was washed with pre-cooled acetone for 3 times and dried for 1 min. The protein sample was then redissolved in 200 mM TEAB (Sigma) and ultrasonically dispersed. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. The sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Pheonomenex).  TMT labeling After trypsin digestion, peptides were firstly dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB. Each channel of peptide was labeled with their respective TMT reagent (based on manufacturer’s protocol, Thermo Scientific), and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature. Five microliters of each sample were pooled, desalted and analyzed by MS to check labeling efficiency. After labeling efficiency check, samples were quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine. The pooled samples were then desalted with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC fractionation The sample was fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 12 fractions for proteomic and 6 fractions for phosphoproteomics. Subsequently the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifuging.  LC-MS/MS Analysis  The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The proteomic gradient was comprised an increase of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) from 7% to 25% in 26 min, 25% to 38% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, at a constant flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific).The separated peptides were analyzed in Q ExactiveTM HF-X (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source.The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. The full MS scan resolution was set to 120,000 for a scan range of 400–1600 m/z.Up to 25 most abundant precursors were then selected for further MS/MS analyses with 30 s dynamic exclusion. The HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15000. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 5E4, with an intensity threshold of 2.5E5 and a maximum injection time of 40 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) data analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta  (20395 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages.The minimum amino acid length was set to 7. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 4.5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The relative quantitative value of the protein was calculated and further normalized using the median centering method. Genes with missing value in at least 50% samples were filtered and the reserved missing values were imputed by KNN method using R package impute. Differential expressed proteins were identified using limma package using log2FoldChange ＞ 0.3 (or < -0.3). and P-value < 0.05 as the cut-off. GSEA analyses was performed with R package ClusterProfiler

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wee1, Azd1775, Cdk1, Hyperthermia, Multi-omics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
TongJi Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Xingyuan Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Sun chaoyang
TongJi Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology


