### Accession
PXD028885

### Title
Circulating Microvesicles and Exosomes in Small Cell Lung Cancer by Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Early detection of small cell lung cancer crucially demands highly reliable markers. Growing evidence suggests that extracellular vesicles carry tumor cell-specific cargo suitable as protein markers in cancer. Therefore, we isolated plasma-derived exosomes from newly diagnosed small cell lung cancer patients and investigated proteome dynamics of these exosomes aiming at improving the detection of small cell lung cancer. A total of 1,016 proteins were initially identified. After data processing and statistical analysis, several proteins were found to be differentially expressed in comparing small cell lung cancer patients and healthy individuals, indicating that circulating exosomes may encompass specific proteins with potential diagnostic attributes for small cell lung cancer. Furthermore, our data may indicate a novel tumor-suppressing role of blood coagulation and involvement of complement activation in small cell lung cancer pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were collected from 24 patients with small cell lung cancer, diagnosed (baseline) and treated with chemotherapy between March 2015 to September 2017 at the Department of Oncology, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark. Additionally, blood samples from 24 age- and gender-matched healthy controls collected at the blood bank at Aalborg University Hospital were included. Blood was drawn from the antecubital vein using a vacutainer blood collection device with a 21-gauge needle (Vacuette, Greiner Bio-One, Austria) and collected in 9 mL 0.105 M (3.2 %) trisodium citrate tubes (BD Vacutainer®, UK). Platelet-poor plasma was prepared by double centrifugation at 2500x g for 15 minutes at room temperature. Plasma collection was stopped 1 cm above the buffy coat and pellet, respectively, after first and second centrifugation and the plasma isolates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Exosomes were isolated from 1 mL plasma by double centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 1 hour at 4 °C using an Avanti J-30i centrifuge with a J A-30.50 fixed-angle rotor with a k-factor 280 (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA) followed by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 × g for 1 hour at 4 °C, resulting in a 100K pellet (exosomes). The resultant exosomes were washed in 1 mL phosphate-buffered saline filtered by a 0.22 µm filter, and the samples were resuspended in 20 µL filtered phosphate-buffered saline prior to mass spectrometry analysis. The samples were lysed and solubilized in 5 % sodium dodecyl sulfate containing 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.55. Alkylation and tryptic digestion were performed using S-TrapTM Micro Spin Columns (Protifi, NY, USA) and peptide concentrations were measured by fluorescence using an EnSpire microplate reader (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected with an amount of 0.75 µg. The peptides from the 100K preparations were analysed on a nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry platform consisting of an Ultimate 3000 and an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument from (Thermo Scientific Instruments, MA, USA). Samples were run in technical duplicates, however, due to technical difficulties, one patient sample could not be analysed. All in all, 94 100K raw files were generated, 48 control files (100kCON) and 46 baseline files (100kB).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Raw data from the 48 control files, 46 baseline files and 48 files from treated patients were searched against the human database from Uniprot (downloaded 10/08/2019) and then, label-free quantification was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). The following search parameters were used: Carbamidomethyl (C) was used as fixed modification; the false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches, protein, and site were each set at 1 %; the minimum ratio count for LFQ was set to 1. For quantification of proteins, unique and razor peptides, unmodified and modified with oxidation (M) or acetyl (protein N-terminal) were used. The function match between runs was used, reverse sequences were used for decoy search, and contaminant sequences were included in the search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Extracellular vesicles, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Bent Honoré

### Lab Head
Dr Bent Honoré
Aarhus University


