### Accession
PXD031072

### Title
A plant tethering system for the functional study of protein-RNA interactions in vivo

### Description
The sorting of RNA transcripts dictates their ultimate post-transcriptional fates, such as translation, decay or degradation by RNA interference (RNAi). This sorting of RNAs into distinct fates is mediated by their interaction with RNA-binding proteins. While hundreds of RNA binding proteins have been identified, which act to sort RNAs into different pathways is largely unknown. Particularly in plants, this is due to the lack of reliable protein-RNA artificial tethering tools necessary to determine the mechanism of protein action on an RNA in vivo. Here we used minimal Arabidopsis BRN1 RNA binding domains to generate a protein-RNA tethering system which functions on an endogenous Arabidopsis RNA called SOC1  that is tracked by the quantitative flowering time phenotype. Unlike other protein-RNA tethering systems that have been attempted in plants, our system circumvents the inadvertent triggering of RNAi. We successfully in vivo tethered a protein epitope to the RNA and identified new proteins that were previously unknown to interact during BRN1-RNA binding. This protein-RNA tethering system enables the future determination of any protein’s function upon recruitment to an RNA and can be used to discover new interactions with RNA-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Leaf tissue was ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen using mortar and pestle. The powder was suspended in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 0.1% IGEPAL, and 1% plant protease inhibitor (GoldBio)), then centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,000 rpm at 4˚C. The supernatant was incubated with 50µl of FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma) at 4˚C for 3 hours. The beads were then washed three times in cold TBS. The FLAG-IP was eluted twice with 50µl of 0.1M pH2.5 glycine and neutralized with 0.5M Tris, 1.5M NaCl pH8.0 solution. FLAG-IP elutions were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (25 mM Iodoacetamide) followed by digestion with Trypsin at 37°C overnight. Digest was acidified with 1%TFA before cleaned up with C18 tip. The extracted peptides were dried down and each sample was resuspended in 10 μL 5% ACN/0.1% FA. 5 μL was analyzed by LC-MS with a Dionex RSLCnano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer using a 2h gradient. Peptides were resolved using 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1.0). Mascot was set up to search against the provided sequences and the TAIR10 database. The digestion enzyme was set as trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and acetylation of N-terminal of protein were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (4.8.2 Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established under 1% FDR by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Arabidopsis, Bruno1, Rna binding

### Affiliations
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, USA Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center

### Submitter
Yu-Hung Hung

### Lab Head
Dr R. Keith Slotkin
Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, USA Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA


