### Accession
PXD022175

### Title
Analalysis of ASB6-UBA3-NAE1 interaction

### Description
Validation of ASB6 and NAE1-UBA3 interaction using SH tagged cell lines

### Sample Protocol
On beads digestion following Strep-tag purification on Hela-CCL2 expressing SH tagged ASB6 and GFP as control. Acquisition using Qexactive in DDA mode and PRM

### Data Protocol
DDA analysis with MaxQuant starting from proteinGroup.txt. Selection of peptides for targeted MS analysis from peptides.txt and PRM analysis with Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the availability of methods for analyzing protein complexes, systematic analysis of complexes under multiple conditions remains challenging. Approaches based on biochemical fractionation of intact, native complexes and correlation of protein profiles have shown promise. However, most approaches for interpreting cofractionation datasets to yield complex composition and rearrangements between samples depend considerably on protein-protein interaction inference. We introduce PCprophet, a toolkit built on size exclusion chromatography-sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectrometry (SEC-SWATH-MS) data to predict protein complexes and characterize their changes across experimental conditions. We demonstrate improved performance of PCprophet over state-of-the-art approaches and introduce a Bayesian approach to analyze altered protein-protein interactions across conditions. We provide both command-line and graphical interfaces to support the application of PCprophet to any cofractionation MS dataset, independent of separation or quantitative liquid chromatography-MS workflow, for the detection and quantitative tracking of protein complexes and their physiological dynamics.

### Keywords
Asb6 pulldown, Dda and prm

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich (lab head)
University of California San Francisco, Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA

### Submitter
Andrea Fossati

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
IMSB, ETH Zurich (lab head)


