### Accession
PXD001389

### Title
Phosphoproteome Analysis of Magnaporthe oryzae During Appressorium Development

### Description
The rice pathogen, Magnaporthe oryzae, undergoes a complex developmental process leading to formation of an appressorium prior to plant infection. In an effort to better understand phosphoregulation during appressorium development, a mass spectrometry-based study was undertaken. Phosphosites were identified from phosphoproteins from mycelia, conidia, germlings, and appressoria of the wild type and a ckpA mutant. The cyclic-AMP dependent protein kinase A (CPKA) is required for initial perception of the leaf surface, development of functional appressoria, and timely mobilization of storage reserves in conidia, including glycogen and lipid bodies.

### Sample Protocol
M. oryzae wild type strain 70-15 and a cpkA mutant were maintained on minimal medium agar. Mycelial samples were harvested from minimal medium broth cultures grown for five days, then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Conidial samples were harvested from eight day old minimal medium plates by filtration through miracloth, and aliquots of 1.8 million conidia were centrifuged after which the supernatants were removed and pellets frozen in liquid nitrogen. Additional aliquots of 1.8 million conidia were germinated on the hydrophilic surface of GelBond (R) sheets. Following eight hours of germination, germinated conidia were harvested. Additional eight hour germinated samples were treated with 10uM 1,16-hexadecanediol (wild type and cpkA mutant strains, labeled +) or mock treated with ethanol (wild type, labeled N), and collected after 30 and 90 minutes. A total of three biological replicates for each condition were produced with each replicate being a pool of samples from six sheets of GelBond(R) as required to generate sufficient material for phosphopeptide enrichment. Prior to protein collection, samples from two of the six experiments were pooled to produce three biological replicates. Protein harvests were performed with the addition of a PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. A total of 250 ug of protein were trypsin digested using a FASP procedure. Phosphopeptides were enriched using an Iron-IMAC resin in combination with TiO2 beads, washed, and eluted for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The .raw files from the MS/MS analysis were searched against the M. oryzae genome version 8 using the Andromeda search engine of MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 with the reverse database function enabled. Search parameters included a two missed trypsin cleavage tolerance, a precursor ion tolerance of 6ppm, and a FTMS MS/MS tolerance of 20ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications allowed included: methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of glutamine or asparagines, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, or tyrosine. Protein, peptide, and site false discovery rates were set to 1% in MaxQuant with the match between runs function enabled. Phosphorylation site information was obtained from the Phospho (STY) Site output file of MaxQuant. Class I sites were identified as having a localization probabilty greater than or equal to 0.75 and a score difference greater than or equal to five. For quantification, phosphosite intensities from MaxQuant were first log (base 2) transformed and then normalized by teh sample median subtraction in the Perseus module of MaxQuant. Phosphosites were considered regulated at a 2 fold cutoff with a t-test p-value less than 0.06 and a requirement that the site be observed in at least two of three replicates for each of the conditions considered in a pairwise comparison. In addition, phosphosites were considered regulated if they were observed in all three replicates of one condition and absent in all replicates of a second condition in a given pairwise comparison.

### Publication Abstract
The rice pathogen, Magnaporthe oryzae, undergoes a complex developmental process leading to formation of an appressorium prior to plant infection. In an effort to better understand phosphoregulation during appressorium development, a mass spectrometry based phosphoproteomics study was undertaken. A total of 2924 class I phosphosites were identified from 1514 phosphoproteins from mycelia, conidia, germlings, and appressoria of the wild type and a protein kinase A (PKA) mutant. Phosphoregulation during appressorium development was observed for 448 phosphosites on 320 phosphoproteins. In addition, a set of candidate PKA targets was identified encompassing 253 phosphosites on 227 phosphoproteins. Network analysis incorporating regulation from transcriptomic, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic data revealed new insights into the regulation of the metabolism of conidial storage reserves and phospholipids, autophagy, actin dynamics, and cell wall metabolism during appressorium formation. In particular, protein phosphorylation appears to play a central role in the regulation of autophagic recycling and actin dynamics during appressorium formation. Changes in phosphorylation were observed in multiple components of the cell wall integrity pathway providing evidence that this pathway is highly active during appressorium development. Several transcription factors were phosphoregulated during appressorium formation including the bHLH domain transcription factor MGG_05709. Functional analysis of MGG_05709 provided further evidence for the role of protein phosphorylation in regulation of glycerol metabolism and the metabolic reprogramming characteristic of appressorium formation. The data presented here represent a comprehensive investigation of the M. oryzae phosphoproteome and provide key insights on the role of protein phosphorylation during infection-related development.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Phosphopeptide, Magnaporthe oryzae, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphoproteome, Appressorium

### Affiliations
Director of the Center for Integrated Fungal Research (CIFR), North Carolina State University (NCSU), USA.
Director at the Center for Integrated Fungal Research (CIFR), North Carolina State University (NCSU), USA

### Submitter
Ralph Dean

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ralph Dean
Director at the Center for Integrated Fungal Research (CIFR), North Carolina State University (NCSU), USA


