### Accession
PXD021371

### Title
DCLK1 small extracellular vesicle proteome

### Description
Doublecortin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1) is a putative cancer stem cell marker, a promising diagnostic and prognostic maker for malignant tumors and a proposed driver gene for gastric cancer. Here we show that DCLK1 expression in the gastric cancer cell line MKN1 impacts EV biogenesis both quantitatively and qualitatively in a kinase dependent manner, revealing a hitherto unknown role for this putative oncogenic kinase. Importantly, the proteome of EVs isolated from DCLK1 expressing gastric cancer cells is enriched for proteins involved in tumor-promoting biological processes, raising the prospect of establishing DCLK1 as  a novel anti-cancer target.

### Sample Protocol
EVs (PAR; parental, OE; DCKL1 overexpressed, and INH; OE treated with specific kinase inhibitor) solubilised in 2% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM TEAB, reduction (DTT), alkylation (IAA), acetone precipitation, trypsin digestion. Peptides purified and quantified by Fluorometric Peptide Assay and normalized to 1 µg per 3 µL. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex 3000 nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source in positive mode. Peptides were loaded (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 5 m beads with 100 Å pore-size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated (1.9-µm particle size C18, 0.075 × 200 mm, Nikkyo Technos Co. Ltd) with a gradient of 2–28% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. An MS1 scan was acquired from 350–1,650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 × 106 automatic gain control (AGC), 128 mseconds injection time) followed by MS/MS data-dependent acquisition (top 25) with collision-induced dissociation and detection in the ion trap (30,000 resolution, 1 ×105 AGC, 60 mseconds injection time, 28% normalized collision energy, 1.3 m/z quadrupole isolation width). Unassigned precursor ions charge states and slightly charged species were rejected and peptide match disabled. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.6.12.0) with Homo sapiens (human) reference proteome (74,811 entries, downloaded 12-2019) supplemented with common contaminants. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. The search tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, at less than 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to obtain quantification intensity values, and match-between runs true.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Migration, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes, Dclk1

### Affiliations
Baker Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Institute


