### Accession
PXD005757

### Title
Accurate quantification of site-specific acetylation stoichiometry reveals the impact of sirtuin deacetylase CobB on the E. coli acetylome

### Description
We applied SD-SILAC to determine absolute acetylation stoichiometry in exponentially-growing and stationary-phase wild type and sirtuin deacetylase CobB-deficient E. coli. We further assayed stoichiometry in phophotransacetylase (pta) and acetate kinase (ackA) mutant strains in the presence and absence of the sirtuin inhibitor nicotinamide. Comparison to relative quantification under the same conditions validated our stoichiometry estimates at hundreds of sites, demonstrating the accuracy of our method. We measured acetylation stoichiometry at 3,669 unique sites and found that the vast majority of acetylation occurs at very low stoichiometry (median 0.04%). Manipulations that cause increased nonenzymatic acetylation by acetyl-phosphate (AcP), such stationary-phase arrest and deletion of ackA, resulted in globally increased acetylation stoichiometry. Similar to sirtuin deacetylase 3 (SIRT3) in mitochondria, CobB suppressed acetylation to lower than median stoichiometry at hundreds of sites in WT, pta, and ackA cells. These results suggest an evolutionarily conserved function of sirtuin deacetylases in suppressing low stoichiometry acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli were cultured in M9 minimal media supplemented with heavy isotopes of arginine and lysine (13C615N4-arginine and 13C615N2-lysine, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Cells were washed once with PBS, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were resuspended in 8M guanidine HCl, 50mM Hepes pH 8.5, followed by sonication for 30s. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5mM TCEP (Sigma) and alkylated with 5mM chloracetamide (Sigma). Samples were diluted to 1M guanidine HCl with water and the protein digested to peptides by addition of 1/100 weight/weight trypsin protease. Tryptic digestion was stopped by addition of TFA to 0.5%, peptides were cleared of precipitates by centrifugation (2,500 x g, 5 min) and loaded onto reversed-phase C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters), pre-equilibrated with 5 ml acetonitrile and 2 x 5 ml 0.1% TFA. Peptides were washed with 0.1% TFA and H2O, eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN). For acetyllysine peptide enrichment the eluate was mixed with 100 µl 10x IAP buffer (500 mM MOPS; pH 7.2, 100 mM Na-phosphate, 500 mM NaCl). Subsequently, ACN was removed by vacuum centrifugation and the volume of samples was adjusted to 1 ml by H2O. Acetylated peptides were fractionated by micro-SCX columns in a stage-tip format (Rappsilber, Mann et al. Nat Protoc 2007; Weinert, Scholz et al. Cell Rep 2013). Peptide fractions were purified and concentrated with reversed-phase StageTips as described (Rappsilber, Mann et al. Nat Protoc 2007). Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon easy nLC system connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as described (Kelstrup, Jersie-Christensen et al. J Proteome Res 2014)

### Data Protocol
Raw data was computationally processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.4) and searched against the E. coli K12 UniProt database (downloaded June 30, 2014) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox, Neuhauser et al. J Proteome Res 2011).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a protein posttranslational modification (PTM) that occurs on thousands of lysine residues in diverse organisms from bacteria to humans. Accurate measurement of acetylation stoichiometry on a proteome-wide scale remains challenging. Most methods employ a comparison of chemically acetylated peptides to native acetylated peptides, however, the potentially large differences in abundance between these peptides presents a challenge for accurate quantification. Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the most widely used quantitative proteomic methods. Here we show that serial dilution of SILAC-labeled peptides (SD-SILAC) can be used to identify accurately quantified peptides and to estimate the quantification error rate. We applied SD-SILAC to determine absolute acetylation stoichiometry in exponentially-growing and stationary-phase wild-type and Sirtuin deacetylase CobB-deficient cells. To further analyze CobB-regulated sites under conditions of globally increased or decreased acetylation, we measured stoichiometry in phophotransacetylase (<i>pta</i>&#x394;) and acetate kinase (<i>ackA</i>&#x394;) mutant strains in the presence and absence of the Sirtuin inhibitor nicotinamide. We measured acetylation stoichiometry at 3,669 unique sites and found that the vast majority of acetylation occurred at a low stoichiometry. Manipulations that cause increased nonenzymatic acetylation by acetyl-phosphate (AcP), such as stationary-phase arrest and deletion of <i>ackA</i>, resulted in globally increased acetylation stoichiometry. Comparison to relative quantification under the same conditions validated our stoichiometry estimates at hundreds of sites, demonstrating the accuracy of our method. Similar to Sirtuin deacetylase 3 (SIRT3) in mitochondria, CobB suppressed acetylation to lower than median stoichiometry in WT, <i>pta</i>&#x394;, and <i>ackA</i>&#x394; cells. Together, our results provide a detailed view of acetylation stoichiometry in <i>E. coli</i> and suggest an evolutionarily conserved function of Sirtuin deacetylases in suppressing low stoichiometry acetylation.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Acetylation, Cobb, Sirtuin, E. coli

### Affiliations
Proteomics
University of Copenhagen Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B, 6.1 DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Brian Weinert

### Lab Head
Dr Brian T. Weinert
University of Copenhagen Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Blegdamsvej 3B, 6.1 DK-2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


