### Accession
PXD017384

### Title
Human GTPBP5 is involved in the late stage of mitoribosome large subunit assembly

### Description
Human mitoribosomes are macromolecular complexes essential for translation of 11 mitochondrial mRNAs. The large and the small mitoribosomal subunits undergo a multistep maturation process that requires the involvement of several factors. Among these factors, GTP-binding proteins (GTPBPs) play an important role as GTP hydrolysis can provide energy throughout the assembly stages. In bacteria, many GTPBPs are needed for the maturation of ribosome subunits and, of particular interest for this study, ObgE has been shown to assist in the 50S subunit assembly. Here, we characterize the role of a related human Obg-family member, GTPBP5. We show that GTPBP5 interacts specifically with the large mitoribosomal subunit (mt-LSU) proteins and several late-stage mitoribosome assembly factors, including NSUN4-MTERF4 complex, MRM2 methyltransferase, MALSU1 and MTG1. Interestingly, we find that interaction of GTPBP5 with the mt-LSU is compromised in the presence of a non-hydrolyzable analog of GTP, suggesting a different mechanism of action of this protein in contrast to that of other Obg-family GTPBPs. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated GTPBP5 ablation leads to severe impairment in the oxidative phosphorylation system, concurrent with a decrease in mitochondrial translation, reduced monosome formation and elevated levels of certain mitoribosome assembly factors. Overall, our data indicate an important role of GTPBP5 in mitochondrial function and suggest its involvement in the late-stage maturation of the mt-LSU maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of peptides from GTPBP5-IP for mass spectrometry Proteins obtained from co-immunoprecipitations were prepared according to a modified protocol from Busch et al. 2019 (19) described below. Essentially, proteins obtained from GTPBP5::FLAG and HEK293T co-immunoprecipitations (n = 3) were resuspended in 200 to 300 µl of 0.6 M Guanidium chloride buffer (5 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; ThermoFisher), 0.5 mM 2-chloroacetamid (Merck, cat. no. 8024120100)). Peptides were generated by overnight digest with 300 ng trypsin gold (Promega, cat. no. V5280, resuspended in 50 mM acetic acid) added directly to the resuspended protein samples. On the next day, peptides were desalted using home-made StageTips (Empore Octadecyl C18, 3M; (30)) and eluted with 80 to 100 µl of 60% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid buffer. The eluted peptides were subsequently dried using a vaccuum concentrator plus (Eppendorf) and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry. Preparation of peptides from SILAC sucrose gradient experiment for mass spectrometry Peptides from SILAC sucrose gradient centrifugation experiments were prepared from fractions 1 and 2 joined, 3 and 4 joined, and 5 to 17 individually. Collected fractions were precipitated in 20x 100% ice-cold ethanol overnight at -20°C. Pelleted proteins were resuspended in 6M GuHCl/Tris pH 8.0 solution and sonicated for 5 minutes at maximum output (10 seconds on/off cycles). After a 5 minute incubation at RT, samples underwent a second round of sonication and were later centrifuged at maximum speed for 10 minutes. DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM was added to the obtained supernatants and incubated for 30 minutes at 55°C followed by incubation with 15 mM chloroacetamide for 15 minutes at RT in the dark. Prior to digestion, protein quantification was performed and trypsin (Pierce, trypsin protease MS-grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added accordingly. Protein digestion was performed at 37°C overnight mildly shaking. After 12-14 hours, trypsin was inactivated using 1.2% formic acid and samples were spun down at 3000g for 10 minutes at RT. Samples were desalted, using pre-packed C18 desalting columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) previously equilibrated and washed respectively with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% formic acid, and eluted (0.5% formic acid, 50% ACN). Peptides were consequently dried using a SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator and resuspended in 0.5% formic acid for mass spectrometry.  Peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch,) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 45 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 5 min at 200 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 30000 using a minimum AGC target of 2e5 and 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.  For the analysis of the sucrose gradient fractions, peptides were separated using a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B and from 31% to 44% for 5 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 350 to 1500 m/z range. The ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 27% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 50000 using a minimum AGC target of 2e5 and 86 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 (31) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (32). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical sequences of the human reference proteome (proteome ID UP000005640, downloaded September 2018 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Label-free quantification (LFQ) (33) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of two.  LFQ intensities were filtered for at least two valid values in at least one group and imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Protein quantification was performed using the t-test function in Perseus version 1.5.2.4 (34).  For SILAC labelling analyses, the raw data from the sucrose gradient fractions was analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0. Heavy labels were set to Arg10 and Lys8 and Label min. ratio count to 1. Match between runs was enabled between the same fraction number of the two sucrose gradients. For analyses, R version 3.5.2 and ggplot2 3.2.1 were used. Intensity values or normalized H/L ratios were extracted from the MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt file. Within each replicate, intensities of control (HEK293T or GTPBP5RESCUE) and GTPBP5KO were normalized to each other against the median of the control, and then log2 transformed for plotting. Assembly factors associated with either the mt-SSU or the mt-LSU were manually curated.

### Publication Abstract
Human mitoribosomes are macromolecular complexes essential for translation of 11 mitochondrial mRNAs. The large and the small mitoribosomal subunits undergo a multistep maturation process that requires the involvement of several factors. Among these factors, GTP-binding proteins (GTPBPs) play an important role as GTP hydrolysis can provide energy throughout the assembly stages. In bacteria, many GTPBPs are needed for the maturation of ribosome subunits and, of particular interest for this study, ObgE has been shown to assist in the 50S subunit assembly. Here, we characterize the role of a related human Obg-family member, GTPBP5. We show that GTPBP5 interacts specifically with the large mitoribosomal subunit (mt-LSU) proteins and several late-stage mitoribosome assembly factors, including MTERF4:NSUN4 complex, MRM2 methyltransferase, MALSU1 and MTG1. Interestingly, we find that interaction of GTPBP5 with the mt-LSU is compromised in the presence of a non-hydrolysable analogue of GTP, implying a different mechanism of action of this protein in contrast to that of other Obg-family GTPBPs. GTPBP5 ablation leads to severe impairment in the oxidative phosphorylation system, concurrent with a decrease in mitochondrial translation and reduced monosome formation. Overall, our data indicate an important role of GTPBP5 in mitochondrial function and suggest its involvement in the late-stage of mt-LSU maturation.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Lfq, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institutet, Solnavägen 9, 171 65 Solna, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Joanna Rorbach
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institutet, Solnavägen 9, 171 65 Solna, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


