### Accession
PXD042761

### Title
LSM14B is essential for oocyte meiotic maturation by regulating maternal mRNA storage and clearance

### Description
Fully grown oocytes remain transcriptionally quiescent, yet many maternal mRNAs are synthesized and retained in growing oocytes. We now know that maternal mRNAs are stored in a structure called the mitochondria associated ribonucleoprotein domain (MARDO). But the components and functions of MARDO remain elusive. Here, we found that LSM14B knockout prevents the proper storage and timely clearance of mRNAs (including Cyclin B1, Btg4, and other mRNAs that are translationally activated during meiotic maturation), specifically by disrupting MARDO assembly during oocyte growth and meiotic maturation. With decreased levels of storage and clearance, the LSM14B knockout oocytes failed to enter meiosis II, ultimately resulting in female infertility. Our results demonstrate the function of LSM14B in MARDO assembly, couple the MARDO with mRNA clearance and oocyte meiotic maturation

### Sample Protocol
One hundred MII stage oocytes were collected from wild-type and Lsm14b-/- mice respectively, with three replicates per sample. After washing three times in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), the samples were collected in tubes with lysis buffer and then transferred to -80°C freezer with liquid nitrogen.The samples were sent on dry ice to Hangzhou JingJie Biotechnology Co., Ltd., which was responsible for proteomics testing and data analysis. A cutoff of the adjusted P value of 0.05 (false discovery rate–adjusted) along with a log2 fold change of 2 has been applied to determine significantly regulated proteins in WT and Lsm14b-/- comparison.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis is a bioinformatics analysis method that can organically link the various information of genes and gene products (such as proteins) to provide statistical information. In proteomics projects, GO mainly has the following uses: 1. As a database of various information of proteins and genes; 2. Providing various information of proteins and genes and classifying proteins and genes according to the information; 3. As A tool that provides the most comprehensive annotation and classification services for all proteins in the project. GO analysis mainly includes three aspects: 1. Cellular Component: Refers to the specific component of the cell. In the GO system, it should the component of the larger element of the cell. For example, some cell structures in anatomy.(rough endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus, etc.), or a series of gene products, such as the basic structure of some complex components (ribosomes, protein dimers, etc.); 2. Molecular Function: Mainly describe the chemical activity of the molecule, such as the catalytic activity or binding activity at the molecular level; 3. Biological Process: A series of elements in the body executed a specific function in order, which is called the biological process. GO annotation is to annotate and analyze the identified proteins with eggnog-mapper software (v2.0). The software is based on the EggNOG database. The latest version is the 5th edition, covering 5,090 organisms (477 eukaryotes, 4445 representative bacteria and 168 archaebacteria) and 2502 virus genome-wide coding protein sequences. Extracting the GO ID from the results of each protein note, and then classified the protein according to Cellular Component, Molecular Function and Biological Process. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) can integrate the information known at present, such as pathways and related complexes (Pathway database), genes and gene products (Gene database), biological complexes and related reactions (Compound and Reaction database). The KEGG pathway mainly includes: metabolism, genetic information processing, environmental information processing, cellular processes, human diseases, drug development, and the like. We annotated the protein pathways based on the KEGG pathway database, and performed BLAST alignments (blastp, evalue≤1e-4) of the identified proteins. For the BLAST alignment results of each sequence, the alignment with the highest score (score) was selected to annotate. In this study, the Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of proteins were categorized into three groups: Biological Process, Cellular Component, and Molecular Function. To determine the significance of GO enrichment of differentially expressed proteins, Fisher's exact test was employed with identified proteins as the background, and a P value<0.05 was regarded as significant. KEGG database was used for pathway enrichment analysis, and Fisher's exact test was used to evaluate the significance of KEGG pathway enrichment of differentially expressed proteins with identified proteins as the background. A P value<0.05 was considered significant. Furthermore, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed to identify specific biological pathway gene sets that were significantly associated with the expression levels between two groups of samples.

### Publication Abstract
Fully grown oocytes remain transcriptionally quiescent, yet many maternal mRNAs are synthesized and retained in growing oocytes. We now know that maternal mRNAs are stored in a structure called the mitochondria-associated ribonucleoprotein domain (MARDO). However, the components and functions of MARDO remain elusive. Here, we found that LSM14B knockout prevents the proper storage and timely clearance of mRNAs (including Cyclin B1, Btg4 and other mRNAs that are translationally activated during meiotic maturation), specifically by disrupting MARDO assembly during oocyte growth and meiotic maturation. With decreased levels of storage and clearance, the LSM14B knockout oocytes failed to enter meiosis II, ultimately resulting in female infertility. Our results demonstrate the function of LSM14B in MARDO assembly, and couple the MARDO with mRNA clearance and oocyte meiotic maturation.

### Keywords
Lsm14b; oocyte meiotic maturation; mrna storage

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong University

### Submitter
Y.L. Wan

### Lab Head
Dr Hongbing Liu
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong University


