### Accession
PXD021790

### Title
Genetic variation of maize responses to low temperatures in controlled conditions

### Description
Eighteen genetically-diverse maize hybrids (Zea mays, dent lines crossed to a flint inbred-line) were cultivated in a growth-chamber at optimal temperature (20°C) for three weeks. They were then submitted to three successive steps of decreasing temperature ( 16, 13 and 8.5°C). Each step lasted two days. Samples were taken on the youngest ligulated leaf (fourth or fifth leaf) at the end of the period at 20°C and at the end of each temperature step. Three replicates per genotype/ temperature combination were analyzed. Each replicate was made up of the mix of leaf samples from different plants.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 50 mg of fresh leaf material. Protein extraction and digestion were performed as in Blein-Nicolas et al. (2019). LC-MS/MS analyses of protein digests (400 ng of peptides) were performed using a NanoLC-Ultra System (nano2DUltra, Eksigent) connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron) as in Balliau et al ( 2018) except for the gradient duration ( 40 min ) and for the mass range for Full MS scan ( 350-1400 m/z ) .   Balliau T., Blein-Nicolas M. & Zivy M. (2018) Evaluation of optimized tube-gel methods of sample preparation for large-scale plant proteomics. Proteomes 6 , 6. Blein-Nicolas M., Negro S.S., Balliau T., Welcker C., Cabrera-Bosquet L., Nicolas S.D., Charcosset A. & Zivy M. (2019) Integrating proteomics and genomics into systems genetics provides novel insights into the mechanisms of drought tolerance in maize. BioRxiv , 636514.

### Data Protocol
Raw datafiles were transformed into mzXML format using msconvert software in the ProteoWizard 3.0.3706 package  (Kessner et al. 2008) . MS and MS/MS data were centroided during conversion . Peptide and protein identification were performed with X!Tandem software (Craig & Beavis 2004, version Alanine 2017.2.1.4) using the maize genome (http://www.maizesequence.org/ version 5a) and a home-made contaminant database. Protein inference was performed using X!TandemPipeline (Langella et al. 2017). T he following parameters were used : at least two identified peptides per protein, peptide e-value < 0.01, protein e-value < 10 -5 . The false discovery rate was estimated at 0.07% and 0% for peptides and proteins, respectively.   Craig R. & Beavis R.C. (2004) TANDEM: matching proteins with tandem mass spectra. Bioinformatics 20 , 1466-1467.  Kessner D., Chambers M., Burke R., Agus D. & Mallick P. (2008) ProteoWizard: open source software for rapid proteomics tools development. Bioinformatics 24 , 2534-2536.  Langella O., Valot B., Balliau T., Blein-Nicolas M., Bonhomme L. & Zivy M. (2017) X! TandemPipeline: a tool to manage sequence redundancy for protein inference and phosphosite identification. Journal of proteome research 16 , 494-503.

### Publication Abstract
In Northern Europe, sowing maize one-month earlier than current agricultural practices may lead to moderate chilling damage. However, studies of the metabolic responses to low, non-freezing, temperatures remain scarce. Here, genetically-diverse maize hybrids (Zea mays, dent inbred lines crossed with a flint inbred line) were cultivated in a growth chamber at optimal temperature and then three decreasing temperatures for 2&#x2009;days each, as well as in the field. Leaf metabolomic and proteomic profiles were determined. In the growth chamber, 50% of metabolites and 18% of proteins changed between 20 and 16&#xb0;C. These maize responses, partly differing from those of Arabidopsis to short-term chilling, were mapped on genome-wide metabolic maps. Several metabolites and proteins showed similar variation for all temperature decreases: seven MS-based metabolite signatures and two proteins involved in photosynthesis decreased continuously. Several increasing metabolites or proteins in the growth-chamber chilling conditions showed similar trends in the early-sowing field experiment, including trans-aconitate, three hydroxycinnamate derivatives, a benzoxazinoid, a sucrose synthase, lethal leaf-spot 1 protein, an allene oxide synthase, several glutathione transferases and peroxidases. Hybrid groups based on field biomass were used to search for the metabolite or protein responses differentiating them in growth-chamber conditions, which could be of interest for breeding.

### Keywords
Zea mays, Growth chamber, Cold resistance, Genetic diversity, Low temperature

### Affiliations
Plateforme d'Analyse Proteomique Paris Sud-Ouest Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
PAPPSO, Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE -Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Thierry Balliau

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Zivy
PAPPSO, Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE -Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


