### Accession
PXD046871

### Title
Temporal Quantitative Phosphoproteomic Profiling of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 Neuroblastoma Cells During All-trans Retinoic Acid-Induced Neuronal Differentiation

### Description
The human neuroblastoma cell lines SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 can be differentiated into neuron-like phenotypes through treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). After differentiation, these cell lines are extensively utilized as in vitro models to study various aspects of neuronal cell biology. However, temporal and quantitative profiling of the proteome and phosphoproteome of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells throughout ATRA-induced differentiation has been limited. Here, we performed relative quantification of the phosphoproteomes of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells at multiple time points during ATRA-induced differentiation. The data presented serve as a valuable resource for investigating temporal protein and phosphoprotein abundance changes in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells during ATRA-induced differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested at specified time points. Media was aspirated and cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, supplemented with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Mini Tablets). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 1 hour at 60oC, followed by alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate for 10 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 trypsin:protein ratio. Tryptic digested peptides were subsequently purified using C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), then re-suspended in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. For labelling, samples were labelled with TMT10plex label reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the following order: IMR-32 - Control: 126; 12 hours: 127C; 1 day: 128C; 3 days: 129C; 5 days: 130C. SH-SY5Y - Control: 127N; 12 hours: 128N; 1 day: 129N; 3 days: 130N; 5 days: 131. TMT reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with samples. Equal amounts of each sample were mixed and fractionated into 8 fractions by high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4) with SEQUEST as a search engine. The data were searched against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (Proteome ID UP000005640). The search parameters were as follows: Precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; tryptic cleavage specificity, 2 maximum missed cleavage. For the modification setting: oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) was set as the dynamic modification and methylthiol of cysteine (+45.988 Da), TMT6plex of peptide N-terminal, protein N-terminal and lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as the static modification. In addition, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966) were set as the dynamic modification for the phosphoproteomic analysis. The protein level false discovery rate was estimated by Percolator with an experimental q-value (exp. q-value) threshold set as 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The human neuroblastoma cell lines SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 can be differentiated into neuron-like phenotypes through treatment with all-<i>trans</i>-retinoic acid (ATRA). After differentiation, these cell lines are extensively utilized as in vitro models to study various aspects of neuronal cell biology. However, temporal and quantitative profiling of the proteome and phosphoproteome of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells throughout ATRA-induced differentiation has been limited. Here, we performed relative quantification of the proteomes and phosphoproteomes of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells at multiple time points during ATRA-induced differentiation. Relative quantification of proteins and phosphopeptides with subsequent gene ontology analysis revealed that several biological processes, including cytoskeleton organization, cell division, chaperone function and protein folding, and one-carbon metabolism, were associated with ATRA-induced differentiation in both cell lines. Furthermore, kinase-substrate enrichment analysis predicted altered activities of several kinases during differentiation. Among these, CDK5 exhibited increased activity, while CDK2 displayed reduced activity. The data presented serve as a valuable resource for investigating temporal protein and phosphoprotein abundance changes in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells during ATRA-induced differentiation.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Imr-32, Neuronal differentiation, Tmt, Sh-sy5y

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
School of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

### Submitter
Thomas.C.N. LEUNG

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas C.N. LEUNG
School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China


