### Accession
PXD013054

### Title
miR-122-dependent binding of TNRC6 to HCV RNA

### Description
The liver-specific microRNA, miR-122, is an essential host factor for replication of hepatitis C virus (HCV), an important infectious cause of chronic liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma. miR-122 stabilizes the positive-strand HCV RNA genome and promotes viral RNA synthesis by binding two closely spaced sites (S1 and S2) near the 5’ end of the genome in association with Ago2. Ago2 is essential for both host factor activities, but whether other host proteins are involved is unknown. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we identified TNRC6A (GW182) and its paralogs (TNRC6B and TNRC6C), as functionally important components of the miR-122/Ago2 host factor complex binding HCV RNA. Depletion of any two TNRC6 proteins reduced HCV replication in Huh-7.5 cells,but did not reduce viral RNA stability or translational activity, but rather dampened miR-122 stimulation of viral RNA synthesis. However, TNRC6 depletion had no effect on replication of HCV in which S2 was mutated so that miR-122 binds only S1, whereas it significantly enhanced replication when S1 was mutated and only S2 bound by miR-122. Consistent with this, we found that TNRC6 proteins preferentially associate with the S1 site, and that the association of Ago2 with S2 is increased in TNRC6-depleted cells. Collectively, these data suggest a model in which TNRC6 proteins, which are known to interact with Ago2, preferentially direct the miR-122/Ago2 complex to S1 while restricting its association with S2, thereby fine tuning the spatial organization of miR-122/Ago2 complexes bound to the viral RNA.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated RNA pull-down:  Commercially synthesized oligonucleotides representing the 5’ terminal sequence of hepatitis C virus genomic RNA (H77S strain, nts 1-47, conjugated at its 3’ end to biotin, 10 pmol each reaction) were heated at 75C for 5 min then cooled down to room temperature. Annealed oligos were bound to magnetic streptavidin T1 beads (Invitrogen) as per the manufacturer’s instruction, then incubated with HepG2 or HepG2-miR-122 cytoplasmic lysate for 1h at 40C.  Proteins associated with the RNA bait were digested by trypsin on the beads, the desalted peptide mixtures were dissolved in 30 μl 0.1% formic acid (Thermo-Fisher), of which 5 μl peptides were injected and analyzed by a ultra2D nanoLC system (Eksigent) coupled to a Velos LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were first loaded on to a 2 mm × 0.5 mm reverse-phase (RP) C18 trap column (Eksigent) at a flow rate of 1 μl/min, then eluted and fractionated on a 25 cm C18 RP column (360 μm × 75 μm × 3 μm) with a 90 min gradient of 5%-40% buffer B (ACN and 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Velos LTQ Orbitrap was operated in the positive-ion mode with a data-dependent automatic switch between survey Full-MS scan (m/z 300-1800) (externally calibrated to a mass accuracy of <5 ppm and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400) and CID MS/MS acquisition of the top 15 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral processing and peptide identification were performed on the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.3.17) against a human UniProt database. All searches were conducted with a defined modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, with methionine oxidation and protein amino-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Peptides were confidently identified using a target-decoy approach with a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and a protein FDR of 5%. A minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required, maximally two missed cleavages were allowed, initial mass deviation for precursor ion was up to 7 ppm, and the maximum allowed mass deviation for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed on Perseus (Version 1.5.5.1). Protein quantitation was performed on biological replicate runs, and a two-sample t-test statistics was used to report statistically significant fold-changes in relative abundance in HepG2 vs. HepG2-miR122 pulldown samples.

### Publication Abstract
The liver-specific microRNA, miR-122, is an essential host factor for replication of the hepatitis C virus (HCV). miR-122 stabilizes the positive-strand HCV RNA genome and promotes its synthesis by binding two sites (S1 and S2) near its 5' end in association with Ago2. Ago2 is essential for both host factor activities, but whether other host proteins are involved is unknown. Using an unbiased quantitative proteomics screen, we identified the TNRC6 protein paralogs, TNRC6B and TNRC6C, as functionally important but redundant components of the miR-122/Ago2 host factor complex. Doubly depleting TNRC6B and TNRC6C proteins reduced HCV replication in human hepatoma cells, dampening miR-122 stimulation of viral RNA synthesis without reducing the stability or translational activity of the viral RNA. TNRC6B/C were required for optimal miR-122 host factor activity only when S1 was able to bind miR-122, and restricted replication when S1 was mutated and only S2 bound by miR-122. TNRC6B/C preferentially associated with S1, and TNRC6B/C depletion enhanced Ago2 association at S2. Collectively, these data suggest a model in which TNRC6B/C regulate the assembly of miR-122/Ago complexes on HCV RNA, preferentially directing miR-122/Ago2 to S1 while restricting its association with S2, thereby fine-tuning the spatial organization of miR-122/Ago2 complexes on the viral genome.

### Keywords
Risc complex, Microrna, Ap-ms, Rna stability, Protein translation

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral Research Associate
Professor of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Li Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley M Lemon
Professor of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


