### Accession
PXD002160

### Title
PsbS interacting proteins -  PsbS interactions involved in the activation of energy dissipation in Arabidopsis

### Description
PsbS Protein Interactions during Non-photochemical quenching The non-photochemical quenching of excitation energy (NPQ) describes a photoprotective mechanism in the antenna of PSII which dissipates excess excitation energy as heat at the level of 1Chl* and by that prevents the formation of singlet oxygen in PSII. Four different components contribute to NPQ, namely qT, qE, qZ and qI. Under saturating light conditions, the qE represents the dominant NPQ component; qE is based on a complex mechanism which strictly depends on the ΔpH across the thylakoid membrane, the PsbS protein and the xanthophyll zeaxanthin (Zx). The central role of PsbS in these processes is related to the function of PsbS as sensor of the lumen pH. However, the molecular basis of this central function and particularly the underlying interactions of PsbS with PSII antenna proteins that lead to energy quenching are largely unclear. In this work, we present an in vitro approach to identify protein transient interactions involving the PsbS protein during NPQ induction and relaxation in Arabidopsis thaliana, revealing its direct role in the formation of quenching sites in the antenna complexes of photosystem II.

### Sample Protocol
60 µg of isolated thylakoids from Arabidopsis thaliana WT Col-0 and npq4 mutant (psbs-1.3) (1) were incubated either in the dark or in the light (1285 µ µmol photons m-2 s-1 ,actinic red light) under stirring for 30 min in 2 ml RM-A with DTSSP (2.5 mM final concentration) and the linking stopped by the addition of 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) and further incubation for 15 min . For the light treatment DTSSP was added after pre-illuminating the thylakoids for 5 min. Cross-linked thylakoids were spin down and resuspended in 2 ml CO-IP buffer (PBS ,1 % α-DM, and protease inhibitors cocktail) and incubated overnight with 500 µl Sepahorse beads containing a specific, covalently bound, anti-PsbS antibody ( commissioned work Pineda Antibody-service). Unspecifically bound proteins were eluted as previously described with the following modifications: washing buffer: 0,5M NaCl, 0,05%Tween 20 and 0,1% Triton x-100. Specific PsbS-linked proteins were eluted with 2 ml Pierce™ IgG Elution Buffer, pH 2.0 (Thermo Scientific), 0,05% α-DM. Eluted proteins were concentrated by overnight precipitation with TCA (15%) at 4°C, spin down for 1 h at 17 000 g and resuspended in 75 µl ACA Buffer (750 mM ɛ-aminocaproic acid (ACA), 50 mM Bis-Tris, pH 7.0, 0.5 mM EDTA) for 1 h at 37°C and denaturated by adding 25 µl 4x LDS Buffer (Nu-Page system Life Technologies. Co-immunoprecipitation of control WT samples was performed as described but without adding DTSSP. For each treatment: 5 Independent replicates. After crosslinking and anti-PsbS based affinity purification of five technical replicates per samples group (1: npq4 mutant, crosslinked, light; 2: wt, crosslinked, light; 3: npq4 mutant, crosslinked, dark; 4: wt, crosslinked, dark; 5: wt, not crosslinked, light; 4: wt, not crosslinked, dark), protein samples were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by first focusing them shorty in a 4-12% polyacrylamide bis-tris gel (Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany). After silver staining, protein containing bands were excised, destained, reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide as described (Poschmann, Seyfarth et al. 2014). Subsequently, protein samples were digested with 0.1 µg trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C and resulting peptides extracted with 1:1 (v/v) 0.1 % TFA / acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification and label-free quantification was carried out using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.0.30, MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany). Spectra were searched against 27416 protein entries from the TAIR database (TAIR10_pep_20110103_representative_gene_model_updated.fasta) with the predefined setting for orbitrap mass spectrometers: 20 ppm first search peptide tolerance; 4.5 ppm main search peptide tolerance, 0.5 Da MS/MS match tolerance. Carbamidomethyl at cysteines was set as fixed and N-terminal acetylation as well as methionine oxidation and 3-(carbamidomethylthio)propanoyl of lysine residues as variable modification. Peptide identification was controlled by a decoy database approach using a false discovery rate of 1%. Protein were accepted at a false discovery rate of 1% and initially with at least one unique or razor peptide. Subsequently, proteins marked as contaminants, proteins which were only identified by a modified site and protein identifications based on only one peptide were not considered for further analysis. Label-free quantification of precursor ions of unique and razor peptides was done using the label-free quantification algorithm implemented in MaxQuant (Cox, Hein et al. 2014) considering a “minimal ratio count” of two and “match between runs” enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The non-photochemical quenching of light energy as heat (NPQ) is an important photoprotective mechanism that is activated in plants when light absorption exceeds the capacity of light utilization in photosynthesis. The PsbS protein plays a central role in this process and is supposed to activate NPQ through specific, light-regulated interactions with photosystem (PS) II antenna proteins. However, NPQ-specific interaction partners of PsbS in the thylakoid membrane are still unknown. Here, we have determined the localization and protein interactions of PsbS in thylakoid membranes in the NPQ-inactive (dark) and NPQ-active (light) states. Our results corroborate a localization of PsbS in PSII supercomplexes and support the model that the light activation of NPQ is based on the monomerization of dimeric PsbS and a light-induced enhanced interaction of PsbS with Lhcb1, the major component of trimeric light-harvesting complexes in PSII.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Psbs, Ap-ms, Arabidopsis, Thylakoid

### Affiliations
Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Germany

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Germany


