### Accession
PXD024795

### Title
BSA,HSA,myoglobin,mouse liver LC-MS/MS

### Description
We systematically explored the VUV photochemical reactions of aqueous halides Cl−, Br−, and I− with native proteins and peptides under the irradiation of a 10-ns single pulse of 193-nm ArF VUV laser

### Sample Protocol
In the oxidation of peptide samples by CAPO, complex BSA and mouse liver digests samples were dissolved in 10 mM PBS solution (10 mM Na2HPO4, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) with a concentration of 1 mg/mL. To study the photochemical oxidation mechanism of CAPO, mouse liver digest was further prepared in 95% H218O solution with a final concentration of 1 mg/mL by dissolving 100 μg of mouse liver protein digest into 100 μl 10 mM PBS solution with 95% H218O.  In the oxidation of native proteins by CAPO, myoglobin and BSA were dissolved in 10 mM PBS solution containing10 mM Glu (serving as a radical scavenger) with a concentration of 10 μM. To elucidate the HSA-warfarin interaction details by photochemical oxidation analysis, 1 mL 10 μM HSA (10 mM PBS) was mixed with l μL 50 mM warfarin (dissolved in DMSO), while the control group was mixed with 1 μL DMSO. In the photochemical bromination and iodization of peptide samples, omplex mouse liver protein digest was dissolved in reaction buffer (10 mM Na2HPO4, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 150 mM NaBr/NaI, pH 7.4) with a concentration of 1 mg/mL. In the photochemical bromination and iodization of native proteins, myoglobin and BSA were dissolved in reaction buffer (10 mM Na2HPO4, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 150 mM NaBr/NaI, pH 7.4) with a final concentration of 10 μM. In elucidating the HSA-warfarin interaction details by photochemical halogenation, 1 mL 10 μM HSA (10 mM Na2HPO4, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 150 mM NaBr/NaI, pH 7.4) was mixed with l μL 50 mM warfarin (dissolved in DMSO), while the control group was mixed with 1 μL DMSO. After the photochemical oxidation or halogenation, the peptide sequences and modification sites were determined by LC-MS/MS analysis. Surveyor LC system coupled with LTQ-Orbitrap Velos MS (Thermo) and Vanquish Flex HPLC system coupled with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo) were utilized for the LC-MS/MS analyses of standard protein and complex mouse liver protein digests, respectively. The LC separation mobile phase A was 0.1% FA aqueous solution and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA acetonitrile solution. The tryptic peptide samples were re-dissolved into 0.1% FA (v/v) solution to 0.1 μg/μL, loaded onto a 3 cm x 150 μm C18 (3 μm, 120 Å) trap column, and separated by a 15 cm x 75 μm i.d. C18 (3 μm, 120 Å) capillary column with flow rate at about 200 nL/min. The reversed-phase separation gradients for standard protein and complex mouse liver digests were set as 5-35% mobile phase B in 35 and 70 min, respectively. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos MS parameters were set as ion transfer capillary 275 °C, electrospray voltage 1.8 kV, full MS scan from 350 to 1850 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 in Orbitrap, and tandem MS (MS/MS) were collected under data-dependent mode (DDA) with the 20 strongest parent ions selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in LTQ. The normalized collision energy (NCE) of fragmentation was 35% and the dynamic exclusion parameters were set as repeat count 1, repeat duration 60 s, and exclusion duration 90 s. For Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS analysis, the MS/MS spectra were collected in a ‘top-speed’ manner (3 seconds) with a resolution of 15,000 in Orbitrap. The precursor ions with a charge state of 2 to 5 were isolated with a m/z window of 1.4 m/z and subjected to high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 28.0% NCE.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS datasets were searched by using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1) to determine the peptide sequences and photochemical modification sites. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification in dataset searching. Additional variable modifications for CAPO experiments: for BSA, HSA, and mouse liver protein samples, Oxi (CMYWFHLI) +15.99 Da and Oxi2 (CMYWF) +31.99 Da were included; for mouse liver digest dissolved in 95% H218O, Oxi (CMYFHLI) +15.99 Da, Oxi2 (W)+31.99Da, Oxid (CMYWFHLI) +18.00 Da, and Oxid2 (W)+36.00 Da were included. Additional variable modifications for photochemical bromination experiments: Br1 (YH) +77.9 Da, Br2 (YH) +155.8 Da, Br1O1 (W) +93.9 Da, Br2O1 (W) +171.8 Da, Br1O2 (W) +109.9 Da, and Oxi (MW) +15.99 Da were included. Additional variable modifications for photochemical iodization experiments: I1 (YH) +125.9 Da, I2 (YH) +251.8 Da, and Oxi (M) +15.99 Da were included. The other parameters were the default values of MaxQuant. Finally, the matched MS/MS spectra of modified peptides were manually validated and filtered to further improve the identification reliability.

### Publication Abstract
Ultraviolet (UV) laser photolysis of hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) for the <i>in situ</i> generation of hydroxyl radicals (<sup>&#x2022;</sup>OH) is a widely utilized strategy in the oxidation footprinting of native proteins and mass spectrometry (MS)-based structural analysis. However, it remains challenging to realize peroxide-free photochemical oxidation footprinting. Herein, we describe the footprinting of native proteins by chloride-mediated peroxide-free photochemical oxidation of proteins (PPOP). The protein samples are prepared within biocompatible phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 10 mM Gln as radical scavengers and oxidized in a capillary flow reactor directly under a single-pulse (10 ns) irradiation of a 193 nm ArF UV laser. The main oxidized protein residues are CMYWFHLI. We demonstrate that the PPOP-MS strategy is highly sensitive to the protein high-order structures and can be applied to monitor the protein-drug interfaces, which provides a promising footprinting alternative for protein structure-function explorations.

### Keywords
Myoglobin, Bsa, Hsa, Mouse liver lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China
Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics

### Submitter
Pan Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Fangjun Wang
CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China


