### Accession
PXD038845

### Title
KMT2A rearranged B lineage infant ALL cell line SEM treated with bortezomib LC-MS/MS

### Description
The KMT2A rearranged B lineage infant ALL cell line SEM was treated with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib followed by a multiplexed mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis at multiple time points (0, 6, 12, 16, and 20 hours) over 20 hours to further understand the cellular response of these cells to proteasome inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed with a protocol of multiplexed tandem mass tag labeling, two dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS) (reference: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28109439/). Cells were lysed and proteins were digested into peptides. After desalting, the peptides were differentially labeled with TMT reagents, consisting of three groups: an amine-reactive group, a balance group, and a reporter group. The isobaric labels, defined by a different distribution of isotopes (13C, 15N) between the reporter and balance groups, allow each labeled peptide to coelute during chromatography and to ionize at the same mass-to-charge in MS scans. The labeled samples were equally mixed and further fractionated by basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography. Each fraction was further analyzed by acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS. During ion fragmentation, the TMT reagents were cleaved to produce reporter ions in MS/MS spectra for quantification.

### Data Protocol
The collected data was searched against a database to identify peptides using the JUMP software suite (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25202125). While the peptides are identified by MS/MS, the quantification was achieved by the fragmented reporter ions in the same MS/MS scans. The peptide quantification data were then corrected for loading errors and summarized to derive protein quantification results. Statistical analysis (ANOVA) was performed to determine a cutoff for altered proteins and to evaluate false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Rearrangments in Histone-lysine-N-methyltransferase 2A (KMT2Ar) are associated with pediatric, adult and therapy-induced acute leukemias. Infants with KMT2Ar acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) have a poor prognosis with an event-free-survival of 38%. Herein we evaluate 1116 FDA approved compounds in primary KMT2Ar infant ALL specimens and identify a sensitivity to proteasome inhibition. Upon exposure to this class of agents, cells demonstrate a depletion of histone H2B monoubiquitination (H2Bub1) and histone H3 lysine 79 dimethylation (H3K79me2) at KMT2A target genes in addition to a downregulation of the KMT2A gene expression signature, providing evidence that it targets the KMT2A transcriptional complex and alters the epigenome. A cohort of relapsed/refractory KMT2Ar patients treated with this approach on a compassionate basis had an overall response rate of 90%. In conclusion, we report on a high throughput drug screen in primary pediatric leukemia specimens whose results translate into clinically meaningful responses. This innovative treatment approach is now being evaluated in a multi-institutional upfront trial for infants with newly diagnosed ALL.

### Keywords
Human, B cell, Spectrum counting, Acute leukemia, Blood

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Member, Stanford Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Vishwajeeth Pagala

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja A. Gruber
Member, Stanford Cancer Institute


