### Accession
PXD039635

### Title
LC-MS analysis of Murine eIF4E-BP1/2 Double Knockout naive and TCR stimulated CD4+ T cells

### Description
This project focuses on examining the differences in the global CD4+ T cell proteome between cells lacking the negative regulators of eIF4E( eIf4E-Binding Proteins 1/2) and WT naive CD4+ T cells both prior and following TCR stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
Splenic cells from eIF4E-BP1/2 Double Knockout Foxp3-GFP fusion and WT Foxp3-GFP Fusion Mice were sorted by FACS to isolate CD4+CD62L+CD44-Foxp3- Naive T cells. T cells were activated with platbound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for a period of 48 hours. Cell lysates were collected from either freshly sorted naive T cells or following T cell activation using RIPA lysis buffer and Roche cOmplete Protease Inhibitor cocktail. Lysate samples were loaded onto a single stacking gel band to remove lipids, detergents and salts. The single gel band containing all proteins was reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetic acid and digested with trypsin. 2 ug of extracted peptides were re-solubilized in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo, 75uM ID X 2cm C18 3uM beads) precolumn and then onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (Thermo, 75uM X 15cm with 2uM C18 beads) analytical column separation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000  uHPLC at 250 nl/min with a gradient of 2-35% organic (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 3 hours . Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating at 120,000 resolution ( FWHM in MS1) with HCD sequencing (15,000 resolution) at top speed for all peptides with a charge of 2+ or greater.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted into *.mgf format (Mascot generic format) for searching using the Mascot 2.6.2 search engine (Matrix Science) against Mouse Uniprot sequences (2020).The database search results were loaded onto Scaffold Q+ Scaffold_4.9.0 (Proteome Sciences) for statistical treatment and data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells are critical for adaptive immunity, differentiating into distinct effector and regulatory subsets. Although the transcriptional programs underlying their differentiation are known, recent research has highlighted the importance of mRNA translation in determining protein abundance. We previously conducted genome-wide analysis of translation in CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells revealing distinct translational signatures distinguishing these subsets, identifying eIF4E as a central differentially translated transcript. As eIF4E is vital for eukaryotic translation, we examined how altered eIF4E activity affected T&#xa0;cell function using mice lacking eIF4E-binding proteins (BP<sup>-/-</sup>). BP<sup>-/-</sup> effector T&#xa0;cells showed elevated Th1 responses <i>ex&#xa0;vivo</i> and upon viral challenge with enhanced Th1 differentiation observed <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i>. This was accompanied by increased TCR activation and elevated glycolytic activity. This study highlights how regulating T&#xa0;cell-intrinsic eIF4E activity can influence T&#xa0;cell activation and differentiation, suggesting the eIF4EBP-eIF4E axis as a potential therapeutic target for controlling aberrant T&#xa0;cell responses.

### Keywords
Immunology, Translational regulation, Murine, Cd4+ t cells, Eif4e

### Affiliations
McGill University
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University. Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health (IDIGH) Program, Center for Translational Biology, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center. Montreal, Quebec Canada

### Submitter
Roman Istomine

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ciriaco Piccirillo
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University. Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health (IDIGH) Program, Center for Translational Biology, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center. Montreal, Quebec Canada


