### Accession
PXD011289

### Title
Stromal and epithelial proteome landscapes of pancreatic cancer predict poor prognosis and identify therapeutic options

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by the presence of relatively few tumor cells surrounded a heterocellular non-cancerous cell population embedded in extracellular matrix, collectively named stroma. Despite the recognition that the stroma is an important contributor to the typically poor outcome of PDAC, its analysis has been hampered by the analysis of bulk tissue. Similar issues have precluded meaningful analysis of the epithelial compartment. Here, we present the proteome analysis of a set of sixteen lasercapture microdissected PDAC samples, investigating tumor and stroma, together with bulk tumor samples, yielding the deepest PDAC proteomic to date.

### Sample Protocol
Approval from the Local Medical Ethical committee at the VU University Medical Center was received for the Biobank (#14038). All patients gave informed consent for tissue sampling, clinical data analysis and molecular analysis. Consecutive snap-frozen tumor samples from January 2014 until November 2015 from the VU University Medical Center were evaluated for their quality and tumor percentage. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) was performed on an LCM microscope (Leica, Switzerland) for a total surface of 3x10^6µm2 per compartment. Selected areas were captured in 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, USA) and stored until further preparation. Samples were sonicated and reduced to a final concentration of 5mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and 15mM Iodoacetamide (IAM). Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin was added overnight to a final concentration of 7ng/µl. Digestion was stopped with acidification by Trifluoroacetic acid. The peptide mixture was centrifuged and supernatant was transferred to a glass-lined MS/MS auto sampler vials. Samples were brought up to 20µl volume and stored at -80°C until further analysis. Frozen bulk tumors from 10 PDX models were used for proteome analysis. A minimum of 100 mg of tissue was digested in lysis buffer (9M Urea, 20mM Hepes pH 8.0, 1mM Na3VO4, 2.5mM Na4P2O7, 1mM Na2C3H7PO6) using sonication. Proteins were reduced in 5mM DDT, alkylated in 15 mM IAM and digested overnight with Trypsin. Peptides were stored in autosampler vials at -20°C until LC-MS/MS measurement. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 130 min (150 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 32 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot FASTA file (release march 2017, 42161 entries, canonical and isoforms) using MaxQuant 1.5.8.0. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by label-free quantitation (LFQ) using default settings in MaxQuant. To find statistically significant differences in LFQ values between sample groups, we used the R package LIMMA after data imputation from a normal distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by a relative paucity of cancer cells that are surrounded by an abundance of nontumor cells and extracellular matrix, known as stroma. The interaction between stroma and cancer cells contributes to poor outcome, but how proteins from these individual compartments drive aggressive tumor behavior is not known. Here, we report the proteomic analysis of laser-capture microdissected (LCM) PDAC samples. We isolated stroma, tumor, and bulk samples from a cohort with long- and short-term survivors. Compartment-specific proteins were measured by mass spectrometry, yielding what we believe to be the largest PDAC proteome landscape to date. These analyses revealed that, in bulk analysis, tumor-derived proteins were typically masked and that LCM was required to reveal biology and prognostic markers. We validated tumor CALB2 and stromal COL11A1 expression as compartment-specific prognostic markers. We identified and functionally addressed the contributions of the tumor cell receptor EPHA2 to tumor cell viability and motility, underscoring the value of compartment-specific protein analysis in PDAC.

### Keywords
Prognosis, Pancreatic cancer, Stroma, Laser capture microdissection, Label-free

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


