### Accession
PXD034941

### Title
RNA-host protein interaction analyses reveal additional proteins involved in SARS-CoV-2 RNA biology

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 is a positive single-stranded RNA virus which interacts at different stages with the host proteins of infected cells. These interactions are necessary for the host to recognize and block the replication of the virus. But, at the same time, the virus requires host proteins to translate, transcribe and replicate its genetic material. In order to identify the host proteins that interact with SARS-CoV-2 RNA, we adopted the RNA-protein interaction detection coupled to mass spectrometry (RaPID-MS) technology, which allows the purification and identification by MS-based proteomics of the proteins associated to a specific RNA of interest expressed in mammalian cells. In particular, we conducted the analysis on the more structured regions of SARS-CoV-2 RNA and retrieved several proteins specifically associated with each region. Overall, our data revealed a list of proteins associated to SARS-CoV-2 RNA that will be further characterized to understand their role in SARS-CoV-2 infection and viral replication.

### Sample Protocol
We adopter the RaPID-MS strategy: HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid vectors expressing ?N-HA-BASU and one of the BoxB-RNA fragments using LipofectamineTM 3000 transfection reagent (L3000001; ThermoFisher Scientific), according to vendor?s instructions. After 48h from transfection, medium was changed and replaced with standard cultivating medium complemented with 200 uM biotin for 1 hour. Cells were harvested, washed once with PBS 1x and lysed with RIPA buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1%Triton-X100, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.1% NaDeoxycholate, 1mM EDTA) supplemented with 1mM 1,4-Dithiothreitol (DTT), cOmplete? Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (11697498001; Merck) and PhosSTOP? (4906845001; Merck). Cell lysates were incubated for 15 minutes on ice and then centrifuged at 15000 g for 15 minutes. The supernatants containing the protein extracts were transferred into fresh 1.5 ml tubes and protein concentration was measured by Bio-Rad Protein Assay Kit using BSA as protein standard (5000002; Bio-Rad). From each sample, 3 mg of protein extract was taken and brought to the same volume (600uL) with RIPA buffer. 5% of input material was taken for further analysis and 150 uL of pre-washed Streptavidin Mag Sepharose® (GE28-9857-99; Merck) were added to the remaining material. Then, samples were rocked over night at 4C. The following day, beads were separated from the unbound fractions and 5% of each fractions was collected on fresh tubes. Beads containing the biotinylated proteins were washed 3 times with 1 mL of Wash Buffer 1 (1%SDS supplemented with 1mM DTT, protease and phosphatase cocktail inhibitors); 1 time with Wash Buffer 2 (0.1% Na-DOC, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5M NaCl, 50mM HEPES pH7.5, 1uM EDTA supplemented with 1mM DTT, protease and phosphatase cocktail inhibitors) and 1 time with Wash Buffer 3 (0.5% Na-DOC, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 10mM Tris-HCl, 1uM EDTA supplemented with 1mM DTT, protease and phosphatase cocktail inhibitors). All the washes were performed by rocking samples 5 minutes at 4 °C. Finally, proteins were eluted with Laemmli buffer containing 100 mM DTT and boiled for 5 minutes at 95 °C. Proteins were then initially separated on a precast 4-12% gradient gel (NP0322BOX, ThermoFisher Scientific). Each lane was divided in 6 slices that were cut from gels and destained in 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN)/50 mM NH4HCO3. A reduction step was performed with 10 mM DTT, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. After each step, samples were dehydrated with 100% ethanol and quickly dried in a centrifugal evaporator (SpeedVac). Subsequently, gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and overnight digested with 12.5 ng/ml trypsin (Promega, V5113) at 37 °C. The following day, tryptic digested peptides were extracted with Extraction Buffer (3% TFA, 30% ACN) and 100% ACN. Prior to MS, peptides were desalted and concentrated in a single step through reversed phase chromatography on micro-column C18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and eluted in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with a 50-cm analytical column (75 mm inner diameter, 350 mm outer diameter) packed with C18 resin (EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 2M 50 cm x 75 M, Thermo Fisher Scientific) configuration. Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Samples were injected in an aqueous 0.1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and separated with a gradient of 5%?40% solvent B over 50 min followed by a gradient of 40%?60% for 10 min and 60%?80% over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min in the EASY-nLC 1000 system. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MSMS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300-1150) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R = 35,000 at m/z 400. The ten most intense peptide ions with charge states R 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 and fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy setting of 25%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 ms for full scans and 50 ms for MSMS and the target value for MSMS was set to 1e6. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software v.1.6.0.16. using the Andromeda search engine. In MaxQuant, the estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. The main search was performed with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was permitted, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The 2021 version of the Uniprot sequence was used for peptide identification. Proteins were profiled by quantitative label-free analysis, activating the label-free software MaxLFQ and analyzed using Perseus software

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a positive single-stranded RNA virus, engages in complex interactions with host cell proteins throughout its life cycle. While these interactions enable the host to recognize and inhibit viral replication, they also facilitate essential viral processes such as transcription, translation, and replication. Many aspects of these virus-host interactions remain poorly understood. Here, we employed the <i>cat</i>RAPID algorithm and utilized the RNA-protein interaction detection coupled with mass spectrometry technology to predict and validate the host proteins that specifically bind to the highly structured 5' and 3' terminal regions of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Among the interactions identified, we prioritized pseudouridine synthase PUS7, which binds to both ends of the viral RNA. Using nanopore direct RNA sequencing, we discovered that the viral RNA undergoes extensive post-transcriptional modifications. Modified consensus regions for PUS7 were identified at both terminal regions of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA, including one in the viral transcription regulatory sequence leader. Collectively, our findings offer insights into host protein interactions with the SARS-CoV-2&#xa0;UTRs and highlight the likely significance of pseudouridine synthases and other post-transcriptional modifications in the viral life cycle. This new knowledge enhances our understanding of virus-host dynamics and could inform the development of targeted therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Ars-cov-2; interactome; host-virus interactions; rbps

### Affiliations
ITB-CNR
Italian Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Roberto Giambruno

### Lab Head
Dr Francesco Nicassio
Italian Institute of Technology


