### Accession
PXD043367

### Title
The chromatin associated lncREST interacts with the replication fork to ensure effective replication stress response

### Description
In vivo pulldown of the long non-coding RNA lncREST combined with LC-MS/MS in HCT116 cells in non-treated and Hydroxyurea treated conditions

### Sample Protocol
DNA probes biotinylated at 3’ end targeting lncREST and LacZ were designed and purchased from IDT (see Table S1 for sequences). Briefly, 22 x 107 HCT116 non-treated or treated with 2mM HU overnight were washed with PBS and UV crosslinked with 265 nm UV light at 500 mJ/cm2 on a UVC500 UV crosslinker, scraped and pellets were snap-freezed. The following day, pellets were quickly thawed, lysed (50mM Tris-HCl, 10mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, supplemented with protease inhibitors and RNAse inhibitors) and sonicated in a Bioruptor device set on high for 15 cycles (30’’ ON/45’’ OFF) to obtain fragments of 100-500bp. Sonicated lysates were centrifuged at high speed to remove debris and supernatant was pre-cleared with Dynabeads MyOne streptavidin C1 (Invitrogen) for 30 min, and beads were discarded. Pre-cleared lysates were diluted with hybridization buffer (500 mM NaCl, 0.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH7, 1mM EDTA, 15% formamide, protease inhibitors and RNAsin) in a ratio 2ml/ml of lysate and one percent and 10 percent inputs for RNA and proteins, respectively, were put aside. Lysate were combined with 200pmoles of probes/ml of lysate for 4hrs at 37ºC, and then leave overnight at RT. The next day, 200ul of washed dynabeads/ml of lysate were added to the hybridized samples for 4 hrs at 37ºC. Beads were washed for 5 times, 5 min each wash with wash buffer (2X SSC, 0.5%SDS, supplemented with protease and RNAse inhibitors). Finally, beads were resuspended in elution buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH8, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.05% sodium lauryl sulfate, 0.5 mM DTT, Benzonase -125U for 200 x 106 cells, RNaseA) and incubated with agitation for 2-3 hours before separating the elute from the beads. The remaining beads were resuspended in 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. Both elutes and beads were sent for mass spectrometry. Beads were washed at least five times with 100ul 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate then 5ul (200ng/ul) of modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was spiked in and the samples were placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  The samples were then centrifuged or placed on a magnetic plate if magnetic beads were used and the liquid removed.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  All samples were then re-suspended in 50ul of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and desalted by STAGE tip (1).  On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 10 µl of HPLC solvent A.  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into a Velos Orbitrap Elite ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  1. Juri Rappsilber, Yasushi Ishihama and Matthias Mann, 2003. Stop And Go Extraction Tips for Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization, Nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS Sample Pretreatment in Proteomics. Anal. Chem. 75, 663-670. 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91

### Data Protocol
Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (1).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.   1- Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna pulldown, Rbps, Hct116

### Affiliations
CIMA (Centre for applied medical research) - University od Navarre
1- Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pio XII 55 Ave, 31008, Pamplona, Spain 2-Institute of Health Research of Navarra (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Spain

### Submitter
Luisa Statello

### Lab Head
Dr Maite Huarte
1- Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pio XII 55 Ave, 31008, Pamplona, Spain 2-Institute of Health Research of Navarra (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Spain


