### Accession
PXD007640

### Title
Quantitative proteomics and bioinformatics analyses reveal the mechanism of pan-aurora kinase inhibitor tozasertib in neuroblastoma

### Description
Neuroblastoma is the third most common pediatric cancer and is responsible for approximately 15% of all childhood cancer deaths (Maris & Matthay, 1999). In our analysis, we found that poor patient survival with increasing mRNA expression level of AURKA and AURKB in Mycn-amplified neuroblastoma. In the light of this evidence, we were able to find possibilities of existing inhibitors for therapy. According to the following experiments, we found that tozasertib, a pan-Aurora kinase inhibitor, has high therapeutic potential in neuroblastoma treatment. First, we performed in vitro experiments to reveal that tozasertib suppressed cell proliferation in multiple Mycn-amplified neuroblastoma cell lines. Next, we evaluated ex vivo not only in Mycn-amplified neuroblastoma xenograft mouse model but also TH-Mycn transgenic mouse model. The results showed that tozasertib significantly inhibited the tumor growth and prolonged the survival probability in both animal models. Finally, we explored the mechanism of tozasertib-treated tissues in two animal models by iTRAQ proteomic.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor tissues were grinded into a powder using pestle and mortar in liquid nitrogen. Tissue powder was the suspended in lysis buffer containing 1% (v/v) SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10% (v/v) glycerol and protease inhibitor. The solution containing tissue powder was kept vortexing until there was almost no visible pellet and the sample solution was homogenized on ice using a homogenizer with 60% amplitude, cycle = 0.6 for 2 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 16000 ×g at 4℃ for 10 minutes. 400μg/sample of each sample was added 1 M TEABC buffer to make every sample containing 50 mM TEABC (pH < 8.5). Proteins were reduced by 5 mM TCEP in a dry bath at 37℃ for 30 minutes and then alkylated by 2 mM MMTS at room temperature for 30 minutes. The all protein samples were digested into peptides by in gel digestion, 40% Acrylamide/bisacrylamide, 10% APS and TEMED were gently mixed with the indicated protein solution to make it as a gel. 25 mM TEABC was added to rehydrate the gel and trypsin (protein: trypsin = 10:1, w/w) was subsequently added to the rehydrated gel and incubated at 37℃ 16 hours. Peptides were extracted from the gel with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) TFA, and 100% ACN. Desalt samples by stage tips with SDB-XC empore disk membranes (3M, Neuss) and eluted in a buffer containing 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile. 150 μg peptides of each sample were required. Equal amount of peptides from different samples was labeled by adding iTRAQ Reagent 114, 115, 116, and 117, respectively and performed gently vortex at room temperature for 1 hour. And, then the labeled peptides were suspended in 2 ml buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4 and 25% (v/v) ACN, pH 3) and fractioned by PolySULFOETHYL ATM column (2.1 × 200 mm, 5-μm particles, 300 Å pore size, PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). A flow rate of 200μl/min with a gradient of 0-25% buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl and 25% (v/v) ACN, pH 3) for 30 minutes followed by a gradient of a 25-100% buffer B for 20 minutes was applied for peptide elution. The eluent was monitored by the absorbance of peptide bond at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 minute. Each fraction was dried with a sample concentrator. Finally, in xenograft mouse model, each fraction of peptides was desalted by StageTip. We perform desalting using SDB-XC StageTips, which the manufacturing processes of SDB-XC StageTips have been described (Rappsilber et al, 2007). In transgenic mouse model, each fraction of peptides was desalted by ZipTip® Pipette Tips (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). Peptides were suspended in 20 μl 0.1% (v/v) TFA and adjust the pH value to pH 3 by 10% (v/v) TFA. All fractions were combined into 20 tubes before desalting. The tips were rinsed by 100% ACN and 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) TFA and equilibrated by 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Peptide solution were then aspirated and dispensed for 20 times for binding. Bound peptides were then washed by 0.1% (v/v) TFA and eluted by 50% (v/v) ACN/0.1% (v/v) TFA, then dried by a centrifugal evaporator.   The proteomics data analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer were performed by the Academia Sinica common mass spectrometry facilities located at the Institute of Biological Chemistry. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 BEH column (Waters, Milford, MA) packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore with of 130 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 90 min from 5% to 40% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a column temperature of 35°C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode. The MS survey scan for all experiments was performed in the FT cell recording a window between 350 and 1600 m/z. The resolution was set to 60000 at m/z 400 and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1000000 ions. The m/z values triggering MS/MS were put on an exclusion list for 90 s. In all cases, one microscan was recorded. For HCD, the applied acquisition method consisted of a survey scan to detect the peptide ions followed by a maximum of three MS/MS experiments of the three most intense signals exceeding a minimum signal of 5000 in survey scans. For MS/MS, we used a resolution of 7500, an isolation window of 3 m/z and a target value of 100000 ions, with maximum accumulation times of 500 ms. Fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energy of 45% and an activation time of 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectral information was submitted to Proteome DiscovererTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), the software for Mascot search and data analysis. Data files were combined and used to query the Swiss-Prot human database (December 11, 2015) for xenograft mouse model and the Swiss-Prot mouse database (April 7, 2016) using the following parameter: 1) precursor mass tolerance (10 ppm); 2) fragment mass tolerance (50 mmu); 3) allow up to two missed cleavage sites; 4) dynamic modifications considered were carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), iTRAQ-4plex (K) and iTRAQ-4plex (N-term). FDR of decoy database search was set at 0.01 and relaxed target FDR was set at 0.05. Significant hits as defined by Mascot probability analysis were considered initially. Proteins with more than unique peptides were qualified for further analysis in both animal models. It was assumed that all treatment over control ratio of proteins was a normal distribution. All treatment over control ratio of proteins was counted and the proteins with R values out of median ± 1.96 SD were recognized as differentially expressed proteins. The details of the analysis were according to Wu et al. for selection of differentially expressed proteins (Wu et al, 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Neuroblastoma is a neural crest-derived embryonal tumor and accounts for about 15% of all cancer deaths in children. MYCN amplification is associated with aggressive and advanced stage of high-risk neuroblastoma, which remains difficult to treat and exhibits poor survival under current multimodality treatment. Here, we analyzed the transcriptomic profiles of neuroblastoma patients and showed that aurora kinases lead to poor survival and had positive correlation with MYCN amplification and high-risk disease. Further, pan-aurora kinase inhibitor (tozasertib) treatment not only induces cell-cycle arrest and suppresses cell proliferation, migration, and invasion ability in MYCN-amplified (MNA) neuroblastoma cell lines, but also inhibits tumor growth and prolongs animal survival in Th-MYCN transgenic mice. Moreover, we performed quantitative proteomics and identified 150 differentially expressed proteins after tozasertib treatment in the Th-MYCN mouse model. The functional and network-based enrichment revealed that tozasertib alters metabolic processes and identified a mitochondrial flavoenzyme in fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation, ACADM, which is correlated with aurora kinases and neuroblastoma patient survival. Our findings indicate that the aurora kinase inhibitor could cause metabolic imbalance, possibly by disturbing carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolic pathways, and ACADM may be a potential target in MNA neuroblastoma.

### Keywords
Neuroblastoma/ tozasertib/ itraq/ metabolite/ aurora kinase inhibitor.

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 

### Submitter
Chiao-Hui Hsieh

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan


