### Accession
PXD008724

### Title
APIM-peptide targeting PCNA improves cisplatin therapy in a rat muscle-invasive bladder cancer model

### Description
High mortality rate of muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) and complexity of disease demand new multi-targeting treatment strategies. Targeting proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) with a peptide containing the AlkB homologue 2 PCNA interacting motif (APIM), is shown to impair multiple vital cellular stress responses and induce hypersensitivity against several chemotherapeutics in different pre-clinical models. This study examine the anti-cancer efficacy of the novel APIM-peptide drug when combined with cisplatin-based therapies (cisplatin, cisplatin/gemcitabine (GC) and methotrexate/vinblastine/adriamycin/cisplatin (MVAC)) in a panel of bladder cancer (BC) cells and with intravenous cisplatin-therapy in a rat MIBC-model. Furthermore, we explore the molecular mechanisms underlying the observed effects on a genomic, proteomic and metabolomic level using microarray, multiplexed inhibitor bead (MIB)-assay, and targeted mass spectrometric metabolite profiling. The APIM-peptide significantly increased the efficacy of all cisplatin-based therapies in all BC cell lines tested, including a cisplatin resistant cell line and reduced the tumor load in cisplatin treated MIBC-bearing rats. Genome and proteome analysis of APIM-peptide/cisplatin treated BC cells revealed reduced expression of multiple proteins frequently overexpressed in MIBC. Of notice, the EGFR/ERBB2, PI3K/Akt and MAPK signaling pathways and anti-apoptosis were downregulated. We suggest that the anti-cancer effect of the APIM-peptide is through the downregulation of several known oncogenic signaling pathways including anti-apoptosis. Together our results indicate that the APIM-peptide represents a potential improved treatment approach for patients with MIBC.

### Sample Protocol
Cell extracts were prepared as previously described [1]. Briefly, cells were collected, resuspended  in buffer 1 (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 200 mM KCl) and  incubated  in  lysis  buffer 2 (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 200 mM KCl, 2 mM EGTA, 10 mM MgCl2, 40% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM DTT, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 1 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich), 2% complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche) and 2 µL/mL omnicleave (Epicentre Technologies)(1.5  h,  4ºC),  followed  by  sonication  and  centrifugation  (10  min,  4ºC,  13  600  rpm).  The supernatants represents total cell extract. Multiplexed inhibitor bead (MIB)-assay Kinase enrichment was performed as described in [2]. Briefly, kinase inhibitors (Bisindolylmaleimide X, Purvalonol B and SB6-060-05) were immobilized on sepharose beads (GE healthcare). Total cell extract (200 µg), prepared as described above, were added to each column and incubated (15 min, RT). The columns were washed, and bound proteins trypsinized on-column overnight. The eluted peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap MS and the data analysis was performed as previously described [2].  1. Olaisen, C., et al., PCNA-interacting peptides reduce Akt phosphorylation and TLR-mediated cytokine secretion suggesting a role of PCNA in cellular signaling. Cellular signalling, 2015. 27(7): p. 1478-1487. 2. Petrovic, V., et al., On-column trypsinization allows for re-use of matrix in modified Multiplexed Inhibitor Beads assay. Analytical Biochemistry, 2017. 523: p. 10-16.

### Data Protocol
The raw files from the experiments were inspected with Preview 2.3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.) to determine optimal search criteria (Kil, Becker et al. 2011). These were plugged in Max Quant v 1.5.30 (Cox and Mann 2008) mapping the spectra over Rat canonical proteome with Isoforms downloaded from Uniprot (Boutet, Lieberherr et al. 2016). The following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; Deamidation of Asparagine/Glutamine, Oxidation of Methionine, Protein N-terminal acetylation, and Dimethylation of Lysine/Arginine as variable modifications; precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 (high confidence) for peptide as well as protein group identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox, Hein et al. 2014) was used to estimate the protein amounts in the sample using match between the runs with alignment time of 20 minutes and match time window of 1 minute.

### Publication Abstract
Low response rate and rapid development of resistance against commonly used chemotherapeutic regimes demand new multi-targeting anti-cancer strategies. In this study, we target the stress-related roles of the scaffold protein PCNA with a cell-penetrating peptide containing the PCNA-interacting motif APIM. The APIM-peptide increased the efficacy of cisplatin-based therapies in a muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) solid tumor model in rat and in bladder cancer (BC) cell lines. By combining multiple omics-levels, from gene expression to proteome/kinome and metabolome, we revealed a unique downregulation of the EGFR/ERBB2 and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways in the APIM-peptide-cisplatin combination treated cells. Additionally, the combination treatment reduced the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins and proteins involved in development of resistance to cisplatin. Concurrently, we observed increased levels of DNA breaks in combination treated cells, suggesting that the APIM-peptide impaired PCNA - DNA repair protein interactions and reduced the efficacy of repair. This was also seen in cisplatin-resistant cells, which notably was re-sensitized to cisplatin by the APIM-peptide. Our data indicate that the increased efficacy of cisplatin treatment is mediated both via downregulation of known oncogenic signaling pathways and inhibition of DNA repair/translesion synthesis (TLS), thus the APIM-peptide hits both nuclear and cytosolic functions of PCNA. The novel multi-targeting strategy of the APIM-peptide could potentially improve the efficacy of chemotherapeutic regiments for treatment of MIBC, and likely other solid tumors.

### Keywords
Assay, Ay-27, Rat, Lfq, Mib

### Affiliations
Professor Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet Erling Skjalgssons g 1, Laboratoriesenteret * 231.05.036 Trondheim 7030 Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Marit Otterlei
Professor Institutt for klinisk og molekylær medisin Norges teknisk-naturvitenskapelige universitet Erling Skjalgssons g 1, Laboratoriesenteret * 231.05.036 Trondheim 7030 Norway


