### Accession
PXD009999

### Title
Phosphoproteomic-based kinase profiling early in influenza virus infection

### Description
Although annual epidemics of seasonal influenza affect around 10% of the global population, current treatment options are limited and development of new antivirals is urgently needed. Here, using state-of-the-art quantitative phosphoproteomics, we reveal the unique phosphoproteome dynamics that occur in the host cell within minutes of influenza A virus (IAV) infection. Based on this virus-induced phosphorylation signature, we uncover cellular kinases required for the observed signalling pattern and find that inhibition of selected candidates, such as the G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2), leads to decreased IAV replication. As GRK2 has emerged as drug target in heart disease, we focus on its role in IAV infection and show that it is required for viral entry at the stage of uncoating. Replication of seasonal and pandemic IAVs is severely decreased by specific GRK2 inhibitors in primary human airway cultures and in an animal model. Our study reveals the IAV-induced changes to the cellular phosphoproteome and identifies GRK2 as a crucial node of the kinase network that enables IAV replication.

### Sample Protocol
Five biological replicates of the phosphoproteomic experiment were performed using SILAC-labelled A549 cells. The following conditions were used: L (light), where A549 cells were grown in normal DMEM; M (medium), where A549 cells were grown in DMEM containing 4,4,5,5-D4 lysine and 13C6 arginine; and H (heavy), where A549 cells were grown in DMEM containing 13C6 15N2 lysine and 13C6 15N4 arginine. Medium and heavy labelled cells were infected with IAV (A/WSN/1933) at an MOI of 25 PFU/cell for 5 and 15 minutes respectively. As a mock-infection control, an equivalent amount of allantoic fluid from non-infected 10-day old embryonated chicken eggs was diluted in infection PBS and added to unlabelled cells (L). After the corresponding incubation time, the cells were directly lysed in SDS-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2, 0.1 M DTT, Complete (Roche) and Phos-Stop (Roche)). Protein extracts were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described in Wiśniewski et al. 2009. A fraction of these peptides was collected for total proteome analysis. Phosphopeptides were enriched by Ti4+-immobilized metal affinity chromatography (Ti-IMAC) and TiO2 affinity chromatography using magnetic microspheres (ReSyn Biosciences) and a magnetic separator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1 mg of Ti-IMAC or TiO2 magnetic microspheres were washed twice with 70% (v/v) ethanol and equilibrated once in 1% NH4OH and three times in phosphopeptide loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)). 500 µg of tryptic peptides were diluted in loading buffer, added to 1 mg of equilibrated magnetic microspheres and incubated for 20 min at RT with continuous rotation. After binding of the phosphopeptides, the microspheres were washed once with loading buffer and unbound peptides were removed by three washes with washing buffer (80% (v/v) ACN, 1% (v/v) TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted by incubation of the microspheres for 15 min in elution buffer (1% (v/v) NH4OH), acidified by addition of 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were resuspended in 3% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA and desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore). Filters were equilibrated once in a 60% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA and subsequently twice in 0.1% (v/v) TFA solution. Peptides were bound to the filters, washed three times with 0.1% (v/v) TFA and eluted in 60% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. After drying them in a SpeedVac concentrator, peptides were dissolved in 10 µ of LC-MS/MS solvent (3% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. All data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, Ca), which was connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). 4 µl of the peptide samples in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a frit column (inner diameter 75 µm, length 15 cm) packed with reverse phase material (C18-AQ, particle size 1.9 μm, pore size 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany), and separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/per min. Solvent composition of buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. For the phospho-enriched samples, the following LC gradient was applied: 0 min: 2% buffer B, 110 min: 30% B, 120 min: 50% B, 122 min: 95% B. Survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyser in the range of m/z 350-1,500, with a resolution of 60,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra were acquired in the ion trap mass analyser, using a normalized collision energy of 28%. The precursor ion isolation width was set to m/z 2.0, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3e4 were applied. Charge state screening was enabled, and charge states 2-7 were included. The threshold for signal intensities was 1e4, and precursor masses already selected for MS/MS acquisition were excluded for further selection during 30 s. For total protein samples, the following LC gradient was applied: 0 min: 5% buffer B, 50 min: 25% B, 60 min: 32% B, 70 min: 97% B. Survey scans were recorded in the range of m/z 300-1,500, with a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD spectra were acquired in the ion trap, using a normalized collision energy of 28%, an isolation window of m/z 1.6, a maximum injection time of 250 ms and an AGC target value of 1e2. The intensity threshold was 5e3 and the dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s.

### Data Protocol
A first round of peptide identification was conducted in Mascot (www.matrixscience.com)57 and the phosphoenrichment efficiency and the number of identifications for the different samples was evaluated using Scaffold PTM 3.0. MaxQuant Analysis. Data acquired on the Orbitrap Fusion were analysed with MaxQuant v1.5.0.3023, searching a database consisting of human (88,708 entries) and influenza A virus (A/WSN/33, 9 entries) sequences. To identify contaminant proteins, the internal contaminant database of MaxQuant was used and for target-decoy searches the database was reversed. Search parameters were: Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications; SILAC labelling (Arg10, Lys8, Arg6, Lys4) as heavy labels; enzyme trypsin/P; two missed cleavages were allowed; and a minimum of seven amino acids per identified peptide were required. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Peptide identifications were accepted until less than 1% of the reverse hits were retained in the list. The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Although annual influenza epidemics affect around 10% of the global population, current treatment options are limited and development of new antivirals is needed. Here, using quantitative phosphoproteomics, we reveal the unique phosphoproteome dynamics that occur in the host cell within minutes of influenza A virus (IAV) infection. We uncover cellular kinases required for the observed signaling pattern and find that inhibition of selected candidates, such as the G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2), leads to decreased IAV replication. As GRK2 has emerged as drug target in heart disease, we focus on its role in IAV infection and show that it is required for viral uncoating. Replication of seasonal and pandemic IAVs is severely decreased by specific GRK2 inhibitors in primary human airway cultures and in mice. Our study reveals the IAV-induced changes to the cellular phosphoproteome and identifies GRK2 as crucial node of the kinase network that enables IAV replication.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Influenza virus, Silac

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Virology University of Zürich Winterthurerstrasse 190 CH-8057 Zürich Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Emilio Yángüez

### Lab Head
Dr Silke Stertz
Institute of Medical Virology University of Zürich Winterthurerstrasse 190 CH-8057 Zürich Switzerland


