### Accession
PXD008251

### Title
Ribosomal/nucleolar stress induction regulates tert-butyl hydroperoxide (tBHP) mediated oxidative stress in Anopheles gambiae midguts

### Description
A general understanding of redox homeostasis in An. gambiae midgut epithelial cells under different oxidative conditions during P. falciparum ookinete invasion is missing. We used an ex vivo midgut culture model to understand AgTrx-1 protein expression pattern in An. gambiae midguts under oxidative stress of the ROS inducer, tert-butyl hydroperoxide (tBHP). We then quantified the midgut proteomic expression profile to understand organ-level regulation of the response to oxidative stress. An. gambiae midguts under low (50M) and high (200M) tBHP concentrations were enriched in ribosomal proteins (RPs), consistent with cells undergoing ribosomal/nucleolar stress. Nevertheless, these midguts were also enriched in peptidases, integral membrane proteins, and cytochrome P450s indicating cells that are undergoing protein processing and folding through post-translational modification (PTMs), and detoxification of toxic compounds through active efflux. This response to oxidative stress was strikingly dissimilar to that observed from previous studies with another dipteran, Drosophila following oxidative stress induction. Our data indicates that the response to tBHP induced oxidative stress is mild and suggests that the associated antioxidant response is similar to what is observed during midgut invasion of P. falciparum okinete. Furthermore, our data shows that ribosomal/nucleolar stress is crucial in the regulation of oxidative stress in An. gambiae midguts. Given this importance, its possible to develop mechanisms to perturb this ribosomal/nucleolar stress response in An. gambiae resulting into unmanageable levels of oxidative stress exposure to Plasmodium parasite in the midgut, yet still allowing the mosquito to survive the perturbation. Unmanageable levels of oxidative stress could result to harmful effect to the Plasmodium and eventually its death resulting into halting of its transmission.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, only 3 treatment groups were used and these were: ex vivo organ culture only (control), 50 M (low), and 200 M (high). This was decided basing on no significant differences in AgTrx-1 expression levels observed across the different concentrations of tBHP used in the ROS induction assays. Also, the high cost of LC-MS/MS run per sample necessitated that we use a small number of samples. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, treatment groups (45 midguts/samples) were processed for proteins. Total protein lysate was prepared by lysing the midgut samples with 45 μL of SDST-lysis buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 100 mM Tris/HCl, 0.1 M DTT pH 7.6) and boiled at 95oC for 5 minutes. 30 μL of the protein lysates was taken for protein digestion according to the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (Tao et al., 2014a; Tweedell et al., 2015) (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). Acidified tryptic peptides from FASP approaches were desalted using an HPLC C18 column on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA)(Tao et al., 2014a; Tweedell et al., 2015). Concentration of the peptides following FASP approaches was estimated using protein digest standards whose concentrations, as determined by BCA, were known (Tao et al., 2014a; Tweedell et al., 2015).  Peptide products desalted and digested by the FASP protocol were dissolved in loading buffer (97.9% water, 2% CAN, and 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and ~ 20 μg was injected to our previously constructed online 2D HPLC-MS/MS system, using the exact method as described previously and briefly detailed below (Tao et al., 2014a, 2014b; Tweedell et al., 2015). The online 2D HPLC-MS-MS system was constructed by integrating one SCX column (150 μm i.d. x 2 cm length PolySULFOETHYL ATM, 5 µm 300 Å, PolyLC INC) into an Agilent LC-MS system comprised of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6520 QTOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. For the online SCX fractionation, in the first dimension peptides were loaded into the SCX column at 1.8 μl/min and the peptides were eluted using the autosampler by injecting 6 μl of each increasing salt concentration (0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, 160, and 300mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA) followed by one injection of 500 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA to wash the column. The salt elution was captured by a C18 enrichment column integrated into the Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip (360 nL, 180 Å C18 trap with a 75 μm i.d., 150 mm length, 180 Å C18 analytical column). In the second dimension, with the valve switched and the RPLC gradient started, the peptides were eluted from the enrichment column and separated by a C18 analytical column. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a gradient starting at 97% A (A: 99.9% water, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was 3–10% B (B: 90% ACN, 9.9% water, 0.1% FA) for 4 min, 10–35% B for 56 min, 35–99% B for 2 min, and maintained at 99% B for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of column with 3% B for 10 min. Data-dependent (autoMS2) MS acquisition was performed by an Agilent 6520 QTOF at 2 GHz. Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1700, and the top four peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1700 at a scan rate of 1.5 spectra per second. A medium isolation width (~4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.6 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied with precursors excluded for 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectra were acquired.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic format (.mgf) by Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.04.00. The data acquired was used to search the VectorBase Anopheles gambiae protein FASTA sequence database (VectorBase, http://www.vectorbase.org, Anopheles gambiae PEST, AgamP4.2.) for peptide sequence alignments. The search engine used for the search was MASCOT version 2.5 with the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine residues set as fixed and variable modifications respectively. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints, and up to two internal cleavage sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. The MASCOT search results were exported as .DAT format and then imported into the Scaffold software (version 4.4.5, Proteome Software) for curation, label-free quantification, analysis, and visualization. Overall, protein false discovery rates of less than 1% and peptide false discovery rates of less than 1% were obtained with Scaffold filters, and each protein had ≥ 2 unique peptides. Identified proteins were clustered to remove redundancy. Proteins were clustered together if there was a peptide identification shared between them, because this indicates substantial sequence similarity, and the protein with the greatest number of peptides identified was considered the unique protein identification from that group. The data analysis pipeline meets all MIAPE standards (Taylor et al., 2007) and the detailed peptide data can be found in Table S1 in supplemental material.

### Publication Abstract
Paraquat is a potent superoxide (O&#x2082;<sup>-</sup>)-inducing agent that is capable of inducing an oxidative imbalance in the mosquito midgut. This oxidative imbalance can super-stress the malaria parasite, leading to arrested development in the mosquito midgut and reduced transmission. While several studies have explored the effect of paraquat on malaria parasites, a fundamental understanding of the mosquito response to this compound remains unknown. Here, we quantified the mosquito midgut proteomic response to a paraquat-laced sugar meal, and found that <i>An. gambiae</i> midguts were enriched in proteins that are indicative of cells under endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We also carried out qRT-PCR analyses for nine prominent thioredoxin (Trx) and glutathione (GSH)-dependent genes in mosquito midguts post <i>P. falciparum</i> blood meal ingestion to evaluate the concordance between transcripts and proteins under different oxidative stress conditions. Our data revealed an absence of significant upregulation in the Trx and GSH-dependent genes following infected blood meal ingestion. These data suggest that the intrinsic tolerance of the mosquito midgut to paraquat-mediated oxidative stress is through an ER stress response. These data indicate that mosquitoes have at least two divergent pathways of managing the oxidative stress that is induced by exogenous compounds, and outline the potential application of paraquat-like drugs to act selectively against malaria parasite development in mosquito midguts, thereby blocking mosquito-to-human transmission.

### Keywords
Nucleolar stress, Oxidative stress, Malaria, Anopheles gambiae, Tert butyl hydroperoxide, Ribosomal stress

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida

### Submitter
Chun Hin Law

### Lab Head
Dr Rhoel Dinglasan
Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida


