### Accession
PXD003252

### Title
Ovarian cancer cell line LC-MS-MS

### Description
A2780-DR cells are cisplatin resistance compared to A2780. H19 knockdown in A2780-DR cells resulted in recovery of cisplatin sensitivity in vitro and in vivo. To demonstrate how H19 contributes to cisplatin-resistance in ovarian cancer, proteomic analysis was carried out on A2780, A2780-DR, A2780-DR/H19si, and A2780-DR/control cells. Proteins expression levels were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software (http://medusa.biochem.mpg.de/maxquant_doku/). The experiments were repeated twice and the false-positive rate was set to be <1%. Based on label-free quantification intensity ratios (>1.67 or <0.6) in proteins that have two or more unique peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed using lysis buffer (4% SDC in 0.1M Tris-Hcl, ph=8.0) with SIGMAFAST™ Protease Inhibitor (Sigma, USA). Equal amount of proteins from four cell sublines (about 50 μg) were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide. In solution digestion was then carried out with sequencing grade modified trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, USA) at 37°C overnight. The peptides were acidated with 0.5-1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in the final concentration. The SDC was removed by high speed centrifugation. Tryptic peptides were desalted and centrifuged in a speedvac to reduce the volume. Then, Tryptic peptides were redissolved in 0.1% FA.   For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 90 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.20μl/min with a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system, which was directly interfaced with a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a Thermo Scientific AcclaimR PepMap RSLC column (50 μm ID, 15 cm length, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å). The precolumn was a Thermo Scientific AcclaimR PepMap100 column (100 μm ID, 2 cm length, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 2.2 SP1 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (350-2000 m/z, 70,000 resolution) followed by 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 27% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the "human.fasta" from UniProt (release date of March 19, 2014；68406 entries) using Proteome Discoverer software (Version PD1.4, Thermo Scientific, USA). The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the dynamic modification; precursor mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm; and the fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD. When the q value was smaller than 1%, the peptide spectrum match (PSM) was considered to be correct. Peptides only assigned to a given protein group were considered as unique. The false discovery rate (FDR) was also set to 0.01 for protein identifications. Relative protein quantification was performed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.4.0.8) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Quantitation was carried out only for proteins with 2 or more unique peptide matches and PEP<0.001.

### Publication Abstract
Primary and acquired drug resistance is one of the main obstacles encountered in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) chemotherapy. Cisplatin induces DNA damage through cross-linking and long integrated non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) play an important role in chemical induced DNA-damage response, which suggests that lincRNAs may be also associated with cisplatin resistance. However, the mechanism of long integrated non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) acting on cisplatin resistance is not well understood. Here, we showed that expression of lin-RECK-3, H19, LUCAT1, LINC00961, and linc-CARS2-2 was enhanced in cisplatin-resistant A2780-DR cells, while transcriptome sequencing showed decreased Linc-TNFRSF19-1 and LINC00515 expression. Additionally, we verified that different H19 expression levels in HGSC tissues showed strong correlation with cancer recurrence. H19 knockdown in A2780-DR cells resulted in recovery of cisplatin sensitivity in vitro and in vivo. Quantitative proteomics analysis indicated that six NRF2-targeted proteins, including NQO1, GSR, G6PD, GCLC, GCLM and GSTP1 involved in the glutathione metabolism pathway, were reduced in H19-knockdown cells. Furthermore, H19-knockdown cells were markedly more sensitive to hydrogen-peroxide treatment and exhibited lower glutathione levels. Our results reveal a previously unknown link between H19 and glutathione metabolism in the regulation of cancer-drug resistance.

### Keywords
Ovarian cancer; cisplatin resistance; lc-ms-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Hong Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Yue-Jin Hua
Institute of Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University


