### Accession
PXD025272

### Title
IKAROS and MENIN are Functionally Cooperative Therapeutic Targets in Acute Myeloid Leukemia

### Description
Genome-scale functional genetic screening was utilized to identify resistance mechanisms and synthetic lethal interactions during small molecule targeting of MENIN and DOT1L in MLL1-rearranged AML. Chromatin regulatory complexes are found to modulate the therapeutic response to these inhibitors, and IKZF1/IKAROS is identified as an essential transcriptional regulator that supports leukemia gene expression through extensive chromatin co-occupancy with MENIN and the transcription factor MEIS1. Furthermore, we show that combined IKAROS degradation with imide drugs and MENIN inhibition using VTP-50469 leads to synergistic anti-leukemic effects through rapid induction of apoptotic cell death both in vitro and in vivo. This study uncovers a previously underappreciated role for IKAROS in AML and cooperativity among IKAROS, MLL1/MENIN and MEIS1 in maintaining leukemogenic transcription.

### Sample Protocol
To generate BioID systems gene synthesis was carried out by Twist Biosciences to N- and C-terminally BirA* tag coding sequences for IKAROS, MEIS1, HOXA10 and ZNF692. The resulting fusion genes were cloned into the lentiviral plasmid pTwist-Lenti-SFFV-Puro-WPRE. MV4;11 and MOLM13 cells were virally transduced with the resulting plasmids and cells were selected with puromycin. The degree of biotin labelling was assessed by Western blotting with streptavidin-HRP (data not shown) and N-terminally BirA* tagged IKAROS, C-terminally BirA* tagged MEIS1, C-terminally BirA* tagged HOXA10 and C-terminally BirA* tagged ZNF692 containing MV4;11 and MOLM13 cell lines were chosen for subsequent experiments based on near-equal biotin labeling signal. ZNF692 was chosen as a control because it does not score as a dependency in MLL-r leukaemia cells, was not enriched in IKAROS/MEIS1/HOXA10 BioID data, contains multiple ZF domains and was thought to be an inert DNA binding control independent of MLL-r leukemic function. Cell lines were expanded to large volumes and 50 µM Biotin was added to culture medium 24 hours prior to harvest. Cells were harvested and washed 3 times with PBS and then resuspended in a hypotonic buffer (50 mM KCl, 10 mM MgSO4, 5 mM HEPES, 0.05% NP-40, 1 mM PMSF) followed by 3 washes in a nuclear wash buffer (10 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2) to generate intact nuclei. Nuclei were lysed in BioID Lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 2% Triton X-100 supplemented with Roche protease inhibitor tablets), followed by probe tip sonication (3 rounds, duty cycle 65%, 30 s pulses). Samples were clarified by centrifugation and lysates were quantified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Ten mg of protein per replicate, two replicates per cell line, were incubated with 80 μL of streptavidin sepharose high performance beads (Millipore Sigma) overnight at 4 ºC. After incubation beads were washed with 2 mL of 2% SDS, 2 mL of BioID lysis buffer three times, 10 mL of 50 mM Tris six times, and 5 mL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) once. Streptavidin bound proteins then underwent on-bead tryptic digestion by adding 1 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and incubating beads overnight at 37 ºC. After digestion, the supernatant was separated from the streptavidin beads and acidified to 1% Formic acid. Acidified peptides were then de-salted and purified using SOLAµ™ Solid phase extraction plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  All mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an EasySpray ES803a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For BioID interaction proteomics, peptides were separated using a 140 min gradient of 5 - 34% buffer B (95% acetonitrile) in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data were acquired in the orbitrap using a mass range of m/z 375 – 1500 in profile mode with a 3 s cycle time between master scans. Maximum injection time was set to 50 ms, resolution 120,000, AGC target 4 x 105, and 30 s exclusion after 2 events. Data dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap in centroid mode with the collision energy set at 30%, AGC target set to 1  104 and a maximum injection time of 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (December 2016) with both the forward and reverse sequences. For BioID data searches a FASTA entry was included for the protein sequence of BirA*. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). For BioID data spectral counting analysis, individual Proteome Discoverer searches were conducted on IKAROS, MEIS1 and HOXA10 BioID .RAW files, combining both replicates. The protein identities and their corresponding PSM values were then merged between MV4;11 and MOLM13 cell lines to create a unified dataset with proteins uniquely detected in MV4;11 or MOLM13 cells excluded. The protein identities were then referenced against the CRAPome repository (PMID: 23921808) to remove contaminants common to affinity purification MS experiments. The dataset was further filtered by removal of proteins that met either of the following two criteria; if the number of “experiments detected” in the CRAPome repository was greater than the average of the number of “experiments detected” values across our BioID datasets or if the “average spectral count” reported in the CRAPome repository was greater than the average of the “average spectral count” values detected in our BioID datasets. NuRD complex member proteins are highly prevalent in the CRAPome and because of the biological interests of this study, we made a special exemption to keep them in this dataset. After CRAPome proteins were removed, the resulting proteins were ranked from highest to lowest number of PSMs and plotted in rank order. For Label Free Quantitation (LFQ), analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. Separate analyses were made for MV4;11 and MOLM13 cells using corresponding IKAROS, MEIS1, HOXA10 and ZNF692 BioID .RAW files that were searched together and the Minora Feature Detector was used to generate abundance values for proteins across the different samples. Normalization was applied in the Precursor Ions Quantifier tool using the Total Peptide Amount feature. Retention time alignment was set at 15 minutes. Log2 abundance ratios were generated for IKAROS, MEIS1 and HOXA10 over ZNF692 and a threshold was set to define enrichment as being greater than 2-fold (Log2 ratio=1). Based on Western blot analysis and the median value of Log2 ratios called in the MOLM13 experiment (IKAROS/ZNF692=-1.64, MEIS1/ZNF692=-0.73, and IKAROS/ZNF692=-1.95) we concluded that ZNF692-BirA* induced significantly higher labelling than IKAROS/MEIS1/HOXA10. Thus, MOLM13 BioID data was further normalized by subtracting the median value of all Log2 ratios in each comparison from each individual value. No extra normalization was applied to the MV4;11 LFQ data. PSM values from individual searches described above were added, and any protein with less than 2 PSMs was excluded from the LFQ analysis. Of those proteins that had 1 or more isoform detected, the isoform with the most PSMs was retained and the others were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mll1, Ikzf1, Ikaros, Lenalidomide, Kmt2a, Dot1l, Menin, Acute myeloid leukemia, Imid, Men1

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


