### Accession
PXD030572

### Title
Time-course proteomic analysis of irradiated human endothelial cells

### Description
The vascular endothelium is a hot spot in the response to radiation therapy for both tumors and normal tissues. To improve patient outcomes, interpretable systemic hypotheses are needed to help radiobiologists and radiation oncologists propose endothelial targets that could protect normal tissues from the adverse effects of radiation therapy and/or enhance its antitumor potential. To this end, we captured the kinetics of multi-omics layers – i.e. miRNome, targeted transcriptome, proteome and metabolome – in irradiated primary human endothelial cells cultured in vitro. We then designed a strategy of deep learning as in convolutional graph networks that facilitates unsupervised high-level feature extraction of important omics data to learn how ionizing radiation-induced endothelial dysfunction may evolve over time. Last, we present experimental data showing that some of the features identified using our approach are involved in the alteration of angiogenesis by ionizing radiation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. HUVECs were washed 3 times with PBS and lysed, strongly vortexed and sonicated for 5 minutes in 1 mL of protein extraction buffer containing 8 M urea (Sigma), 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.5 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and cOmplete™ Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). After addition of 0.03% (v/v) of ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant, Trypsin Enhancer (Promega), samples were incubated for 45 minutes at room temperature, centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 1 hour and the supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich). Experiments were performed in 4 replicates for each time point of the kinetic and each dose of irradiation. Peptide fractionation. Protein samples were reduced with 5 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethy) phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 1 hour and alkylated with 60 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in dark for 30 minutes. Then, 200 µg of protein were digested overnight at 37 °C with 3.5% (W/W) sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). 100 µg of the digests were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and labeled with iTRAQ® in a 4-Plex experimental design (114 and 116 reagents for control samples, 116 and 117 reagents for treated cells) as per the standard protocol supplied by the manufacturer (SCIEX). After labeling, samples were pooled and dried with the SpeedVac concentrator prior to peptide fractionation by isoelectric focusing. To perform peptide fractionation, 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator and the high resolution OFFGEL Kit (linear pH 3-10 gradient, 24 fractions) from Agilent Technologies were used as per the user’s guide protocol. After focusing, each fraction was concentrated with a SpeedVac concentrator prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography–electrospray ionization MS and data analysis of proteins. Peptides were resuspended in 15 to 80 µL of 3% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.2% (v/v) formic acid depending on the initial volume of the fraction and then analyzed with a nano-LC1200 system coupled to a Q-TOF 6520 mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source and an HPLC-chip cube interface (Agilent Technologies). Briefly, peptides were enriched and desalted on a 160-nl RP-C18 trap column and separated on a Zorbax  C18 column (30-nm pore size, 5-µm particle size, 150-mm long 75 µm inner diameter; Agilent Technologies) using a 55-minute linear gradient (3-75% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Full autoMS1 scans from 290 to 2400 m/z and autoMS2 from 59 to 3200 m/z were recorded. In each cycle, up to five precursors sorted by charge state (preferred 2+ ions and single-charge ions excluded) were isolated and fragmented in the collision cell. The collision cell energy was automatically adjusted according to the m/z ratio. Active exclusion of these precursors was enabled after 1 spectrum in 0.2 min, and the precursor selection threshold was set at 1000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol Peptide and protein identification were performed using the Spectrum Mill MS Proteomic Workbench (Rev B.04.00.127; Agilent Technologies). The following parameters were used for data extraction: MH+ mass range from 600 to 4000, scan time range from 0 to 300 min, similarity merging of scan with same precursor (+/- 15 sec and 0.05 m/z) and minimum MS s/n set to 25. The searches were performed with the following specific parameters: enzyme specificity, trypsin; two missed cleavage permitted; iTRAQ (N-term, K) fixed modifications; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation and Gln pyro-Glu (N-ter Q); maximum ambiguous precursor charge set to 3; mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 ppm; mass tolerance for fragment ions, 50 ppm; ESI-QUAD-TOF as instrument; taxonomy, Human; database, SWISS-PROT release 20170315; 50 % minimum scored peak intensity; calculate reversed database scores and dynamic peak thresholding. Identified proteins and peptides were auto-validated using default parameters. Validated peptides were then exported in an Excel .ssv excel file using the following filter parameters: score of peptides > 6 and % of SPI > 60. Last, differential protein expression of iTRAQ labeling data was performed using iQuantitator open source software and the eDesign default parameter value as described (Schwacke, J.H., Hill, E.G., Krug, E.L., Comte-Walters, S. & Schey, K.L. iQuantitator: a tool for protein expression inference using iTRAQ. BMC Bioinformatics 10, 342 (2009)).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Ionising radiation, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
PSE-SANTE/SERAMED, LRMED, IRSN
IRSN

### Submitter
Olivier Guipaud

### Lab Head
Dr Fabien Milliat
PSE-SANTE/SERAMED, LRMED, IRSN


