### Accession
PXD014322

### Title
Phosphoproteomic screening of exercise-like treatments reveals drug interactions regulating protein secretion

### Description
Exercise triggers skeletal muscle signalling pathways that modulate the release of circulating factors to cause systemic health benefits. Understanding these mechanisms could lead to better strategies for treating cardiometabolic diseases. We previously showed that acute exercise induces >1000 changes in protein phosphorylation in human muscle. Here we employed a strategy to deconvolute this network by analysing phosphoproteomes of rat L6 myotubes treated with small molecules that mimic different aspects of exercise signalling. Bioinformatics suggested that combining β-adrenergic and calcium agonists would yield a phosphoproteome most closely resembling exercise. Experimental analysis supported this but also revealed a surprising divergence in signalling from that observed with either drug alone. Dual stimulation promoted multisite phosphorylation of SERBP1, a regulator of Serpine1 mRNA stability, a pro-thrombotic fibrotic secreted protein. Secretomic analysis of L6 myotubes treated with β-adrenergic and calcium agonists revealed a significant decrease in SERPINE1 secretion and other deleterious secretory factors. This provides a novel approach to dissect the beneficial effects of exercise and demonstrates an underappreciated effect of exercise to reduce the circulating levels of certain factors, providing new insights into exercise benefits and their therapeutic potential.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for phosphoproteomics using the EasyPhos method (Humphrey et al., 2015). The samples were resuspended in 3% ACN and 0.1% TFA. For the total proteome, cells were lysed, precipitated and resuspended in TFE as per the phosphoproteomics samples above. For the secretome, media was collected and immediately filtered with a 0.22 m filter (Merck), into powdered urea to a final concentration of 6 M, with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA. Samples were concentrated with Amicon Ultra-15 spin columns with a nominal molecular weight limit of 3 KDa (Millipore, Merck) by centrifugation at 5000 xg and room temperature. The columns were washed three times with 6 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested with 1:50 Lys-C for 2 hours. The samples were diluted 1:5 to reduce the concentration of urea with 100 mM ABC. Trypsin was added at 1:50 and incubated for 18 hours at 30 °C. TFA was added to a final concentration of 1%. Samples were loaded onto 4X SDB-RPS stage tips and processed as per the phosphoproteomics samples except spins were 1000 xg and before eluting, the stage tips were washed with 1% TFA in isopropanol (Fisher Scientific), then washed with 0.2% TFA. Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography (LC) on a UHPLC system using a 50 cm column with a 75 m inner diameter, packed with 1.9 M C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, ReproSil Pur AQ) at 50°C. For the exercise-like treatment screen, a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) UHPLC connected to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. For the isoproterenol, thapsigargin and combination phosphoproteomics, total proteomics and secretome studies, a Proxeon Easy nLC1000 UHPLC was interfaced with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with 0.1% Formic Acid (buffer A) and 0.1% Formic Acid/80% ACN (buffer B). The flow rate was 300 nL/min on the Easy nLC1000 or 250 nL/min on the Dionex Ultimate 3000. For the phosphoproteomics and secretome studies, peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5% - 35% buffer B over 90 minutes. For total proteome analysis, peptides were eluted with a gradient of 5% - 30% buffer B over 180 minutes. For the exercise-like treatment screen, one full scan (300-1600 m/z, resolving power (R) = 70,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions, followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans with HCD (target 3.3e5 ions, max IT 120 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalised collision energy (NCE) 25%, 20% underfill ratio), detected (R = 17,500 at 200 m/z) in the Orbitrap detector. For the combination treatment phosphoproteomics study, one full scan (300-1650 m/z, resolving power (R) = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions, followed by 7 data-dependent MS/MS scans with HCD (target 1e5 ions, max IT 120 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalised collision energy (NCE) 27%), detected (R = 15,000 at 200 m/z) in the Orbitrap detector. For both proteome and secretome, peptides were analysed with one full scan (300-1650 m/z, resolving power (R) = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions, followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans with HCD (target 2e5 ions, max IT 25 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalised collision energy (NCE) 27%), detected (R = 15,000 at 200 m/z) in the Orbitrap detector.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Default settings were used, with the addition of Phospho(STY) in the variable modifications for the phosphoproteomics studies, and match between runs was turned on with an alignment time window of 20 minutes, and a match time window of 0.7 minutes. The rat uniprot database for searching was the July 2016 version for all experiments.   Bioinformatic and statistical analysis Data filtering and imputation The numbers of biological replicates per study were as follows. Exercise-like treatment study: (control = 18, TPA = 3, isoproterenol = 3, hyperosmotic stress = 3, berberine = 4, DNP = 4, AICAR/A-769662 = 3, heat = 5, thapsigargin = 5, aripiprazole = 5). Combination phosphoproteomics study (control = 4, isoproterenol = 5, thapsigargin = 4, isoproterenol + thapsigargin = 4). Control 4 was excluded from the combination phosphoproteomics study because it was an outlier in quality control including correlation plots and hierarchical clustering. Total proteomics: (control = 5, isoproterenol = 5, TBQ = 4, isoproterenol + TBQ = 4, isoproterenol + TBQ + BFA = 5). Secretome: (control = 5, isoproterenol = 4, TBQ = 5, isoproterenol + TBQ = 4, isoproterenol + TBQ + BFA = 4).   For all datasets, either phosphopeptides or protein groups were filtered out for reverse sequences and potential contaminants. In the phosphoproteomics experiments only phosphopeptides with a localisation probability of > 0.75 (class I) were considered. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and median normalized.  In the exercise-like treatment screen, each treatment group was imputed as previously described in (Yang et al., 2019). Briefly, if values were quantified in at least two replicates for a treatment, the remaining missing values would be imputed by sampling from a distribution with the same mean and standard deviation as the quantified replicates for that particular treatment and phosphopeptide. For remaining missing values in the exercise-like treatment screen or for the combination phosphoproteomics study, a second step of imputation was performed if at least three replicates had quantified values in the treatment and the values were completely missing or had only one quantified replicate in the respective controls, or vice versa, using a method previously described in (Robles et al., 2017). This involved sampling from a down shifted normal distribution (down shifted mean = replicate mean – 1.6x replicate standard deviation, down shifted standard deviation = 0.6 x replicate standard deviation), to simulate low abundance phosphopeptides.     Statistical analysis For the phosphopeptides with no missing values after imputation in the exercise-like treatment screen, an ANOVA blocking for experimental batch was implemented using limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). Contrasts of each treatment compared to control were extracted from the linear model fit.   For the other studies, two sample t-tests were performed with empirical Bayes moderation of standard error. Treatments were compared to control, with phosphopeptides or proteins only included if they were quantified in at least two replicates per condition. In all studies, p-values were corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
Exercise engages signaling networks to control the release of circulating factors beneficial to health. However, the nature of these networks remains undefined. Using high-throughput phosphoproteomics, we quantify 20,249 phosphorylation sites in skeletal muscle-like myotube cells and monitor their responses to a panel of cell stressors targeting aspects of exercise signaling in&#xa0;vivo. Integrating these in-depth phosphoproteomes with the phosphoproteome of acute aerobic exercise in human skeletal muscle suggests that co-administration of &#x3b2;-adrenergic and calcium agonists would activate complementary signaling relevant to this exercise context. The phosphoproteome of cells treated with this combination reveals a surprising divergence in signaling from the individual treatments. Remarkably, only the combination treatment promotes multisite phosphorylation of SERBP1, a regulator of Serpine1 mRNA stability, a pro-fibrotic secreted protein. Secretome analysis reveals that the combined treatments decrease secretion of SERPINE1 and other deleterious factors. This study provides a framework for dissecting phosphorylation-based signaling relevant to acute exercise.

### Keywords
Exercise, Myotubes, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
the University of Sydney

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
the University of Sydney


