### Accession
PXD033591

### Title
The salivary proteome in relation to oral mucositis in autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation recipients: a labelled and label-free proteomics approach-DDALFQ

### Description
Decreased salivary flow rates and/or changes in protein composition reported after autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (ASCT) reduces the protective function of saliva. This might be associated with the development of oral mucositis (OM), an inflammation of the oral mucosa as a result of chemotherapy before ASCT which affects patients? quality of life and risk factor for systemic infections. In this study, a TMT-labelled proteomics experiment, a label-free quantification (LFQ) proteomics experiment and a DIA-MS proteomics experiment were used to identify differences in the salivary proteome between patients with ulcerative OM (uOM; WHO score ? 2) and those without (nOM). For the TMT-labelled experiment, saliva samples of 5 uOM and 5 nOM were pooled at different time points: baseline, 1, 2, and 3 weeks after ASCT and 3 months after ASCT. A different salivary proteome was suggested by a distinct clustering of the OM pools at baseline, week 2 and week 3 after ASCT.

### Sample Protocol
All saliva samples used for both proteomics experiments were selected from multiple myeloma patients receiving autologous HSCT (ASCT) after high-dose melphalan (200 mg/m2) who were included in the multicenter, longitudinal H-OME study, a Dutch extension of the Orastem study [12]. The H-OME study (funded by Dutch Cancer Society, ACTA 2014-7468; trial register NTR5760) was approved by the Medical Research Ethical Committee (NL52117.018.15) and conducted according to GCP guidelines and the declaration of Helsinki. All patients signed informed consent before participation.  During the H-OME study, OM was scored 3 times a week during the hospitalization phase using the WHO scoring system. Patients with a score of ≥2 (indicating ulcerative OM) during this period were considered as OM patients. Stimulated whole-mouth saliva samples were collected at multiple time points: before ASCT during the focal dental evaluation (baseline), once a week during the hospitalization phase for the ASCT and 3 and 12 months after ASCT, as previously described. In total 9 OM and 10 nOM patients (OM: median age 57 (33 – 69 year); nOM: median age 57 (52 – 66 years)) were selected for this experiment (Figure 1). The same patients as in the TMT experiment were included with 4 (OM) or 5 (nOM) additional patients, also selected based on the sample time points and the volume of saliva available. For all stimulated whole-mouth saliva samples, total protein concentration was determined by absorbance 280 nm (Nanodrop spectrophotometer). To generate a spectral library for the DIA analysis, 10 µg of total protein from each sample was used to create a pool consisting of all saliva samples for the OM or nOM patients and all time points. 100 µg of the OM and nOM pool was added to solid urea. Proteins were subsequently reduced, alkylated and digested with lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin (for experiment details see File S1). This peptide mixture was purified and fractionated using reversed-phase chromatography at pH 5.5 using an Agilent 1100 series HPLC. Fractions were collected in MS vials per minute over a time interval of 65 min and automatically pooled by restarting the fraction collection cycle every 10 min resulting in 10 pooled fractions. The fractions were further analyzed in an LC/MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-LC (Thermo) in line connected to a Q Exative HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC™ column with C18-endcapped functionality (Pharmafluidics, Belgium) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a staggered gradient reaching 33% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 105 min, 55% MS solvent B in 145 min and 99% MS solvent B in 150 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a 10-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). In the first 15 min the flow was set to 750 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 8 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 at a maximum fill time of 60 ms. The 8 most intense ions above a threshold value of 8300 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 120 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
All LC/MS/MS runs were searched together using the Andromeda search engine within MaxQuant version 1.5.6.5. Default settings including a false discovery rate of 1% at the peptide and protein level were used to search the spectra against the Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database and the Human oral Microbiome Database (HOMD; www.HOMD.org). Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into the MaxQuant software (PMID 24942700). Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained for identification, while a minimum ratio count of two unique peptides was required for quantification. Protein identifications through mixing of microbial peptides with human peptides was avoided using the split taxonomy feature in the MaxQuant search engine in accordance to Grassl et al. 2016  Log2 transformed LFQ intensities were used to calculate the nOM/OM fold change for each protein. The standard deviation of the median subtracted distribution was used to determine the up- and down-regulated proteins according to the upper and lower limit of the 95% confidence interval. The up- and down-regulated proteins were added to the unique proteins and used in a gene ontology (GO) analysis using g:Profiler [23]. The unique and up-regulated proteins in the OM and nOM pools were run as multi query. Only annotated genes were used, and Bonferroni correction was used for the significance threshold. The significant GO terms for the biological processes (BP) and cellular components (CC) were further analyzed using RStudio (version 1.1.463) and the parent terms were used to divide the BP and CC terms into 4 and 3 groups, respectively. The BP terms were divided into 4 subgroups: immune (BP terms only under the immune system process (GO:0002376)), localization (BP terms only under localization (GO:0051179)), both terms, and others. The CC terms were divided into 3 subgroups: extracellular proteins (GO:0005576), intracellular proteins (GO:0005622) and, others. To determine if the OM and nOM pools were similar in significance for the GO terms within the subgroups, paired T-tests were used on -log10 transformed adjusted p-values of each GO term of both pools.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tmt-ms, Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, Multiple myeloma, Oral mucositis, Dia-ms, Saliva, Label-free quantification, Tmt-labelled proteomics

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Department of Hematology The Netherlands

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole M.A. Blijlevens
Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Department of Hematology The Netherlands


