### Accession
PXD018216

### Title
Slight deuterium enrichment in water acts as an antioxidant: is deuterium a cell growth regulator?

### Description
Small admixtures in water, e.g. of metal ions, often act as cell growth regulators. Here we report that enrichment of deuterium content in water, normally found at 8 mM concentration, two-three folds increases cell proliferation and lowers the oxidative stress level as well. Acting as an anti-oxidant, deuterium-enriched water prevents the toxic effect of such oxidative agents as hydrogen peroxide and auranofin. This action is opposite to that of deuterium depletion that is known to suppress cell growth and induce oxidative stress in mitochondria. We thus hypothesize that deuterium may be a natural cell growth regulator that controls mitochondrial oxidation-reduction balance. Since growth acceleration is reduced approximately by half by addition to water a minute amount (0.15%) of 18O isotope, at least part of the deuterium effect on cell growth can be explained by the isotopic resonance phenomenon.

### Sample Protocol
Expression proteomics sample preparation 15,000 A549 cells were seeded in each well of a 6-well plate (Sarstedt, Germany) and the cells were grown in 80 ppm DDW, NW or 350 ppm DEW medium in three biological replicates. After 48 h growth, the cells were collected and lysed in 50 mM Tris (741883, Sigma) buffer and 8M urea (U5378, Sigma) at pH 8.5, 1% SDS, and protease inhibitor (5892791001, Sigma). After protein reduction using 8 mM 1,4-Dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma 10708984001) and alkylation using 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma I1149), the proteins were precipitated using cold acetone at -20 ℃ overnight. Then the proteins were dissolved in 50 mM HEPES buffer at pH 8.0 containing 8 M urea and digested with Lysyl Endopeptidase (Lys C, Wako Chemicals GmbH 125-05061) (1:75, enzyme to protein ratio) at 30 ℃ for 6 h and trypsin (V5111, Promega) (1:50, enzyme to protein ratio) at 37 ℃ overnight. After labeling using TMT-10 reagent (90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific), desalting using C18 Sep-pak (WAT054960, Waters) and multiplexing, the peptides samples were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a Xbridge Peptide BEH C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (length, 25 cm; inner diameter, 2.1 mm; particle size, 3.5 µm; pore size, 300 Å; Waters), at a ﬂow rate of 200 µL/min. Fractionation was performed using a binary solvent system consisting of 20mM NH4OH in H2O (solvent A) and 20mM NH4OH in acetonitrile (solvent B). Peptides were eluted with a gradient from 2% to 23% B in 42 min, to 52% B in 4 min, to 63% B in 2 min and then at 63% B for 5 min. The elution was monitored by UV absorbance at 214 nm; 96 fractions of each TMT-multiplexed sample were collected in total. Every 8 fractions were combined to a single mix and the 12 such mixes for each TMT-multiplexed sample were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS as customary in shotgun proteomics.  Redox proteomics sample preparation 15,000 A549 cells were seeded in each well of a 6-well plate and the cells were grown in 80 ppm DDW, 350 ppm DEW and NW medium, respectively, in three biological replicates. After 48 h of growth, the cells were collected and lysed at pH 8.0 in a buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, 1mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA, Sigma E9884), 1% SDS and protease inhibitors. The samples were then incubated with 4.4 mM iodoTMT-126, iodoTMT-127 and iodoTMT-128 labels (90102, Thermo Fischer Scientific) at 37 ℃ for 2 h, blocking free -SH and -SSH groups. After precipitation with cold methanol/chloroform, the protein pellets were dissolved in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH = 8.0) containing 8 M urea. 10mM Tris-(2-Carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Thermo Fischer Scientific T2556) was used to reduce disulfides at 50 ℃ for 1 h. After precipitation followed by resuspension, the samples were labelled with iodoTMT-129, iodoTMT-130 and iodoTMT-131 at 37 °C for 2 h. The labelled samples were precipitated again with cold methanol/chloroform and then re-suspended and digested with Lys C (1:75 enzyme to protein ratio) at 30 ℃ for 6 h and trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) at 37 ℃ overnight. After desalting, the tryptic peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched by the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant 1.5.6.5 software using the “Specific Trypsin/P, Lyc/P” digestion mode with maximum two missed cleavages. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass tolerance of the precursor ion of 20 ppm. A minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids was allowed, and the false discovery rate was 0.01 for proteins and peptides. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human database (UP000005640_9606 and UP000005640_9606_additional, containing 90,482 entries, last modified on January 26, 2019) combined with 262 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed sequences. All known contaminants were removed from the search results. “Match between the runs” option was used to improve the identification efficiency.  Carbamidomethyl (C) (only expression proteomics) was set as a fixed modification, while variable modifications were N-terminal acetylation, oxidation (M) as well as deamidation (NQ). Quantification was based on TMT10 reporter ions in MS/MS for expression proteomics and iodoTMT for redox proteomics. Only proteins quantified with at least two peptides were considered for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Small admixtures in water, <i>e.g.</i> of metal ions, often act as cell growth regulators. Here we report that enrichment of deuterium content in water, normally found at 8 mm concentration, two-three folds increases cell proliferation and lowers the oxidative stress level as well. Acting as an anti-oxidant, deuterium-enriched water prevents the toxic effect of such oxidative agents as hydrogen peroxide and auranofin. This action is opposite to that of deuterium depletion that is known to suppress cell growth and induce oxidative stress in mitochondria. We thus hypothesize that deuterium may be a natural cell growth regulator that controls mitochondrial oxidation-reduction balance. Because growth acceleration is reduced approximately by half by addition to water a minute amount (0.15%) of <sup>18</sup>O isotope, at least part of the deuterium effect on cell growth can be explained by the isotopic resonance phenomenon. A slight (&#x2248;2-fold) enrichment of deuterium in water accelerates human cell growth. Quantitative MS based proteomics determined changes in protein abundances and redox states and found that deuterium-enriched water acts mainly through decreasing ROS production in mitochondria. This action is opposite to that of deuterium depletion that suppresses cell growth by inducing oxidative stress. Thus deuterium may be a natural cell growth regulator that controls mitochondrial oxidation-reduction balance. The role of isotopic resonance in this effect was validated by further experiments on bacteria.

### Keywords
Cell growth regulator, Deuterium-enriched water, Oxidantion-reduction balance, Antioxidant

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden SciLIfeLab, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia

### Submitter
Xuepei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A Zubarev
Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden SciLIfeLab, SE-17 177 Stockholm, Sweden Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia


