### Accession
PXD036937

### Title
Post-synaptic density proteomic analysis of the Taok2 KO mouse cortex

### Description
Idententification of differentially expressed proteins in the post-synaptic density fraction of Taok2 KO mouse cortices

### Sample Protocol
The right cortical lobes of three P21-23 Taok2 KO mice and five P21-23 wildtype littermates were harvested and differential centrifugation was used to obtain the crude post-synaptic density fraction. PSD fractionations were validated by western blot for PSD-95 and synaptophysin (data not shown). Final post-synaptic density pellets were resuspended using 8 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein samples were then reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 45 min at 37 °C, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature, and digested by trypsin (Promega) (1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio) overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were desalted with the 10 mg SOLA C18 Plates (Thermo Scientific), dried, and labeled with Multiplex 10-plex TMT labels (Thermo) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and quenched with 5% hydroxylamine before combined. 40 μg of the pooled sample was separated into 60 fractions by high-pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) using a homemade C18 column (200 μm × 30 cm bed volume, Waters BEH 130 5 μm resin) running a 70 min gradient from 11 to 32% acetonitrile− 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Each fraction was then loaded onto a homemade trap column (200 μm × 5 cm bed volume) packed with POROS 10R2 10 μm resin (Applied Biosystems), followed by a homemade analytical column (50 μm × 50 cm bed volume) packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 5 μm particles (Dr. Maisch) with an integrated Picofrit nanospray emitter (New Objective). LC-MS experiments were performed on a Thermo Fisher Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano UPLC system that ran a 3 h gradient (11− 38% acetonitrile−0.1% formic acid) at 70 nL/min coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. A parent ion scan was performed using a resolving power of 120 000; then, up to 30 of the most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS (minimum ion counts of 1000 for activation) using higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was activated such that MS/MS of the same m/z (within a range of 10 ppm; exclusion list size = 500) detected twice within 5 seconds was excluded from the analysis for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo). For protein identification, search was against the SwissProt mouse proteome database (55,366 protein isoform entries), while the search parameters specified a parent ion mass tolerance of 10ppm, and an MS/MS fragment ion tolerance of 0.02Da, with up to two missed cleavages allowed for trypsin. Dynamic modification of +16@M was allowed. Only proteins with two unique peptides were used for further analysis. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were calculated through Significance B outlier test using the Perseus software, and only proteins that had adj. p-value < 0.05 were considered as DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Psd, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University Health Network, Krembil Research Institute
University Health Network

### Submitter
Nadeem Murtaza

### Lab Head
Dr Karun Singh
University Health Network, Krembil Research Institute


