### Accession
PXD015179

### Title
Finding the Sweet Spot in ERLIC Mobile Phase for Simultaneous Enrichment of N-Glyco and Phosphopeptides

### Description
Simultaneous enrichment of glyco- and phospho- peptides will benefit the studies of biological processes regulated by these post-translational modifications (PTMs). It will also reveal potential crosstalk between these two ubiquitous PTMs. Unlike custom designed multifunctional solid phase extraction (SPE) materials, operating strong-anion exchange (SAX) resin in electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography (ERLIC) mode provides a readily available strategy to analytical labs for enrichment of these PTMs for subsequent mass spectrometry (MS)-based characterization. However, the choice of mobile phase has largely relied on empirical rules from hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) or ion-exchange chromatography (IEX) without further optimization and adjustments. In this study, ten mobile phase compositions of ERLIC were systematically compared; the impact of multiple factors including organic phase proportion, ion pairing reagent, pH and salt on the retention of glycosylated and phosphorylated peptides were evaluated. This study demonstrated good enrichment of glyco- and phospho- peptides from the nonmodified peptides in a complex tryptic digest. Moreover, the enriched glyco- and phospho- peptides elute in different fractions by orthogonal retention mechanisms of hydrophilic interaction and electrostatic interaction in ERLIC, maximizing the LC-MS identification of each PTM. The optimized mobile phase can be adapted to the ERLIC HPLC system, where the high resolution in separating multiple PTMs will benefit large-scale MS-based PTM profiling and in-depth characterization.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin Digestion. Lysate containing 2 mg protein was reduced in 5 mM DTT at room temperature for 1h, followed by alkylation in 15 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Alkylation was quenched by adding DTT to 5 mM. The resulting solution was then diluted with Tris buffer (pH=8) to 0.9 M urea and proteins were digested with trypsin at 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio at 37 ºC for 18 hours. Digestion was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.3% and desalted with C18 SepPak cartridges. Digested peptide concentration was measured by Pierce Peptide BCA assay, peptides were aliquoted to 100 µg/tube and dried under vacuum before enrichment. ERLIC Enrichment. ERLIC enrichment of phospho- and N-glyco- peptides from MM.1S cell digest was performed in the custom packed spin-tips [71, 72]. As Figure 1B illustrates, 3mg of cotton wool was inserted into a 200 µL pipette tip. SAX LP bulk material was dispersed in 0.1% TFA as a 10 mg/ 200 µL slurry and activated for 15 min under vigorous vortexing. After activation, 60 µL slurry was added to the spin-tip. Solvent was removed by centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 2 min, leaving the SAX material packed above the cotton wool. The stationary phase was then conditioned by 150 µL ACN, 100 mM ammonium acetate, 1% TFA and the loading buffers, each repeated 3 times. 100 µg MM.1S cell digest was dissolved in 150 µL of the corresponding loading buffer and loaded onto the tips by centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 2 min, the flowthrough was collected and loaded again to ensure complete retention. The tips were then washed with 150 µL loading buffers 6 times, after which four fractions were eluted with 300 µL 50/50 ACN/Water with 0.1% formic acid (FA), 0.1% FA in water, 0.1% TFA in water and 300 mM KH2PO4 (pH = 2) and were collected in four separate centrifuge tubes. Each fraction was filtered by a 0.22 µm Millex-GV Hydrophilic Durapore (PVDF) Membrane filter unit, the KH2PO4 fractions were desalted by C18 OMIX tips according to manufacturer’s protocol, after which all fractions were dried under vacuum before MS analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis. Peptides in each fraction were reconstituted in 0.1% FA, 3% ACN and subjected to reversed phase LC-MS/MS analysis with a Q-Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded onto a 75 μm i.d. microcapillary column custom-packed with 15 cm of BEH C18 particles (1.7 μm, 130 Å, Waters). Peptides were separated with a 90 min gradient from 3% to 30% ACN with 0.1% FA, followed by 10 min to 75% ACN and then 10 min to 95% ACN. After that, the column was reequilibrated with 3% ACN for 15 min to prepare for the next injection.  The mass spectrometer was operated in a top 15 data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey scans of peptide precursors from m/z 300 to 2000 were performed at a resolving power of 60K and an AGC target of 2×105 with a maximum injection time of 150 ms. The top 15 intense precursor ions were selected and subjected to the stepped HCD fragmentation at  normalized collision energy of 22, 30, and 38% followed by tandem MS acquisition at a resolving power of 30K and an AGC target of 5×104, with a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Precursors were subjected to a dynamic exclusion of 15s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Raw files were processed with the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics Inc, San Carlos, CA) embedded within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Spectra were searched against the UniProt Homo sapiens proteome database (April 12, 2016; 16764 entries) with trypsin as the specific digestion enzyme and maximum two missed cleavages. The parent mass error tolerance was set to be 50 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications are specified as carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da). Dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da), phosphorylation on S, Y, and T, and N-glycosylation. It is reported that ERLIC can enrich for O- glycopeptides [73], but in this work, we only analyzed N-glycopeptides from each enrichment. Glycan modifications were specified as the common mammalian N-glycome (default N-glycome database in Byonic with removal of sodium mass, which contains overall 309 N-glycans), expanded with typical mannose-6-phosphate glycans including HexNAc (2)-Hex (4-9)-Phospho (1-2), HexNAc (3-4)-Hex (4-9)-Phospho (1-2), HexNAc (2) Hex (3-4) Phospho (1) and HexNAc (3) Hex (3-4) Phospho (1). Identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Erlic, Lc-ms/ms, Glycosylation, Mm.1s

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Yusi Cui

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison


