### Accession
PXD031556

### Title
Molecular composition of serum exosomes could discriminate rectal cancer patients with different responses to neoadjuvant radiotherapy

### Description
Exosomes may be used as biomarkers for the prediction and monitoring of response to anti-cancer treatment, yet relevant knowledge is very limited in the case of rectal cancer. Here we applied a combined proteomic and metabolomic approach to reveal exosome components connected with different responses to neoadjuvant radiotherapy in this group of patients and processes associated with identified discriminatory molecules. Moreover, the composition of serum-derived exosomes and a whole plasma was analyzed in parallel to compare the biomarker potential of both specimens, which revealed the highest capacity of exosome proteome to discriminate samples of patients with different responses to radiotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Serum derived sEV were concentrated using Vivaspin 500 ultrafiltration tubes (100,000 MWCO, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) and 20µL of the concentrate (corre-sponding to 15–20µg of proteins) was mixed with 5µL of 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). In the case of plasma samples, 2 µL of plasma was diluted with 118µL of water, and next 10 µL of diluted plasma was transferred to new tubes and mixed with 100 µL of 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50mM NH4HCO3 buffer. Homogenized plasma and serum-derived sEV were centrifuged, transferred to new tubes, and digested with trypsin. Detailed protein extraction and digestion procedure is presented in Supplementary Methods S1A. The supernatant containing purified tryptic peptides was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. The label-free untargeted analyses were performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC system coupled to a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The obtained protein digests were separated on a C18 re-verse-phase column using an acetonitrile gradient. All the raw data obtained for each dataset were imported into Protein Discoverer 2.1 package (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for protein identification and quantification.

### Data Protocol
All the raw data obtained for each dataset were imported into Protein Discoverer 2.1 package (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for protein identification and quantification. Protein identification was performed using the Swiss-Prot human database with a tolerance accuracy of 10 ppm for peptide masses and 0.08 Da for fragment ion masses. Protein was considered as identified if at least 2 peptides per protein were found by the search engine, and a peptide score reached the significance threshold FDR = 0.01 (assessed by the Percolator algorithm). The abundance of identified proteins was normalized to the total ion current (TIC)

### Publication Abstract
Identification of biomarkers that could be used for the prediction of the response to neoadjuvant radiotherapy (neo-RT) in locally advanced rectal cancer remains a challenge addressed by different experimental approaches. Exosomes and other classes of extracellular vesicles circulating in patients' blood represent a novel type of liquid biopsy and a source of cancer biomarkers. Here, we used a combined proteomic and metabolomic approach based on mass spectrometry techniques for studying the molecular components of exosomes isolated from the serum of rectal cancer patients with different responses to neo-RT. This allowed revealing several proteins and metabolites associated with common pathways relevant for the response of rectal cancer patients to neo-RT, including immune system response, complement activation cascade, platelet functions, metabolism of lipids, metabolism of glucose, and cancer-related signaling pathways. Moreover, the composition of serum-derived exosomes and a whole serum was analyzed in parallel to compare the biomarker potential of both specimens. Among proteins that the most properly discriminated good and poor responders were GPLD1 (AUC = 0.85, accuracy of 74%) identified in plasma as well as C8G (AUC = 0.91, accuracy 81%), SERPINF2 (AUC = 0.91, accuracy 79%) and CFHR3 (AUC = 0.90, accuracy 81%) identified in exosomes. We found that the proteome component of serum-derived exosomes has the highest capacity to discriminate samples of patients with different responses to neo-RT when compared to the whole plasma proteome and metabolome. We concluded that the molecular components of exosomes are associated with the response of rectal cancer patients to neo-RT and could be used for the prediction of such response.

### Keywords
Rectal cancer; small extracellular vesicles; exosomes; radiotherapy; plasma; proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Lukasz Marczak

### Lab Head
Dr Lukasz Marczak
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences


