### Accession
PXD008383

### Title
Distribution of Collagen in Colorectal Liver Metastasis and Normal Liver tissue

### Description
We determined whether collagen is upregulated in colorectal liver metastasis tissue (CRLM). We previously showed that naturally occurring peptides of collagen type I were elevated in the urine of patients with colorectal liver metastasis (CRLM). CRLM tissue was compared to healthy adjacent liver tissue (controls) using high resolution mass spectrometry. Twenty-two different collagen alpha chains were identified, 19 of which were significantly upregulated (P<0.05) in CRLM tissue compared with control tissue. We observed expression of four collagen alpha chains which were absent or low expressed in healthy colon and control tissue, but were highly present in CRC and CRLM tissues analyzed. This expression pattern was also observed for six non-collagen colon specific proteins. Two of these proteins (CDH17 and PPP1R1B/DARP-32) were not known to be differently expressed in CRLM in comparison to healthy liver tissue. Furthermore, 16 of 20 identified proteins related to collagen synthesis were upregulated, indicating increased synthesis of collagen in CRLM. Cross-validation of the mass spectrometry data with immunohistochemistry for collagen type XII confirmed the significant upregulation of collagen type XII in CRLM. This study shows that the majority of collagen types are upregulated in CRLM compared to control tissue most likely as a result of an increased collagen turnover and changes in the collagen supramolecular structure. This research provides further understanding of morphologic changes in extracellular matrix of CRLM and the finding of proteins and peptides that might be specific for tumor metastasis in liquid biopsies.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections were deparaffinized by addition of 1 ml o-xylene and incubated for 5 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation for 3 min, at 4 °C, at 20,817 rcf (relative centrifugal force), this step was performed twice. The deparaffinized tissue was rehydrated by addition of 1 ml of decreasing grades of ethanol in water (100%, 70%, 50%, 0%), incubated for 1 min in an ultrasonic bath, centrifuged for 5 min at 20,817 rcf, and the supernatant was removed. Kawashima et al. described an optimized protocol for western blots to remove formalin cross-links by the addition of a solution containing 300 mM Tris pH 8 and 2% SDS, followed by incubation of the samples for 90 min, at 90°C (14). We adapted this protocol, using 0.2% Rapigest instead of 2% SDS. The deparaffinized and rehydrated tissue sections were incubated for 90 min at 90°C with 200 µL of 300 mM Tris pH 8 buffer containing 0.2% Rapigest. After cooling to room temperature, dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 30 min at 60°C to reduce sulphur bridges. Then, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 14 mM and incubated for 30 min in the dark. This alkylation of the sulphur groups prevents reformation of sulphur bridges. Proteins present in the sample were digested by the addition of 6 µL of 0.1 µg/µL trypsin at a pH of 8 and incubated overnight at 37°C. Rapigest was hydrolyzed by the addition of 25% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) until the pH was < 2 and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Debris was removed by centrifugation for 30 min, at 4°C, at 20,817 rcf. The supernatant was transferred to a LC-vial for MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.2, Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) as described by Singh et al (16). The hydroxylation of proline and lysine (+15.9992 Da) were added to the list of variable modifications. Mascot search results were further analyzed by Scaffold (v 4.6.2, Portland, OR, USA), protein confidence levels were set to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), at least 1 peptide per protein, and a 1% FDR at the peptide level. Subsequently, the Scaffold data were imported into Progenesis QI (version 4, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom) to align the LC runs. Mass peaks (features) not matching the selection criteria of a positive charge between 2 and 5, and at least two isotopes were excluded from further analysis. Identifications from Scaffold were imported via Scaffold into Progenesis QI (Scaffold export is available in the supplemental S8, ), followed by exporting to Excel 2010 (Microsoft, Redmon, WA, USA). Duplicate feature intensities were summed. Further data processing was performed with Excel, GraphPad Prism (version 5.01, La Jolla, CA, USA), and R (version 3.3.1, Vienna, Austria). Prior to 10log-transformation “10” was added, this to include missing values for further data analysis. The 10log-transformed normalized data was used for statistics, thereby the data was assumed to be normally distributed after log-transformation. Protein significance was determined by ranking peptide values, summation of all peptides per protein, and followed by an unequal variance t-test. In all following comparisons, an unequal variance t-test was used unless stated otherwise, P-values <0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen mass spectrometry proteomics colorectal liver metastasis

### Affiliations
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Nick van Huizen

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands


