### Accession
PXD030890

### Title
Designing workflows for large-scale Omic Based biomarker identification for hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Ter-polymer (MMA/EGDMA/1,2-Epoxy-5-Hexene) is fabricated via the polymerization using ethylene glycol di-methacrylate (EGDMA) as polar crosslinker. The oxirane groups of ter-polymer are immobilized with cysteic acid to enhance the hydrophilicity of HILIC sorbent. The enrichment efficacy is evaluated using the tryptic digests of HRP and IgG. Cya@terpolymer shows good potential for the intact N-linked glycopeptides enrichment from human serum.

### Sample Protocol
500 µg Cya@terpolymer was washed with 100 µL loading buffer, ACN/H2O/TFA, 90/9/1. After dispersing in 200 µL loading buffer, 1 µL of 1 nM model glycoprotein digest was added. The content was incubated for 10 min at room temperature on platform shaker. Supernatant was removed after centrifugation and was washed thrice by 300 µL loading buffer (ACN/H   O/TFA, 90/9/1) each time. The captured glycopeptides were eluted by 20 µL eluting buffer (ACN/H2O/TFA, 30/69.9/0.1)

### Data Protocol
Raw data from Q Exactive was analyzed by pGlyco 3.0 software searching peptides against the UniProt (October 2021, human, 20,360) after replacing the N in the sequence N-X-S/T/C (X ≠ P) with J. Searching parameters were set as two miss cleavages, enzyme trypsin, fragment tolerance 20 ppm, and precursor ion tolerance 4 ppm. Carbamidomethylation (+57.022 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification with oxidation (+15.995 Da), and acetyl (+42.011 Da) modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied for the identification

### Publication Abstract
A new polymeric (methyl methacrylate/ethylene glycol dimethacrylate/1,2-epoxy-5-hexene) base/matrix has been fabricated and decorated with zwitterionic hydrophilic cysteic acid (Cya) for the enrichment of intact N-glycopeptides from standards and biological samples. Terpolymer-Cya provides good enrichment efficiency, improved hydrophilicity, and selectivity by virtue of better surface area (2.09&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>2</sup> m<sup>2</sup>/g) provided by terpolymer and the zwitterionic property offered by cysteic acid. Cysteic acid-functionalized polymeric hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) sorbent enriches 35 and 24&#xa0;N-linked glycopeptides via SPE (solid phase extraction) mode from tryptic digests of model glycoproteins, i.e., immunoglobulin G (IgG) and horseradish peroxidase (HRP), respectively. Zwitterionic chemistry of cysteine helps in achieving higher selectivity with BSA digest (1:200), and lower detection limit down to 100 attomoles with a complete glycosylation profile of each standard digest. The recovery of 81% and good reproducibility define the application of terpolymer-Cya for complex samples like a serum. Analysis of human serum provides a profile of 807 intact N-linked glycopeptides via nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest number of glycopeptides enriched by any HILIC sorbent. Selected glycoproteins are evaluated in link to various cancers including the breast, lung, uterine, and melanoma using single-nucleotide variances (BioMuta). This study represents the complete idea of using an in-house developed strategy as a successful tool to help analyze, relate, and answer glycoprotein-based clinical issues regarding cancers.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Hilic, Ter-polymer, Cysteic acid, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC
Georgetown University

### Submitter
Habtom Ressom

### Lab Head
Dr Habtom Ressom
Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC


