### Accession
PXD034579

### Title
Characterization of the proteome of human cytochrome c oxidase assembly factors - Experiment C

### Description
Mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase (CcO) or respiratory chain complex IV is a heme aa3-copper oxygen reductase containing metal centers essential for holo-complex biogenesis and enzymatic function that are assembled by subunit-specific metallochaperones. The enzyme has two copper sites located in the catalytic core subunits. The COX1 subunit harbors the CuB site that tightly associates with heme a3 while the COX2 subunit contains the binuclear CuA site.  Here, we report that in human cells the CcO copper chaperones form macromolecular assemblies and cooperate with several twin CX9C proteins to control heme a biosynthesis and coordinate copper transfer sequentially to the CuA and CuB sites. These data on CcO illustrate a mechanism that regulates the biogenesis of macromolecular enzymatic assemblies with several catalytic metal redox centers and prevents the accumulation of cytotoxic reactive assembly intermediates.  We characterized the proteome of COX11, COX19 and PET191 by AP + LC-MS-MS

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS-MS analysis, the samples were immunoprecipitated using specific antibodies. The bound material was extracted from the beads by incubation with a 62.5 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.5 and 2% SDS solution. The extracted proteins were precipitated using 100% ice-cold acetone overnight at -20 °C to remove residual detergent. The next day, the samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. The pellet was washed with 100% ice-cold acetone. The final pellet was air-dried and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the services of the Keck Biotechnology Proteomics center at Yale University. Data was visualized using the proteome software Scaffold v 5.

### Data Protocol
Data was visualized using the proteome software Scaffold v 5.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase (CcO) or respiratory chain complex IV is a heme aa<sub>3</sub>-copper oxygen reductase containing metal centers essential for holo-complex biogenesis and enzymatic function that are assembled by subunit-specific metallochaperones. The enzyme has two copper sites located in the catalytic core subunits. The COX1 subunit harbors the Cu<sub>B</sub> site that tightly associates with heme a<sub>3</sub> while the COX2 subunit contains the binuclear Cu<sub>A</sub> site. Here, we report that in human cells the CcO copper chaperones form macromolecular assemblies and cooperate with several twin CX<sub>9</sub>C proteins to control heme a biosynthesis and coordinate copper transfer sequentially to the Cu<sub>A</sub> and Cu<sub>B</sub> sites. These data on CcO illustrate a mechanism that regulates the biogenesis of macromolecular enzymatic assemblies with several catalytic metal redox centers and prevents the accumulation of cytotoxic reactive assembly intermediates.

### Keywords
Cox19, Cytochrome c oxidase, Pet191, Mitochondria, Cox11

### Affiliations
University of Miami School of Medicine

### Submitter
Antonio Barrientos

### Lab Head
Dr Antoni Barrientos
University of Miami School of Medicine


