### Accession
PXD009056

### Title
Gut microbial functional maturation and succession during early life

### Description
The evolutional trajectory of gut microbial colonization from birth has been shown to prime for health later in life. Here, we combined cultivation-independent 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomics to investigate the functional maturation of gut microbiota in faecal samples from full-term healthy infants collected at 6 and 18 months of age. Phylogenetic analysis of the metaproteomes showed that Bifidobacterium provided the highest number of distinct protein groups. Considerable divergences between taxa abundance and protein phylogeny were observed at all taxonomic ranks. Age had a profound effect on early microbiota where compositional and functional complexity of less dissimilar communities increased with time. Comparisons of the relative abundances of proteins revealed the transition of taxon-associated saccharolytic and carbon metabolism strategies from catabolic pathways of milk and mucin-derived monosaccharides feeding acetate/propanoate synthesis to complex food sugars fuelling butyrate production. Furthermore, co-occurrence network analysis uncovered two anti-correlated modules of functional taxa. A low-connected Bifidobacteriaceae-centred guild of facultative anaerobes was succeeded by a rich club of obligate anaerobes densely interconnected around Lachnospiraceae, underpinning their pivotal roles in microbial ecosystem assemblies. Our findings establish a framework to visualize whole microbial community metabolism and ecosystem succession dynamics, proposing opportunities for microbiota-targeted health-promoting strategies early in life.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects, experimental design and ethical guidelines In the present study, full-term healthy infants aged 6- and 18-months, who did not present any intestinal disorders and had not taken antibiotics, were chosen from the panel of infants that belonged to PREOBE study cohort (Berglund et al., 2016). Characteristics of the study population are shown in Supporting information Table S1. In this project, pregnant women were recruited between 2007 and 2012 at San Cecilio and Mother-Infant University Hospitals in Granada, Spain. The study exclusion criteria for mothers were: simultaneous participation in any other research study, any kind of drug treatment, diagnosed diseases (e.g. pre-gestational diabetes, hypertension or preeclampsia, intrauterine growth retardation, maternal infection, hypo/hyperthyroidism, hepatic or renal disease), and vegan diet. Fresh stools were collected at 6- and 18-months after delivery and were immediately stored at -80ºC, until processing. The study included anthropometric measurements, health questionnaires and medical assessments of the child. This project followed the ethical standards recognized by the Declaration of Helsinki (reviewed in Hong-Kong 1989 and in Edinburgh 2000) and the EEC Good Clinical Practice recommendations (document 111/3976/88 1990), and current Spanish legislation regulating clinical research in humans (Royal Decree 561/1993). The study was explained to the participants before starting, and the parents signed an informed consent. DNA extraction from stool samples Genomic DNA was extracted from faecal bacteria of 6-month (n =68) and 18-month (n =72) old infants as previously described (Ferrer et al., 2013). Briefly, faecal samples were resuspended in 1 mL of TN150 buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 150 mM NaCl). Zirconium glass beads (0.3 g) and 150 µL of buffered phenol were added and bacteria were disrupted with a mini bead beater set to 5000 rpm at 4°C for 15 s (Biospec Products, USA). After centrifugation, genomic DNA was purified from the supernatant using phenol-chloroform extraction. Quality was checked by agarose gel electrophoresis and quantified with Quant-iT PicoGreen dsDNA assay kit (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany). 16S rRNA gene sequencing and data processing Genomic DNA from faecal bacteria was used as templates for 16S rRNA gene amplification using 27F and 338R universal primers and two consecutive PCR reactions to integrate Illumina multiplexing sequences as previously described (Camarinha-Silva et al., 2014). The library was prepared by pooling equimolar ratios of amplicons and was sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq platform (Genetic Service, University of Granada). Reads were demultiplexed and sorted, and paired ends were matched to give 240nt reads. Data set was filtered and OTUs were defined at 99% similarity with MOTHUR programs unique.seqs and pre.cluster (Schloss et al., 2009). Taxonomic classifications of OTUs were assigned using the naïve Bayesian algorithm CLASSIFIER of Ribosomal Database Project (Wang et al., 2007). OTUs were considered unassigned when confidence value score was lower than 0.8, and were annotated using upper taxonomic ranks. Protein extraction, separation, identification and data processing Protein extraction was performed from faecal bacteria of 6-month (n =29) and 18-month (n =27) old infants as previously described (Ferrer et al., 2013). Faecal samples (0.5 g) were thawed and diluted in 1mL of 0.05% L-cysteine phosphate saline buffer solution (PBS) under anaerobic conditions. After differential centrifugation, faecal bacteria were disrupted by mechanical lysis in BugBuster Protein Extraction Reagent (Novagen) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by sonication for 2.5 min on ice. Protein extracts were centrifuged for 10 min at 12.000 rpm to separate cell debris. Protein concentrations were determined with the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976). For 1-DE analysis, two 75 μg protein samples (technical replicates denoted by a or b) were precipitated with five-fold volumes of ice-cold acetone and separated on a 12% acrylamide separating gel with the Laemmli buffer system (Laemmli, 1970).

### Data Protocol
Statistical and data analysis Statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS v19.0 (IBM, IL) and R statistical package (Team, 2014). Sankey flow chart was created with SankeyMATIC web tool (http://sankeymatic.com/).  KEGG Mapper was used to visualize metabolic pathways. To quantify the amount of variability explained by each variable and subject in our different data sets, we calculated the coefficient of determination (R2). For the response of composition and function of the microbiota, multivariate analysis of variance using distance matrices was performed, based on Bray-Curtis distance metrics. The matrices were partitioned in sources of variation with subject and characteristics of the study population as explanatory variables. Significance of the pseudo-F ratios was assessed by permutation test (999 permutations, using the adonis function from the R package vegan) (Oksanen, 2011 ). -diversity for compositional data was calculated as Unifrac distance with GUnifrac package. Permanova analysis of the distance between different time points was calculated with adonis function from vegan package. Bray-Curtis dissimilarity measures were calculated with vegan package and anosim test was used to establish significant differences between time points. Statistical Analysis of Metagenomic Profiles v2.0 was used to compare the abundances of taxa, COG categories and subcategories between time points (Parks et al., 2014). -diversity indices were calculated with PAST software (Hammer et al., 2001). Significant differences were identified with the White’s non-parametric t test. Benjamini & Hochberg FDR method was used to correct for multiple comparisons, and results with a q-value (corrected p-value <0.05) were retained. Pearson’s correlation network analysis and visualization were carried out using Calypso v8.20 (Zakrzewski et al., 2017). Network node parameters were calculated using Cytoscape v3.1.1 (Shannon et al., 2003).

### Publication Abstract
The evolutional trajectory of gut microbial colonization from birth has been shown to prime for health&#xa0;later in life. Here, we combined cultivation-independent 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metaproteomics to investigate the functional maturation of gut microbiota in faecal samples from full-term healthy infants collected at 6 and 18 months of age. Phylogenetic analysis of the metaproteomes showed that Bifidobacterium provided the highest number of distinct protein groups. Considerable divergences between taxa abundance and protein phylogeny were observed at all taxonomic ranks. Age had a profound effect on early microbiota where compositional and functional diversity of less dissimilar communities increased with time. Comparisons of the relative abundances of proteins revealed the transition of taxon-associated saccharolytic and fermentation strategies from milk and mucin-derived monosaccharide catabolism feeding acetate/propanoate synthesis to complex food-derived hexoses fuelling butanoate production. Furthermore, co-occurrence network analysis uncovered two anti-correlated modules of functional taxa. A low-connected Bifidobacteriaceae-centred guild of facultative anaerobes was succeeded by a rich club of obligate anaerobes densely interconnected around Lachnospiraceae, underpinning their pivotal roles in microbial ecosystem assemblies. Our findings establish a framework to visualize whole microbial community metabolism and ecosystem succession dynamics, proposing opportunities for microbiota-targeted health-promoting strategies early in life.

### Keywords
Gut microbiome; infants; metaproteomics; early life

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Martin von Bergen Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Head of Department for Molecular Systems Biology http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=17634  Professor of Functional Proteomics Faculty of Life Sciences, Pharmacy and Psychology University of Leipzig Permoserstr. 15 04318 Leipzig GERMANY
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Prof. Dr. Martin von Bergen Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Head of Department for Molecular Systems Biology http://www.ufz.de/index.php?de=17634  Professor of Functional Proteomics Faculty of Life Sciences, Pharmacy and Psychology University of Leipzig Permoserstr. 15 04318 Leipzig GERMANY


