### Accession
PXD044199

### Title
pull-down of PpSerpin-1 isoforms

### Description
proteomic identification of pull-down gel slices of PpSerpin-1 isoforms

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant protein of PpSerpin1 isoforms (10 μg) was mixed with 1 ml diluted P. rapae hemolymph, 50 μl saturated PTU and 100 μl M. luteus (1 μg/μl) and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4 °C. After centrifugation at 12000 g and 4 °C for 20 min, the supernatant was further incubated with 25 μl of cOmplete His-tag purification resins (Roche, Switzerland) at 4 °C for 2 h. After washing three times with 300 μl washing buffer (1 M NaCl, 120 mM imidazole, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9), proteins were eluted with 50 μl of elution buffer (1 M imidazole, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9) and subjected to SDS‒PAGE followed by Lumitein Protein Gel Stain (Biotium, Hayward, CA, USA) and immunoblotting. To identify potential targets in pull-down complexes, gels were cut between 60 and 100 kDa. Gel slices were then in-gel digested by trypsin at 37 °C for 20 h. After desalting and lyophilization, the enzymatic product was redissolved in 0.1% formic acid solution and subjected to LC‒MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Annotated proteins from Pieris rapae genome assembly GCF_001856805.1 were set as the search database. “Oxidation (M)” was set as a variable modification. Protein identification was filtered by proteins with at least two peptides identified. Gel digestion and proteomic identification were conducted by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pteromalus puparum, Alternative splicing, Serpin, Pull-down

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Zhichao Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Zhichao Yan
Nanjing Agricultural University


