### Accession
PXD024405

### Title
Protamine characterization by top-down proteomics: Boosting proteoform identification with DBSCAN

### Description
Protamines replace histones as the main nuclear protein in sperm cells having a crucial role in compacting the paternal genome. Human spermatozoa contain the protamine 1 (P1) and the family of protamine 2 (P2) proteins. Alterations in protamine PTMs or on the P1/P2 ratio could be associated with male infertility. Top-down proteomics enables large-scale analysis of intact proteforms derived from alternative splicing, missense or nonsense genetic variants or PTMs. In contrast to current gold standard techniques, top-down allows a more in-depth analysis of protamine PTMs and proteoforms, opening up new perspectives to unravel their impact on male fertility. We analyzed two normozoospermic semen samples by top-down and discussed in detail the difficulties we found in the data analysis and the suggested solutions, as this step is one of the current bottlenecks in top-down proteomics with currently available bioinformatic tools. Our strategy for the data analysis combines two different software, ProSight PD (PS) and TopPIC suite (TP), with a clustering algorithm to decipher protamine proteoforms. We identified up to 32 protamine proteoforms at different levels of characterization. This in-depth analysis of the protamine proteoform landscape of an individual boosts personalized diagnosis of male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
Protamine-enriched fractions (equivalent to 15 million spermatozoa) were dried at room temperature and kept at -20°C. Previous to liquid chromatography MS analysis (LC-MS/MS), samples were reconstituted in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM for 45 min at 56°C, alkylated for 30 min in the dark with iodoacetamide (IAA) 50 mM and further desalted using PolyLC C18 filter tips (PolyLC INC., Columbia) until LC-MS/MS procedure. LC-MS/MS analysis of intact protamines were conducted on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded to C18 trap columns (100 µm × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min. Protein content was separated using C18 analytical columns (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å (Thermo Scientific) using a linear gradient from 3 to 15% B in 30 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min (A = 0.1% FA in water, B = 0.1% FA in ACN). The Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) was used as the nanospray interface with a spray voltage of 1.60 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120k. The top N (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by electron transfer dissociation (ETD) and detected in the orbitrap at 120k. The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey scan and 1,000,000 for the ETD-fragmented MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 500,000.

### Data Protocol
We used TopPic v1.4.2 suite and Proteome Discoverer v2.5.0.400 with ProSight PD v4.0.0.228 for database searches. We included the following PTMs in the parameters of the TopPic search: oxidation (in M), phosphorylation (in STY), acetylation (in KS), methylation, dimethylation (both in KR) and trimethylation (in K) for being the major PTMs found in histones and therefore also expected in protamines. We also defined precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 15 ppm, and maximum mass shifts of 500 Da. We only considered PrSMs with FDR < 1% for downstream data integration. We used a FASTA file containing P1 and P2 sequences as a database.We launched a three tier search (Annotated Proteoform, Subsequent Search and Annotated Proteoform) with precursor mass tolerances of 2.2 Da / 10 ppm / 500 Da respectively, and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Protamines replace histones as the main nuclear protein in the sperm cells of many species and play a crucial role in compacting the paternal genome. Human spermatozoa contain protamine 1 (P1) and the family of protamine 2 (P2) proteins. Alterations in protamine PTMs or the P1/P2 ratio may be associated with male infertility. Top-down proteomics enables large-scale analysis of intact proteoforms derived from alternative splicing, missense or nonsense genetic variants or PTMs. In contrast to current gold standard techniques, top-down proteomics permits a more in-depth analysis of protamine PTMs and proteoforms, thereby opening up new perspectives to unravel their impact on male fertility. We report on the analysis of two normozoospermic semen samples by top-down proteomics. We discuss the difficulties encountered with the data analysis and propose solutions as this step is one of the current bottlenecks in top-down proteomics with the bioinformatics tools currently available. Our strategy for the data analysis combines two software packages, ProSight PD (PS) and TopPIC suite (TP), with a clustering algorithm to decipher protamine proteoforms. We identified up to 32 protamine proteoforms at different levels of characterization. This in-depth analysis of the protamine proteoform landscape of normozoospermic individuals represents the first step towards the future study of sperm pathological conditions opening up the potential personalized diagnosis of male infertility.

### Keywords
Male infertility; sperm; protamine; lc-ms/ms; top down proteomics; proteoform; post-translational modifications; bioinformatics; dbscan.

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona)

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Vilaseca
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona)


