### Accession
PXD021649

### Title
Online electrochemical reduction of both inter- and intramolecular disulfide bridges in immunoglobulins

### Description
Cysteine disulfide bridges can be reduced by chemical methods, like an incubation with DTT. However, reduction with an electrochemical method has also been demonstrated. Electrochemical reduction can be implemented online, after LC separation and before mass spectrometry. For the study of antibody molecules, reduction of the intermolecular disulfide bridges between heavy and light chains has been demonstrated in literature. However, the reduction of intramolecular disulfide bridges has remained elusive. Here, we demonstrate the online electrochemical reduction of a therapeutic monoclonal antibody. The complete reduction of these molecules will facilitate the study of recombinant or natural antibodies by MS and MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
mAbs were diluted in 0.1% FA prior to injection of 500 ng on column.  For chemical reduction controls, samples were educed with 10 mM DTT, either denatured in 6 M Guanidine HCl at 60C or in 25 mM Tris pH 7 at 25 C. Unreduced Bevacizumab was denatured in Guanidine HCl. All samples were subsequently diluted in 0.1% formic acid for further analysis by LC-MS. Samples were injected onto a C4 trap column in 0.1% formic acid, washed, and eluted onto an analytical Waters C4 column (300 um x 150 mm). Analytical flow was 1 ul/min, samples were eluted with a gradient of acetonitrile in formic acid. Post-column, a makeup flow of 19 ul/min was added (1% formic acid, 50% acetonitrile), and electrochemical reduction was performed online in an Antec microprepcell SS. After reduction, data was acquired on a Synapt G2 Q-TOF or on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Q-Tof data: Deconvolution with Uni-DEC Orbitrap data: Deconvolution with Freestyle XTract, peak matching with Prosight Lite 1.4

### Publication Abstract
Electrochemical reduction of intermolecular disulfide bridges has previously been demonstrated in immunoglobulins but failed to achieve reduction of intramolecular bonds. We now report an improved method that achieves the full reduction of both intermolecular and intramolecular disulfide bridges in a set of monoclonal antibodies based on their intact mass and on MS/MS analysis. The system uses an online electrochemical flow cell positioned online between a chromatography system and a mass spectrometer to give direct information on pairs of heavy and light chains in an antibody. The complete reduction of the intramolecular disulfide bridges is important, as the redox state affects the intact mass of the antibody chain. Disulfide bonds also hamper MS/MS fragmentation of protein chains and thus limit the confirmation of the amino acid sequence of the protein of interest. The improved electrochemical system and associated protocols can simplify sample processing prior to analysis, as chemical reduction is not required. Also, it opens up new possibilities in the top-down mass spectrometry analysis of samples containing complex biomolecules with inter- and intramolecular disulfide bridges.

### Keywords
Electrochemical reduction; disulfide; top-down; antibody

### Affiliations
Lab head clinical and cancer proteomics Department of Neurology Erasmus MC, Rotterdam
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Martijn van Duijn

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Marten Luider
Lab head clinical and cancer proteomics Department of Neurology Erasmus MC, Rotterdam


