### Accession
PXD020629

### Title
Distinct features of plasma extracellular vesicles in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanostructures that are used as sources of biomarkers. To better understand whether EVs could be exploited as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), we analyzed plasma-derived of ALS patients and relative healthy and diseased controls. Using the nickel-based isolation, a recently published EV purification method, we unmasked peculiar features in plasma EVs of ALS patients with a potential straightforward application in a clinical setting. We report that the number of particles is increased in the plasma of ALS patients and of two mouse models of ALS while the average diameter is decreased. Proteins like HSP90 and phosphorylated TDP-43 are differentially represented in ALS patients and mice compared to the controls. In terms of disease progression, the levels of phosphorylated TDP-43 and cyclophilin A, along with the EV size distribution discriminated fast and slow progressors of the diseases suggesting a new means for patient stratification. We exploited the EV size distribution with machine learning analysis that combining different EV parameters resulted in very high prediction rates for disease diagnosis and prognosis

### Sample Protocol
Three aliquots (0.5 ml) of a pool of plasma samples from six healthy subjects were isolated independently by both DC (samples #1DC, #2DC, #3DC) and NBI (samples #1NBI, #2NBI, #3NBI) methods. EV proteins were extracted using RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1.0% Triton, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Equal amount of proteins (9 μg) for each sample was separated by 1D 4-12% Nupage Novex Bis Tris Gel (Invitrogen), stained with Bio-Safe coomassie (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and digested with trypsin by using a published procedure (Brunelli et al., 2012)

### Data Protocol
2microL of each samples were analysed on a Biobasic 18 column (150x0.18mm ID, particle size 5 µm, Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) via a DESI Omni Spray (Prosolia) used in nanospray mode. Peptides were eluted with a 240 min gradient of 5%–60% buffer B (80% ACN) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode with a survey scan range of 400-2000 m/z and a resolution of 70’000 in parallel with low-resolution MS/MS scans of the twenty most abundant precursor ions with a charge ≥ 2. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 15 s to reduce the number of repeated sequences. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3) was used to analyze MS raw files (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (Version 2016) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was applied as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides and proteins. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least 1 unique peptide. A minimum ratio count of 1 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant’s Label Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Data were filtered for common contaminants and peptides only identified by side modification were excluded from further analysis. Bioinformatic analysis was performed in the Perseus software environment (Tyanova et al., 2016). Protein abundance changes were computed on LFQ peak intensities. Statistical analysis was done by non-parametric Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test, using p-value<0.05 as cut-off (JMP Pro13 statistical software) Functional enrichment analysis was performed via STRING (https://string-db.org/), using the Gene ID of the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma extracellular vesicles and als

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri
Istitute of pharmacology research Mario Negri IRCCS

### Submitter
Laura Brunelli

### Lab Head
Dr Roberta Pastorelli
Istitute of pharmacology research Mario Negri IRCCS


