### Accession
PXD013210

### Title
PTMProphet: Fast and Accurate Mass Modification Localization for the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline

### Description
Analysis of synthetic peptide reference datasets to demonstrate the performance of PTMProphet, a free and open-source software tool integrated into the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, which reanalyzes identified spectra from any search engine for which pepXML output is available to provide localization confidence to enable appropriate further characterization of biologic events.

### Sample Protocol
Chemically synthesized phospho-peptides were analyzed in pools of maximum 95 peptides on a TripleTOF® 5600+ equipped with a Nanospray-III® Source (Sciex) and an Ekspert™ nanoLC 425 with cHiPLC® system operated in trap-elute mode (Eksigent). Peptides were loaded on a cHiPLC trap (200 µm x 500 µm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) and washed for 10 minutes at 2 µL/min. Peptides were eluted on a nano cHiPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) with 0.1% formic acid in water (A), 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) (v/v) at 300 nL/min using a gradient from 3% to 43% B in 80 min, 43%-63% B at 80-85 min and 63%-83% B at 85-87 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A survey scan (TOF-MS) was acquired in the m/z range of 400-1,250 Da with 250 msec accumulation time. The 30 most intense precursor ions with charge state 2-5 were selected for fragmentation with rolling collision energy. MS/MS fragment spectra were collected in the range of 100-1,500 Da with 50 msec accumulation and a 1.8 s period cycle time.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted to mzML using the SCIEX mzML converter with option /proteinpilot for peak picking, /zlib for compression and /index for indexing the files.  The data was searched using both Mascot (version 2.4) and X!Tandem (version Jackhammer TPP 2013.06.15.1).   The searches were done specifying parent mass tolerance of 0.1 Da with isotopic offsets for both search engines and fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da for Mascot.  Carbamidomethyl on Cys was the only static modification applied in the search and the variable modifications include phosphorylation on S, T and Y and oxidation on M for both search engines.  The spectra were searched against a database of these synthetic peptides appended to a large synthetic peptide database described in Kusebauch et al. (Cell 2016,166(3):766-778) and decoys based on the randomized versions of the synthetic peptides. The search results of both search engines were processed with PeptideProphet and the pepXML results of both PeptideProphet analyses were combined using iProphet (compiled from SVN revision 7336 of the TPP code).  Finally, we ran PTMProphet on this dataset to localize the PTMs with default settings, except for MAXTHREADS=0 (allowing processing of spectra to occur in parallel on all CPU cores), MINPROB=0.9 (making PTMProphet apply localization to PSMs having an iProphet probability of 90% and higher).

### Publication Abstract
Spectral matching sequence database search engines commonly used on mass spectrometry-based proteomics experiments excel at identifying peptide sequence ions, and in addition, possible sequence ions carrying post-translational modifications (PTMs), but most do not provide confidence metrics for the exact localization of those PTMs when several possible sites are available. Localization is absolutely required for downstream molecular cell biology analysis of PTM function in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, we developed PTMProphet, a free and open-source software tool integrated into the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, which reanalyzes identified spectra from any search engine for which pepXML output is available to provide localization confidence to enable appropriate further characterization of biologic events. Localization of any type of mass modification (e.g., phosphorylation) is supported. PTMProphet applies Bayesian mixture models to compute probabilities for each site/peptide spectrum match where a PTM has been identified. These probabilities can be combined to compute a global false localization rate at any threshold to guide downstream analysis. We describe the PTMProphet tool, its underlying algorithms, and demonstrate its performance on ground-truth synthetic peptide reference data sets, one previously published small data set, one new larger data set, and also on a previously published phosphoenriched data set where the correct sites of modification are unknown. Data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013210.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Site localization, Synthetic phospho-peptides

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
Robert Moritz's Lab

### Submitter
Zhi Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology


