### Accession
PXD005433

### Title
Proteomics identifies markers of MAPKi resistance offering new therapeutic strategies in melanoma- Cytoplasmic (cyt), nuclear (ne) and secreted (sn) proteins of BRAFi resistant melanoma cells

### Description
MAPK inhibitors (MAPKi) show outstanding clinical response rates in melanoma patients harbouring BRAF mutations, but resistance is common. High-throughput, subcellular proteome analyses at two different MS laboratories and RNA-seq on two panels of primary melanoma cells that were either sensitive or MAPKi resistant, revealed that only fifteen proteins were sufficient to discriminate between resistant and sensitive cells. The two proteins with the highest discriminatory power were PTRF and IGFBP7, both highly upregulated in the resistant cells. They were associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and are mechanistically linked. Knock-out of PTRF revealed targets involved in lysosomal activation, endocytosis, pH regulation, EMT, TGFbeta signalling and cell migration and adhesion. In addition, immunohistochemistry on patient samples showed that PTRF and IGFBP7 expression levels were significant biomarkers of poor progression free survival under MAPKi treatment. A drug screen of MAPKi resistant cells using a 960-compound kinase modulator library identified two lead compounds that were effective in targeting MAPKi resistant cells.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatant (sn) was collected after 6 hours incubation in serum free medium and sterile filtered through a 0.2µm filter. To obtain the cytoplasmic fraction, the primary melanoma cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (pepstatin, leupeptin and aprotinin, each at 1 μg/ml; 1 mM PMSF) and mechanical shear stress.  By centrifugation at 2300xg at 4°C the cytoplasmic proteins (cyt) were separated from the nuclei (ne) and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C. The nuclei was further extracted using NaCl and NP-40, again centrifuged at 2300xg at 4°C and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at -20°C. After precipitation, all protein samples were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM DDT) and protein concentrations were determined by means of a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany). For proteomics analyses, in-solution digests were prepared. Briefly, 20 µg of each protein sample was concentrated onto a 3kD MWCO filter (Pall Austria Filter GmbH) pre-washed with LC-MS grade water (Millipore GesmbH); proteins were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). After centrifugation at 14000g for 10min, proteins were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Germany) was then added and incubation was performed at 37°C over-night. After tryptic digestion, peptide samples were cleaned up with C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) and eluted two times with 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and once with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The peptides were dried and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. Peptides of the cellular fractions were separated using nanoflow UHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000RLSC) using a 2 cm x75 µm C18 PepMap100 pre-column for pre-concentration of peptides using mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.2% FA) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min and a 50 cm x75 µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). Peptide separation was achieved applying a multi-step gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 235min in case of cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins and over 95min for the analysis of secreted proteins at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in positive ionization mode at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z=200) in the range from m/z 400-1400 and fragmented using HCD in a QExactive orbitrap (Thermo) in a data-dependent mode upon fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy (isolation width of Δm/z=2, 150 ms collection time, fragmentation at 30 V normalized collision energy, resolution 17500 at m/z=200, top 10 method). All samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS as duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version October 2014 with 20 195 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 10ppm for MS spectra and 50mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Mek, Melanoma, Braf, Igfbp7, Mass spectrometry, Ptrf

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


