### Accession
PXD002370

### Title
UPS1-yeast standard analysis -  Technical Brief Calibration Plot for Proteomics (CP4P): A graphical tool to visually check the assumptions underlying FDR control in quantitative experiments

### Description
Label-free quantification of various concentrations of Universal Proteomic Standard (UPS1, Sigma-Aldrich) spiked in yeast extract.

### Sample Protocol
Three concentrations of UPS1 (25 fmol, 10 fmol and 5 fmol) were spiked in 1 µg of yeast extract. After tryspin digestion, resulting peptides were analyzed in triplicates by nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000, Dionex coupled to Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). Spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c) taxonomy, June 2015 version), UPS database and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
In MS-based quantitative proteomics, the FDR control (i.e. the limitation of the number of proteins that are wrongly claimed as differentially abundant between several conditions) is a major postanalysis step. It is classically achieved thanks to a specific statistical procedure that computes the adjusted p-values of the putative differentially abundant proteins. Unfortunately, such adjustment is conservative only if the p-values are well-calibrated; the false discovery control being spuriously underestimated otherwise. However, well-calibration is a property that can be violated in some practical cases. To overcome this limitation, we propose a graphical method to straightforwardly and visually assess the p-value well-calibration, as well as the R codes to embed it in any pipeline. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002370 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002370).

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Label-free, Proteomic standard

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
EDyP


