### Accession
PXD012707

### Title
Local translation of mitochondrial proteins at the synapse

### Description
To systematically explore the  dynamics of the synaptic proteome upon neuronal stimulation we employed a simple model system which is based on isolated synaptoeurosomes (SN). Synaptoneurosomes are preparations freshly obtained from the brain and enriched in synapses, containing both pre and postsynaptic compartments. After the isolation they were in vitro stimulated. Protocol was set to induce NMDARs on the synaptoneurosomes which initiate calcium signaling in neurons and lead to long lasting responses such as long term potentiation (LTP). The control experiments in which we incubated SN with RNAse and proteinase K have shown that the translation is taking place inside the SN vesicles.  Having established that translation in synaptoeurosomes prepared by us relay on endogenous mRNA we assumed that all proteins which abundance is increased after in vitro stimulation must be locally synthetized on base of mRNA already transported into synapses. In order to identify newly synthetized proteins we in vitro stimulated synaotoneurosomes and combined it with high-resolution quantitative MS techniques (Figure 1A).  It is well established that quantitative mass spectrometry heavily depends on physico-chemical properties of peptides and dynamic range (~4 orders of magnitude) of sample which limits a depth of analysis.  Some of tryptic peptides would be better detectable unmodified, other when modified for example with stable isobaric labeling techniques  iTRAQ or TMT tag. We begin with label-free experiments,  but it was mainly limited by dynamic range of protein in SN, we overcome that issue using iTRAQ 8-plex (4 x controls, 4 x stimulation) coupled with sample fractionation prior to LC-MS.. For this reason we used also TMT 10 plex, which allows us to measure 5 control and 5 stimuli samples at once. Using all three techniques we quantified (FDR 0.01) 2187 proteins. Number of identified proteins could be considered as relatively low for shotgun  MS experiment. But  it should be noticed that synaptical proteome is way different then “normal” cellular proteome since is depleted of nuclear, many of cytoplasmic and other organelles proteins. Finally some of proteins could be heavily modified. . Importantly, we identified 439 of which were significantly (Whitney-Mann p<0.05) upregulated in synaptoneurosomes in response to the stimulation which corresponds to 20% of  identified proteins. The average fold change was relatively low which was however expected because it is not possible to quantitatively change a proteome of synapse through short pule of in vitro stimulation. But four replicates are often not enough for reliable statistic calculation of protein level changes. That is because of low level of proteins that could be synthetase at the synapse, due to its low ATP/syntethic potential. Which results in changes on average 3% of protein level.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptoneurosomes were frozen at -80°C, 500 µl of buffer (25 mM HEPES, 2% SDS, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) was added. Samples were heated at 96°C  for 3 minutes, cooled down and sonicated in Bioruptor® Plus (Diagenode)for 20 cycles 30/30 seconds at “high”, then samples were again heated for 3 minutes at 96°C.   Protein concentration has been determined using DirectDetect Spectrometer (MerckMillipore). Appropriate volumes containing accordingly 75 µg proteins and 10 µg, respectively for isobaric labeling and label free experiments, per sample were moved to 1.5 ml tubes and precipitated using chloroform/methanol protocol. Samples then were label using standard iTRAQ 8-plex (SCIEX) and TMT 10-plex (ThermoFisher) protocol according to manufacturer's recommendations. Label free samples were dissolved in 100 μl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced in 100 mM DTT for 30 min at 57°C, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at RT in the dark and digested overnight with 10 ng/ml trypsin (V5280, Promega) at 37°C. Finally, to stop digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. Mixture was centrifuged at 4°C, 14 000 g for 20 min, to remove solid remaining.  Samples labeled with TMT and iTRAQ were fractionated prior to LC-MS using strong cation-exchange chromatography (SCX). Briefly, 200ug of samples were injected to PolyLC columns (2.1 x 4.6 x 200 mm,  5µm,  300Å pore size) and were fractionated in 60 minutes linear gradient, from 100% A (5mM KH2P04/ 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.8 or 0.1% formic/30% acetonitrile) to 100% B (5mM KH2P04/ 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.8 + 350mM KCl or 500mM ammonium formate/ 30% acetonitrile).   Proteins in gel bands were reduced with 100 mM DTT (for 30 minutes at 57°C), alkylated with 0.5 M iodoacetamide (45 min in a dark at room temperature) and digested overnight in 37°C with 10 ng/μl of trypsin in 25mM NH4HCO3 (sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin Promega V5111) by adding the enzyme directly to the reaction mixture. Peptides were eluted with 2% acetonitrile in presence of 0.1% TFA. The resulting peptide mixtures were applied to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% TFA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 180 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp.,San Jose, CA) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300–2000.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 100-2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 45% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. Data were analyzed with the  Max-Quant (Version 1.5.6.7) platform using mode match between runs (1). The mouse proteome database from UniProt was used (downloaded at 2017.01.20). Modification were set for methionine oxidation, carbamidomethyl or methylthio on cysteines, phospho (STY). Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) intensity values were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm (2). Samples labeled with TMT or iTRAQ were searched against the same database with a 0.001Da error on isobaric tag. Results (LFQ, iTRAQ, TMT) were analyzed using Scaffold 4 platform (Proteome Software) and merge in a one file. Quantitative data were merged in given hierarchy: TMT, iTRAQ, LFQ.     Quantification and Statistical Analysis Unless otherwise noted, statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 7.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc.). Statistical details of experiments, including the statistical tests used and the value of n, are noted in figure legends. Proteomics data was statistically analyzed with Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) platform. Groups were compared with Whitney-Mann test (p<0.05, Benjamin Hochberg correction). Unstimulated synaptoneurosomes were used as a reference sample. Positive fold-change value suggests an increase in the intensity of a given protein as a result of stimulation.   Interactome was prepared and visually edited with CytoScape 3.6.0 (3) platform, using the String application.

### Publication Abstract
Synapses are the regions of the neuron that enable the transmission and propagation of action potentials on the cost of high energy consumption and elevated demand for mitochondrial ATP production. The rapid changes in local energetic requirements at dendritic spines imply the role of mitochondria in the maintenance of their homeostasis. Using global proteomic analysis supported with complementary experimental approaches, we show that an essential pool of mitochondrial proteins is locally produced at the synapse indicating that mitochondrial protein biogenesis takes place locally to maintain functional mitochondria in axons and dendrites. Furthermore, we show that stimulation of synaptoneurosomes induces the local synthesis of mitochondrial proteins that are transported to the mitochondria and incorporated into the protein supercomplexes of the respiratory chain. Importantly, in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome, Fmr1 KO mice, a common disease associated with dysregulation of synaptic protein synthesis, we observed altered morphology and respiration rates of synaptic mitochondria. That indicates that the local production of mitochondrial proteins plays an essential role in synaptic functions.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Local translation, Synaptosomes

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Laboratory of Molecular Basis of Synaptic Plasticity Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Dziembowska
Laboratory of Molecular Basis of Synaptic Plasticity Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw


