### Accession
PXD026373

### Title
Proteome-Wide Analysis of Lysine 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation in the Aspergillus niger in Peanuts

### Description
Aspergillus niger is a very destructive pathogen causing severe peanut root rot, especially in the seeding stage of peanuts (Arachis hypogaea), and often leading to the death of the plant. Protein lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a newly detected post-translational modification identified in several species. In this study, we identified 5041 Khib sites on 1453 modified proteins in A. niger. Compared with five other species, A. niger has conserved and novel proteins. Bioinformatics analysis showed that Khib proteins are widely distributed in A. niger and are involved in many biological processes. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses revealed that Khib proteins were significantly enriched in many cellular compartments and pathways, such as ribosomes and proteasome subunits. A total of 223 Knib proteins were part of the PPI network, thus, suggesting that Knib proteins are associated with a large range of protein interactions and diverse pathways in the life processes of A. niger. Several identified proteins are involved in pathogenesis regulation. Our research provides the first comprehensive report of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation and an extensive database for potential functional studies on Knib proteins in this economically important fungus.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were sonicated three times on ice with a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 10 mM DTT and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea and 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0), and the protein concentration was determined with a 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by addition of 100 mM NH4CO3 to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant, with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Aspergillus niger fasta (A. niger sequencing results identified 26472 total proteins) concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and as many as four missing cleavages, five modifications per peptide and five charges were allowed. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, crotonylation of lysine and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites were specified at 1%. The minimum peptide length was set at 7. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Aspergillus niger, Proteome

### Affiliations
Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, Shandong, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Yucheng Chi
Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, Shandong, China


