### Accession
PXD037804

### Title
Physiology of trans-translation deficiency in Bacillus subtilis – a comparative proteomics study

### Description
trans-Translation is the most effective ribosome rescue system known in bacteria. While it is essential in some bacteria, Bacillus subtilis possesses two additional alternative ribosome rescue mechanisms that require the proteins BrfA or RqcH. To investigate the physiology of trans-translation deficiency in the model organism B. subtilis, we compared the proteomes of B. subtilis 168 and a ΔssrA mutant in mid-log phase using gel-free label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Bacillus strains were grown in BMM overnight to the exponential growth phase. Cultures of 50 ml inoculated to an OD500 of 0.05 were grown and harvested during the mid-log phase. Cells were washed and resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were disrupted by sonication using a VialTweeter (Hielscher, Teltow, Germany) and centrifuged to remove cell debris. Protein concentrations of the supernatant were determined by Bradford assay [19]. 50 µl aliquots containing 0.5 µg/ml of protein were prepared. 0.1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, MA) was added to each sample to enhance enzymatic cleavage. Cysteines were reduced and alkylated by the addition of 2.5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min at 60°C and 5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min at 25°C in the dark, respectively. Proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega, Madison, WI) with a protease-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w). Digestion was complete after incubation for 5 h at 37°C and 350 rpm. 2 µl of trifluoroacetic acid (Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands) were added for RapiGest precipitation and samples were centrifuged at 4°C and 14,000 rpm. Before injection, 50 fmol PhosB peptides were added as a Hi3 quantitation standard (Waters) to 0.5 µg of protein for each sample. Samples were injected into an Acquity M-class ultra-performance liquid chromatography (nanoUPLC) system (Waters). Loading and elution were performed in a reversed-phase C18 column (column length, 200 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 1.7 µm; pore size, 130 Å; heated to 40°C) using the following gradient of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in distilled water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid-acetonitrile) with a flow of 350 nl/min: beginning of procedure to 36 min, constant 1% solvent B; 36 to 120 min, linear to 20% solvent B; 120 to 180 min, linear to 30% solvent B; 180 to 240 min, linear to 60% solvent B. The nanoUPLC column was coupled online to a Synapt XS high-definition mass spectrometry (HDMS) electrospray ionization-time of flight (ESI/ToF) mass spectrometer (Waters). Spectra were recorded in positive ionization mode and resolution mode over a mass range of 50 to 2,000 m/z with 0.6 s/scan using mass spectrometry (MSE) technology and a trap collision energy ramp of 14 to 40 V. The following parameters were used for the NanoLockSpray source: capillary voltage, 1.9 kV; sampling cone voltage, 20 V; source temperature, 100°C; desolvation temperature, 200°C; cone gas flow, 50 liters/h; desolvation gas flow, 600 liters/h. Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B (Glu-Fib), serving as a lock mass analyte, was fed through the lock spray channel (lock mass capillary voltage, 3.0 kV).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using ProteinLynxGlobalServer (PLGS) 3.0.3 software (Waters). Mass spectra were processed using the following parameters: chromatographic peak width, automatic; MS ToF resolution, automatic; lock mass for charge, 785.8426 Da/e; lock mass window, 0.25 Da; low-energy threshold, 200 counts; elevated-energy threshold, 50 counts; elution start time, 60 min; elution end time, 300 min. The reference proteome of B. subtilis 168 database (Uniprot Proteome ID: UP000001570) containing 4,263 protein entries, including the sequences for PhosB, trypsin, and keratin, was used for protein identification using the following parameters; peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; minimal fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; minimal fragment ion matches per protein, 5; minimal peptide matches per protein, 2; maximum protein mass, 250 kDa; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N and Q, and oxidation M; false positive rate, 4%; calibration protein PhosB standard; calibration protein concentration for Hi3 quantitation, 50 fmol

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-mse, Translation, Gene regulation, Bacteria, Proteome

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44892 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Melissa Vázquez-Hernández

### Lab Head
Dr Julia E. Bandow
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44892 Bochum, Germany


