### Accession
PXD011957

### Title
Exosomes harbor B cell targets in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and exert decoy function against complement-mediated cytotoxicityc

### Description
Exosomes harbor B cell targets in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and exert decoy function against complement-mediated cytotoxicityc

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface, total cell extract, and conditioned media proteins were extracted from the same batch of cells. Total cell extract proteins were obtained by sonication of ~2x107 cells in 1 ml of PBS containing the detergent octyl-glucoside (OG) (1% w/v) and protease inhibitors (complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche Diagnostics) followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g at 4 °C for 30 min. Secreted proteins were obtained from conditioned media (from ~2x107 cells) centrifuged at 5000 x g and filtrated through a 0.22 µm filter to remove cells and debris. Secreted proteins were then concentrated to 1 ml using a 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off centrifugal filter (Millipore). To isolate cell surface proteins, ~2x108 cells were rinsed 3 times with 10 ml of cold PBS and biotinylated for 10 min in the culture plates with 10 ml of 0.25 mg/ml of Sulfo-NHS-SS-BIOTIN (Pierce) in PBS at room temperature. The residual biotinylation reagent was quenched with 10ml of 10 mM lysine in cold RPMI media for 5 min at room temperature. Cell surface proteins were obtained by sonication of the biotinylated cells in 2% NP-40 detergent in PBS (v/v) followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g at 4 °C for 30 min. Biotinylated proteins were isolated by affinity chromatography using 1 ml of UltraLink Immobilized Neutravidin (Pierce) according to manufacturer instruction. Proteins bound to the column were recovered by reduction of the biotinylation reagent with 1 ml of a solution containing 65 µmol of DTT and 1% (w/v) OG detergent overnight at 4 ºC. Cell surface, conditioned media, and total cell lysate proteins were fractionated by reversed-phase chromatography as described above. Each fraction from the reverse phase chromatography were in-solution digested overnight at 37 °C with 400 ng of trypsin. The resulting trypsinized fractions were pooled into 4 to 10 pools based on chromatographic features. Pools were individually analyzed by LC-MS/MS.SDS page analysisPlease describe the sample loading to gel part. After CBB staining, respective gel lanes were cut into 10? (I forgot, please check) fractions each for individual profiling. Gel fractions were minced into 1 mm3 cubes; destained for 2 hrs in a 1:1 mix of 100 mM NH4HCO3/acetonitrile; alkylated for 30 mins with 0.154% DTT in 100 mM NH4HCO3; additionally alkylated for 30 mins with 0.271% acrylamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3; followed by washing for 30 mins with 5% acetic acid in methanol. Following aspiration of wash buffer, the gel pieces were washed additionally in 100 mM NH4HCO3; followed by aspiration and final wash with acetonitrile. The gel pieces were then dried 45 mins using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and subjected to overnight tryptic digestion. Digested peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using 20 µL of a 1:1 mix of 0.1% TFA in H20/acetonitrile for 15 mins; followed by spin and supernatant harvest and a second extraction using 20 µL of a 1:2 mix 0.1% TFA in H20/acetonitrile for 15 mins. The pooled supernatants were vacuum concentrated to dryness and stored at -80 °C for subsequent LC–MS/MS analysis. HLA-bound peptide extraction HLA-bound peptides were eluted from 5 × 108 cells of CFPAC-1, HPAF-II, SU.86.86, Panc 03.27, MIA PaCa-2, PANC-1 cell lines as previously described (50). Cell lines were incubated with or without 20 ng/ml IFNγ for 24 h before elution of HLA-bound peptides. In brief, 4 ml of citrate-phosphate buffer at pH 3.3 (0.131 M citric acid/0.066 M Na2HPO4, NaCl 150 mM) containing a protease inhibitor mixture and phosphatase inhibitors was added to each dish. Cells were scraped gently from the plate and pooled together and resuspended by gentle pipetting for 1 min to denature HLA-peptide complexes. Cell suspensions were then pelleted, and the resulting supernatant was isolated. Peptides were then passed through ultrafiltration devices (3-kDa cut off, Amicon Ultra; Millipore) to isolate peptides from β2m proteins. Peptides obtained after acid elution were desalted and separated using an off-line 1100 series HPLC system (Shimadzu) with reversed-phase column(4.6-mm internal diameter × 150-mm length; Column Technology). Peptides were fractionated with a 41-min elution program at a flow rate of 2.1 mL/min: 0–2% B (0–5 min), 2–35% B (5–30 min), 35–50% B (30–33 min), 50–95% B (33–35 min), 95% B (35–37 min), 95–2% B (37–37.5 min), 2% B (37.5–41 min). Mobile phase A: 5% acetonitrile, 95% H2O, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA); Mobile phase B: 5% H2O, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. The fractionated peptides were collected in 96 consecutive fractions, lyophilized, and subsequently resuspended in 50 μL of 1%TFA after pooling into 12 pools of consecutively eluting fractions and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
For cell line exosomes, plasma exosomes and Ig-bound proteins, the acquired LC-HDMSE data were processed and searched against protein knowledge database (Uniprot) through ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, Waters Company) with 4% false discovery rate (FDR). For cell line subcellular and SDS/PAGE fractionated samples, the acquired LC-MS/MS data was processed by the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). The Sequest HT was used as a search engine with the parameters including cysteine (Cys) alkylated with acrylamide (71.03714@C) as a fixed modification and methionine (Met) oxidation (15.99491@M) as a variable modification. Mass precursor of ±20 ppm and MS2 fragment of ±0.7 Da were used for the mass tolerance. Data was searched against the Uniprot Human database November 2015 and further filtered the data with FDR ≤5%. Total mass spectrometry counts for each protein were used as a measure of protein abundance. For peptide identification of HPLC fractionated HLA bound peptides, Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was used and amino acid length of 12 to 34 was searched with no enzyme digestion against the Uniprot database separately. The mass tolerance, modifications and FDR were performed as described above. Peptides of 12- to 34-aa residues were subsequently filtered based on the fitness score for the consensus binding motifs for each of the HLA-II alleles, according to the Immune Epitope Database (www.iedb.org). Predicted HLA class II-bound peptides were further inspected for mass accuracy and MS/MS spectra were validated manually. All predicted HLA class II peptides were searched using the NCBI BLASTp algorithm against the human non-redundant protein database to identify the peptide corresponding source.

### Publication Abstract
Although B cell response is frequently found in cancer, there is little evidence that it alters tumor development or progression. The process through which tumor-associated antigens trigger humoral response is not well delineated. We investigate the repertoire of antigens associated with humoral immune response in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) using in-depth proteomic profiling of immunoglobulin-bound proteins from PDAC patient plasmas and identify tumor antigens that induce antibody response together with exosome hallmark proteins. Additional profiling of PDAC cell-derived exosomes reveals significant overlap in their protein content with immunoglobulin-bound proteins in PDAC plasmas, and significant autoantibody reactivity is observed between PDAC cell-derived exosomes and patient plasmas compared to healthy controls. Importantly, PDAC-derived exosomes induce a dose-dependent inhibition of PDAC serum-mediated complement-dependent cytotoxicity towards cancer cells. In summary, we provide evidence that exosomes display a large repertoire of tumor antigens that induce autoantibodies and exert a decoy function against complement-mediated cytotoxicity.

### Keywords
Exosomes harbor b cell targets in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and exert decoy function against complement-mediated cytotoxicityc

### Affiliations
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center  Director, Red & Charline McCombs Institute for the Early Detection and Treatment of Cancer  Co-Director, Center for Global Cancer Early Detection Evelyn & Sol Rubenstein Distinguished Chair for Cancer Prevention Professor, Clinical Cancer Prevention-Research Professor, Translational Molecular Pathology

### Submitter
Jody Vykoukal

### Lab Head
Dr Samir Hanash, MD, PhD
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center  Director, Red & Charline McCombs Institute for the Early Detection and Treatment of Cancer  Co-Director, Center for Global Cancer Early Detection Evelyn & Sol Rubenstein Distinguished Chair for Cancer Prevention Professor, Clinical Cancer Prevention-Research Professor, Translational Molecular Pathology


