### Accession
PXD025320

### Title
The proteome of equine oviductal fluid varies before and after ovulation: a comparative study

### Description
Equine fertilization cannot be performed in the laboratory as equine spermatozoa do not cross the oocyte´s zona pellucida in vitro. Hence, a more profound study of equine oviductal fluid (OF) composition at the pre-ovulatory and post-ovulatory stages could help to understand what components are required to achieve fertilization in horses. Our work aimed to elucidate the proteomic composition of equine OF at both stages. To do this, OF was obtained postmortem from oviducts of slaughtered mares ipsilateral to a pre-ovulatory follicle (n = 4) or a recent ovulation (n = 4); the samples were kept at -80 °C until analysis. After protein extraction and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labelling, the samples were analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The analysis of the spectra resulted in the identification of a total of 1173 proteins present in pre-ovulatory and post-ovulatory samples; among these, 691 were unique for Equus caballus. Proteins from post-ovulatory oviductal fluid were compared with proteins from pre-ovulatory oviductal fluid and were categorized as up- (positive log fold change) or down-regulated (negative log fold change); 15 proteins were found to be down-regulated in the post-ovulatory fluid and 154 were up-regulated in the post-ovulatory OF compared to the pre-ovulatory fluid. The identified proteins were related to sperm-oviduct interaction, fertilization, and metabolism, among others. Our data reveal consistent differences in the proteome of equine OF prior and after ovulation, helping to increase our understanding in the factors that promote fertilization and early embryo development in horses.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and tagging with iTRAQ-8plex® reagent: Total protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660nm protein assay (Thermo). For digestion, 40 µg of protein from each condition was precipitated by methanol/chloroform method. Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 20 µl 7 M Urea/2M Thiourea/100mM TEAB, pH 7.5, reduced with 2 µL of 50mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, SCIEX), pH 8.0, at 37°C for 60 min and followed by 1 µL of 200mM cysteine-blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Pierce) for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted up to 140 µL to reduce urea concentration with 25mM TEAB. Digestions were initiated by adding 2 µg sequence grade-modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) to each sample in a ratio 1:20 (w/w), which were then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The resulting peptides were subsequently labelled using iTRAQ-8plex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions as follows: 113: C1; 114: C1; 115: V1; 116: C2; 117: V2; 118: V2; 119: V2; 121: V2. Three biological replicates of each condition were analysed in this study. After labelling, the samples were pooled, evaporated to dryness and storaged at -20°C until the LC−MS analysis. Offline high pH reversed-phase (bRP-LC) peptide fractionation: bRP-LC C18 fractionation of the iTRAQ labelled peptides was performed on the SmartLine (Knauer, Germany) HPLC system using the Waters, XBridge C18 column (100 × 2.1 mm, 5 μm particle). The composition of mobile phase (A) was 10 mM ammonium hydroxide (pH 9.4), whereas the composition of mobile phase (B) was 80% methanol, 10 mM ammonium hydroxide (pH 9.3). The dried-up peptide pellet was dissolved in 100 μL of buffer A, injected in the sample loop and then fractionated using a linear gradient of 0–100% buffer B at 150 μL/min for 90 min. Thirty fractions were collected over the elution profile and pooled into 5 fractions using the fraction mixing strategy n+1 (i.e. fractions 1+6+11+16+21+26). The peptide fractions were dried, desalted using a SEP-PAK C18 Cartridge (Waters) and stored at −20 °C until the LC−MS analysis. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis: A 1 µg aliquot of labelled mixture was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 75 µm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size and 130 Å pore size (Waters). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo Scientific), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 250 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 120 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) 35, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 25, declustering potential (DP) 150 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 30 MS/MS scans of 150ms in the mass range of 100–1800. Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were exported to mgf format using Peak View v1.2.0.3 and searched using Mascot Server 2.5.1, OMSSA 2.1.9, X!TANDEM 2013.02.01.1, and Myrimatch 2.2.140 against a composite target/decoy database built from the 44,472 Equus caballus sequences at Uniprot (proteome ID UP000002281, March 2020) plus some commonly occurring contaminants. Correctly identified peptides from an initial X!TANDEM search with mass error tolerance of 35 ppm were used to recalibrate parent ion mass measurements in all spectra using linear models. All search engines were then configured to match potential peptide candidates to recalibrated spectra with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13C) of 1, considering fixed MMTS modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus, and modification of lysine and peptide N-terminus with TMT 6-plex reagents. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values, and spectra recovered by a FDR <= 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Differential regulation was measured using linear models and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics (Madrid, Spain).

### Publication Abstract
Equine fertilization cannot be performed in the laboratory as equine spermatozoa do not cross the oocyte's zona pellucida <i>in vitro</i>. Hence, a more profound study of equine oviductal fluid (OF) composition at the pre-ovulatory and post-ovulatory stages could help in understanding what components are required to achieve fertilization in horses. Our work aimed to elucidate the proteomic composition of equine OF at both stages. To do this, OF was obtained postmortem from oviducts of slaughtered mares ipsilateral to a pre-ovulatory follicle (<i>n</i> = 4) or a recent ovulation (<i>n</i> = 4); the samples were kept at -80&#xb0;C until analysis. After protein extraction and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling, the samples were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The analysis of the spectra resulted in the identification of a total of 1,173 proteins present in pre-ovulatory and post-ovulatory samples; among these, 691 were unique for <i>Equus caballus</i>. Proteins from post-ovulatory oviductal fluid were compared with the proteins from pre-ovulatory oviductal fluid and were categorized as upregulated (positive log fold change) or downregulated (negative log fold change). Fifteen proteins were found to be downregulated in the post-ovulatory fluid and 156 were upregulated in the post-ovulatory OF compared to the pre-ovulatory fluid; among the upregulated proteins, 87 were included in the <i>metabolism of proteins</i> pathway. The identified proteins were related to <i>sperm-oviduct interaction, fertilization</i>, and <i>metabolism</i>, among others. Our data reveal consistent differences in the proteome of equine OF prior to and after ovulation, helping to increase our understanding in the factors that promote fertilization and early embryo development in horses.

### Keywords
Horse, Proteomics, Oviductal fluid, Ovulation

### Affiliations
Universidad de Extremadura
Proteobotics S.L.

### Submitter
Antonio Ramos Fernández

### Lab Head
Dr Beatriz Macías García
Universidad de Extremadura


