### Accession
PXD019663

### Title
Proteomic analysis of exudate of Cercospora armoraciae from Armoracia rusticana

### Description
Cercospora armoraciae causes leaf spot disease on Armoracia rusticana. Exudation of droplets, when grown on PDA, distinguishes this fungi from other members of the genus Cercospora. The role this exudate plays in the virulence of this pathogen has not been elucidated. To explore this, we characterized the proteome of exudate associated with this plant pathogen. Nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis was used to identify proteins in the pathogen exudate. A total of 576 proteins comprising 1,538 peptides, 1,524 unique peptide, were identified from the exudate.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection After 20 days cultivation of Cercospora armoraciae, mixed exudate was collected from hyphae using a capillary tube (20 µL), and the liquid was stored at 20°C in a 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes. Protein extraction Total protein was extracted from the exudate with the cold acetone method (Liang et al. 2010). The resulting powder was dissolved in 2 mL pyrolysis buffer (8M urea, 2% SDS, 1 protease inhibitor mixture [Roche, Basel, Switzerland]. The mixture was treated by ultrasound on ice for 30 minutes and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube. For each sample, the protein was precipitated overnight with cold acetone at 20°C. The precipitate was washed three times with acetone and dissolved in 8 M urea by ultrasonic treatment on ice. Protein quality was examined by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Protein digestion The protein concentration in supernatant was determined by BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). The 100 μg protein was transferred to the new tube, and the final volume was adjusted to 100 μL with 8M urea. In the protein solution, 11μL of 1M DTT (DL-dithiothreotol) was added and kept at 37 for 1 hour, then transferred ℃ to 10K ultrafiltration tube (Merck Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA). To  remove urea, the sample was centrifuged three times by adding 100Mm TEAB. 120μL 55mM iodoacetamide was added to the sample, kept in room temperature for 20 minutes and protected from light. Then the proteins were digested overnight with sequence-level modified tryptase (Promega, Madison, WI). nano-HPLC-MS/MS analysis The sample was divided into three equal parts and resuspended with 30 μl solvent C (C: 0.1% formic acid water; D: ACN containing 0.1% formic acid). The sample solution was separated by nanoLC and analyzed by on-line electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. The experiment was carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), which is connected to the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with an online nano-electrospray ion source. The peptide sample (10 μL) was loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim Pep Map C18,100 um x 2 cm) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min for 3 minutes, then followed by a linear gradient from 3% D to 32% D in 120 minutes to separate with the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 15cm). The column was re-equilibrated for 10 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min under initial conditions. The electrospray voltage of the inlet of the mass spectrometer was 2kV. Mass spectrometer operated in data-related acquisition mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scan MS spectrum (m/z 350-1550) with mass resolution of 35K was obtained. Then continuous high energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scanning was performed with resolution of 17.5K. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Science) was used to convert mass spectrometry data into MGF files. The Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; Version 2.3.2) was used to identify proteins by comparison to the reference transcriptome (accession number: SRR9163995). We searched the Mascot database for protein identification by using the C. armoraciae reference transcriptome in NCBI nr/Swiss Prot/Uniprot/IPI databases. The search parameters of Mascot were set to 0.050 Da for fragment ion mass tolerance and 10.0 ppm for parent ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exudate; cercospora armoraciae

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University
Department of Plant Protection, Shenyang Agricultural University

### Submitter
Songhong Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Songhong Wei
Department of Plant Protection, Shenyang Agricultural University


