### Accession
PXD021022

### Title
Drosophila melanogaster LC-MSMS

### Description
we performed proteome sequencing in Drosophila at day 7 (young) and day 42 (old) under dietary restriction (DR)and ad libitum (AL) conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type Dahomey Drosophila melanogaster was cultured at 25°C on a constant light: dark cycle of 12:12h at 65% humidity. Two concentrations of sugar-yeast (SYA) medium were used respectively, which were 20% yeast (ad libitum, AL medium)/10% yeast (dietary restriction, DR medium), 5% sucrose, 15% agar, 3% nipagin, 0.3% propionic acid.  Drosophila samples under DR and AL conditions were collected at day 7 and day 42. Each sample was prepared by pooling 10 female fruit flies. A total of 8 samples (four samples in two replicates) were included. They were named as d7 AL 1st, d7 AL 2nd, d7 DR 1st, d7 DR 2nd, d42 AL 1st, d42 AL 2nd, d42 DR 1st, d42 DR 2nd, respectively. The protein samples of whole fruit fly were extracted for iTRAQ.

### Data Protocol
Qualitative analysis of protein was carried out using Mascot 2.2 identification parameters. The original spectrum of mass spectrum was searched in Uniprot database(Uniprot-Drosophila-melanogaster-42474-20160530.fasta ) for Drosophila melanogaster using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). To obtain reliable qualitative results, the screening standard was set at FDR<0.01. For protein quantitative analysis, Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software was used to extract the peak intensity value of peptide reporter ion, and the quantitative value was normalized.

### Publication Abstract
To explore the underlying mechanism of dietary restriction (DR) induced lifespan extension in fruit flies at protein level, we performed proteome sequencing in Drosophila at day 7 (young) and day 42 (old) under DR and ad libitum (AL) conditions. A total of 18629 unique peptides were identified in Uniprot, corresponding to 3,662 proteins. Among them, 383 and 409 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified from comparison between DR vs AL at day 7 and 42, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that membrane-related processes, post-transcriptional processes, spliceosome and reproduction related processes, were highlighted significantly. In addition, expression of proteins involved in pathways such as spliceosomes, oxidative phosphorylation, lysosomes, ubiquitination, and riboflavin metabolism was relatively higher during DR. A relatively large number of DEPs were found to participate in longevity and age-related disease pathways. We identified 20 proteins that were consistently regulated during DR and some of which are known to be involved in ageing, such as mTORC1, antioxidant, DNA damage repair and autophagy. In the integration analysis, we found 15 genes that were stably regulated by DR at both transcriptional as well as translational levels. Our results provided a useful dataset for further investigations on the mechanism of DR and aging.

### Keywords
Plasma, Lc-msms, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130
Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, China

### Submitter
Gao yue

### Lab Head
Dr Mingyao Yang
Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, China


