### Accession
PXD025004

### Title
Proteomic analysis of dietary restriction in yeast reveals a role for Hsp26 in lifespan extension C4PR_LIV

### Description
Dietary restriction (DR) has been shown to increase lifespan in organisms ranging from yeast to mammals. This suggests that the underlying mechanisms may be evolutionarily conserved. Indeed, upstream signalling pathways, such as TOR, are strongly linked to DR-induced longevity in various organisms. However, the downstream effector proteins that ultimately mediate lifespan extension are less clear. To shed light on this, we used a proteomic approach on budding yeast. Our reasoning was that analysis of proteome-wide changes in response to DR might enable the identification of proteins that mediate its physiological effects, including lifespan extension. Of over 2500 proteins we identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, 183 were significantly altered in expression by at least 3-fold in response to DR. Most of these proteins were mitochondrial and/or had clear links to respiration and metabolism. Indeed, direct analysis of oxygen consumption confirmed that mitochondrial respiration was increased several-fold in response to DR. In addition, several key proteins involved in mating, including Ste2 and Ste6, were downregulated by DR. Consistent with this, shmoo formation in response to α-factor pheromone was reduced by DR, thus confirming the inhibitory effect of DR on yeast mating. Finally, we found that Hsp26, a member of the conserved small heat shock protein (sHSP) family, was upregulated by DR and that overexpression of Hsp26 extends yeast replicative lifespan. As overexpression of sHSPs in C. elegans and Drosophila has previously been shown to extend lifespan, our data on yeast Hsp26 suggest that sHSPs may be universally conserved effectors of longevity.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Yeast culture Yeast liquid cultures of 10 mL were grown overnight at 30 ˚C in sterile containers. Cultures were then diluted 1/20 in YPD containing either 2% or 0.05% glucose, in a 1 L conical flask and left to grow at 30 ˚C shaking until an OD₆₀₀ of 0.6 (mid-log) had been reached (approximately 4 hours for 2% YPD, and 6 hours for 0.05% YPD). Cultures were spun down at 4000 g for 5 minutes and pellets recovered, washed in sterile deionised water, and frozen at -80 ˚C. Yeast pellets were collected until ~1.5x10⁹ cells had been frozen for each condition. Sample preparation  Cell samples for a given condition and replicate (~5 x 105 cell) were recombined into 1 mL beading beating buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and EDTA-free cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche)), and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 4000 rpm at 4oC. The supernatant was removed and 250 µL bead beating buffer added. Cell lysis was achieved by automated glass bead-beating using the MINILYS® homogenizer (Precellys, UK), 15 × 30 sec cycles at 4 °C with 1 min break between each cycle, when lysates were cooled on ice. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13,000 g at 4 oC, and supernatant collected. Insoluble material was re-suspended in 250 µL of bead beating buffer, and a small hole pierced in the bottom of the tube using a hot fine needle.  Flow-through was then collected via centrifugation for 10 minutes at 4000 g at 4oC and combined with the supernatant. The total volume for the combined fractions was recorded to estimate the number of cells/mL for each condition. A protein assay was then performed to determine the amount of protein within each sample In-solution digest of whole cell lysates  For protein digestion, a volume equivalent to 25 million cells (∼100–150 μg protein) was diluted to 160 μL with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were denatured with RapiGest™ detergent (10 μL of 1% (w/v), 80 °C for 10 minutes), reduced using 60 mM dithiothreitol (10 μL, 60 °C, 400 rpm shaking for 10 minutes), cooled on ice and alkylated 180 mM iodoacetamide (10 μL, incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched to prevent over-alkylation by adding excess DTT solution. In-solution digestion was carried out by adding 2 µg of sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, UK) per sample, incubating at 37oC overnight with rotation.  Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the reaction mixture (1% (v/v) final concentration) for 45 min at 37oC to stop the digestion and hydrolyse RapiGest™ detergent. RapiGest™ precipitate and any remaining particulate in the sample was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 20 minutes at 4oC.  LC-MS analysis  Digests (3 µL) were analysed in a random order using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead) coupled to a QExactive™ HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 μm X 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for seven minutes at a flow rate of 12 μL/min with 2% ACN 97.9% H₂O, 0.1% TFA. Samples were resolved on the analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) using a gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% formic acid) 3.8% B (80% ACN 19.9% H₂O,1% formic acid v/v) to 60% A 40% B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a 60,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (AGC set to 3e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 100 ms), with the 16 most abundant peaks being selected for MS/MS using a 30,000 resolution scan (AGC set to 1e5 ions with a maximum fill time of 45 ms) with an ion selection window of 2 m/z and a normalised collision energy of 30. To avoid repeated selection of peptides for MS/MS, the program used a 20 s dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification The raw LC-MS files were analysed in Progenesis QI for Proteomics, label-free analysis software which aligns the files and then peak picks for quantification by peptide abundance. The Progenesis QI workflow creates a virtual aggregate run comprising all the data from the individual samples which allows features to be cross identified from other samples, overcoming stochastic sampling limitations of DDA. The software first aligned the LC-MS files and peak picked the aligned peptides. An aggregate file was generated that contained all the peaks from all runs in the experiment so that there are no missing values. Normalisation was performed using the “normalize against all proteins” option. The software assumed that most proteins are not changing in abundance and normalisation factors are used to adjust peptide intensities. The peptide list was exported into MASCOT and searched against the UniYeastS288c protein database (with carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.01 Da) and the peptide lists imported back into Progenesis and assigned to features. Peptide identity matches were at a 0.91% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Dietary restriction (DR) has been shown to increase lifespan in organisms ranging from yeast to mammals. This suggests that the underlying mechanisms may be evolutionarily conserved. Indeed, upstream signalling pathways, such as TOR, are strongly linked to DR-induced longevity in various organisms. However, the downstream effector proteins that ultimately mediate lifespan extension are less clear. To shed light on this, we used a proteomic approach on budding yeast. Our reasoning was that analysis of proteome-wide changes in response to DR might enable the identification of proteins that mediate its physiological effects, including replicative lifespan extension. Of over 2500 proteins we identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, 183 were significantly altered in expression by at least 3-fold in response to DR. Most of these proteins were mitochondrial and/or had clear links to respiration and metabolism. Indeed, direct analysis of oxygen consumption confirmed that mitochondrial respiration was increased several-fold in response to DR. In addition, several key proteins involved in mating, including Ste2 and Ste6, were down-regulated by DR. Consistent with this, shmoo formation in response to &#x3b1;-factor pheromone was reduced by DR, thus confirming the inhibitory effect of DR on yeast mating. Finally, we found that Hsp26, a member of the conserved small heat shock protein (sHSP) family, was up-regulated by DR and that overexpression of Hsp26 extended yeast replicative lifespan. As overexpression of sHSPs in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila has previously been shown to extend lifespan, our data on yeast Hsp26 suggest that sHSPs may be universally conserved effectors of longevity.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Chaperone, Calorie restriction, Aging, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool, Crown Street, P.O. Box 147, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK.

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Morgan
Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool, Crown Street, P.O. Box 147, Liverpool, L69 3BX, UK.


