### Accession
PXD019894

### Title
Proteomics of extra virgin olive oil (EVOO)

### Description
Proteins and peptides are minor components of vegetal oils. The presence of these compounds in virgin olive oil was first reported in 2001, but the nature of the olive oil proteome is still a puzzling question for food science researchers. In this project, we have compiled for a first time a comprehensive proteomic dataset of olive fruit and fungal proteins that are present at low but measurable concentrations in a vegetable oil from a crop of great agronomical relevance as olive (Olea europaea L.). Accurate mass nLC-MS data were collected in high definition direct data analysis (HD-DDA) mode using the ion mobility separation step. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot Server v2.2.07 software (Matrix Science) against an ad hoc database made of olive protein entries. Starting from this proteomic record, the impact of these proteins on olive oil stability and quality could be tested. Moreover, the effect of olive oil proteins on human health and their potential use as functional food components could be also evaluated. In addition, this dataset provides a resource for use in further functional comparisons across other vegetable oils, and also expands the proteomic resources to non-model species, thus also allowing further comparative inter-species studies.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly bottled extra virgin olive (cv. Picual) oil (2018 harvest) of the Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) “Montes de Granada” was purchased from a local market and stored in the dark at 15-18°C until use. Extra virgin olive oil proteins were extracted and electrophoresed on 1-D polyacrylamide gels. The gel lane containing the EVOO proteins was systematically cut from the top (slice S1) to the bottom (slice S10) into slices of ~1 cm width each. In situ digestion of proteins was performed using the MassPREP Station (Micromass, Manchester, UK). Gel slices were washed three times in a mixture containing 25 mM NH4HCO3: acetonitrile (ACN) (1:1, v/v). The Cys residues were reduced by 50 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 57°C and alkylated by 50 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature. After gel dehydration with ACN, proteins were digested overnight at room temperature in 15 µL of a solution containing 12.5 ng µL-1 of a modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) prepared in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, a double extraction was performed, first with 60% (v/v) ACN in 5% (v/v) formic acid, and subsequently with 100% (v/v) ACN.  Nano-Liquid chromatography (nLC) of the resulting tryptic peptides was performed using a nanoACQUITY UPLC© system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), equipped with a nanoACQUITY UPLC© Peptide BEH C18 (200 mm length x 75 µm ID, 1.7 µm particle size) nano-column (catalog no. 186007483, Waters), coupled with a nanoACQUITY UPLC C18 trap column (20 mm length x 180 µm ID, 5 µm particle size) (catalog no. 186007496, Waters). About 0.5 µg was loaded per run. The solvent system consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1%  (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN) (mobile phase B). Elution was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1, using a linear gradient (5 to 60%) of mobile phase B over a chromatographic ramp of 120 min. A lock mass compound [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (100 fmol µl-1) (catalog no. 196007091-2, Waters) was delivered by an auxiliary pump of the LC system at 500 nL min-1 to the reference sprayer of the NanoLockSpray Exact Mass Ionization source (Waters Corp.) of the mass spectrometer.  A Synapt G2Si ESI Q-Mobility-TOF spectrometer (Waters Corp.) equipped with an ion mobility chamber (T-Wave-IMS) was used for high definition data acquisition analysis. The mass spectrometer was operating in positive mode ESI with the following settings: source temperature was set to 120°C, while dry gas flow was at 3.7 ml min–1. The nano-electrospray voltage was optimized to 1.3 kV. Data were post-acquisition lock mass corrected using the double charged monoisotopic ion of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B. Accurate LC-MS data were collected in High Definition Direct Data Analysis (HD-DDA) mode that enhances signal intensities using the ion mobility separation step.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using the Mascot Server v2.2.07 software (Matrix Science, London, UK) against an ad hoc-generated database composed of protein entries retrieved from the olive genome and transcriptome records, as well as known contaminant proteins such as human keratins and trypsin, extracted from the NCBI nr protein database. To be accepted for the identification, an error of less than 15 ppm of peptide mass tolerance and 0.2 Da of fragment mass tolerance were tolerated. Up to 3 missed cleavage points were allowed and some modifications were taken into account: carbamidomethylation of Cys residues (+57 Da) as fixed modification, oxidation of Met (+16 Da) as variable modification, and peptide charges of +2 and +3. In addition, searches were performed without any molecular weight (Mr) or isoelectric point (pI) restrictions. To calculate the false discovery rate (FDR), the search was performed using the “decoy” option in Mascot (Matrix Science). Peptide identifications extracted from Mascot result files were validated at a final peptide FDR of 1%. Peptide matches were also manually validated if their score was close to the Mascot homology threshold for a given Mascot p value.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins are minor components of extra virgin olive oil (EVOO), but the nature of the olive oil proteome is still elusive. In this paper, we have uncovered the EVOO proteome for the first time. Seed storage proteins of globulin-type were identified as the most abundant proteins in EVOO, which also contains an active 13-lipoxygenase and several potential allergenic proteins, including the "panallergen" profilin. We validated our proteomic data by Western blotting and enzyme activity assays. Our data also demonstrated that the seed is the main source of proteins in EVOO, while the contribution of the pulp is uncertain and needs further verification. The impact of EVOO proteins on its stability and quality, and on human health is discussed.

### Keywords
Extra virgin olive oil (evoo); lipoxygenase; olea europaea; proteomics; seed storage proteins (ssp)

### Affiliations
Proteomics Service, CIC bioGUNE. Bizkaia Tech Park Build. 800 Detio 48160 Spain
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Service, CIC bioGUNE. Bizkaia Tech Park Build. 800 Detio 48160 Spain


