### Accession
PXD047413

### Title
Endocannabinoid biosynthetic enzymes regulate pain response via LKB1–AMPK signaling

### Description
Diacylglycerol lipase-beta (DAGLβ) serves as a principal 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) biosynthetic enzyme regulating endocannabinoid and eicosanoid metabolism in immune cells including macrophages and dendritic cells. Genetic or pharmacological inactivation of DAGLβ ameliorates inflammation and hyper-nociception in preclinical models of pathogenic pain. These beneficial effects have been assigned principally to reductions in downstream proinflammatory lipid signaling, leaving alternative mechanisms of regulation largely underexplored. Here, we apply quantitative chemical- and phospho-proteomics to find that disruption of DAGLβ in primary macrophages leads to LKB1–AMPK signaling activation, resulting in reprogramming of the phosphoproteome and bioenergetics. Notably, AMPK inhibition reversed the antinociceptive effects of DAGLβ blockade, thereby directly supporting DAGLβ–AMPK crosstalk in vivo. Our findings uncover signaling between endocannabinoid biosynthetic enzymes and ancient energy-sensing kinases to mediate cell biological and pain responses.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomics BMDM cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor, Thermo #A32961), sonicated and fractionated (14,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C) to remove cell debris. Light and heavy proteomes were diluted to 2.5 mg/ml in 200 µl and mixed as a total of 400 µl. Mixed samples were spiked with urea (6 M urea) and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 65°C for 15 min. After buffer exchange to 200 µl 6 M urea:25 mM ammonium bicarbonate on 10KDa filter (Millipore #MRCPRT010), samples were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min, followed by buffer exchange to 200 µl 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were digested to peptides using trypsin/Lys-C (5 µg in 10 µl of ammonium bicarbonate, sequencing grade from Promega) was added to the mixture and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. Digested peptides were collected through the filter (14,000 x g, 15 min) and lyophilized by speedvac. Phospho samples were further enriched by TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo #A32993). Phosphopeptides and global peptides were prepared in 50 µL 0.1% formic acid for LC–MS/MS. Chemical proteomics Proteomes were diluted to 2 mg/mL in kinase buffer. Desthiobiotin ATP acyl phosphate nucleotide probe (0.5 mM in ddH2O) was then added to each sample (5 μL, 10 μM final), mixed gently, and allowed to incubate at 25°C for 30 min. After incubation, matched light and heavy proteomes were transferred and mixed in a 1:1 ratio in a two-dram vial containing 4:1:3 MeOH/CHCl3/H2O for extraction of proteins to remove excess probe, quickly vortexed, and centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 3 min to pellet protein. Organic and aqueous layers were removed using a Pasteur pipette, and the protein pellet was transferred to a screw-top tube in 600 μL MeOH. A second extraction was performed by adding CHCl3 (150 μL) and H2O (600 μL) to each sample, vortexed, and centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 3 min to pellet protein. Organic and aqueous layers were removed by pipetting, MeOH added to pellet (600 μL) and pellets were re-suspended by sonication (3 x 1 sec pulse, 20% amplitude) for a final extraction. Samples were then centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 5 min to pellet protein and MeOH was removed by pipetting. The pellets were re-suspended in 10 M urea/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (500 mL), brought to a final volume of 1 mL with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at 65°C, allowed to cool, and then alkylated. To desalt the samples, each was transferred to a two-dram glass vial, and to the vial 4:1:2 MeOH/CHCl3/ was added. The vials were vortexed quickly, spun at 1,400 x g for 3 min to pellet protein, and aqueous and organic layers were removed using a Pasteur pipette. The resulting protein pellet was transferred to a screw-top tube in 600 μL MeOH, and then CHCl3 (150 μL) and H2O (600 μL) were added to extract protein a second time. The samples were vortexed quickly, centrifuged at 1,400 x g to pellet protein, and the aqueous and organic layers were removed by pipetting. Resulting protein pellet was suspended in MeOH (600 μL) via sonication, centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 5 min to pellet protein, and MeOH removed by pipetting. Protein pellets were then re-suspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (500 μL) and digested with 7.5 μg Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, 15 μL, 0.5 μg/μL) for 3 h at 37°C. Avidin-agarose beads (Thermo Scientific Pierce, 100 μL aliquot per sample) were washed three times by adding 10 mL DPBS, centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 1 min, and decanting. This wash step was repeated for a total of 3 times. Digested protein samples were mixed with washed avidin beads (100 μL) and brought to a volume of 5.5 mL with DPBS in a 15 mL conical and rotated for 1 h to enrich samples for the covalent desthiobiotin modification. The beads were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (3X with 10 mL, centrifuge at 1,400 x g for 3 min, decant) and then H2O (3X with 10 mL, centrifuge at 1,400 x g for 3 min, decant). Washed beads were then transferred to a low-bind microfuge tube, centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 3 min, allowed to rest for 1 min to settle beads, and then excess H2O was removed carefully using a gel-loading pipette tip. To elute peptides, 100 μL of elution buffer (50% acetonitrile, ACN; 0.1% formic acid) was added to each sample and incubated for 3 min. Beads were spun down at 1,400 x g for 3 min, allowed to rest for 1 min to settle beads, and then 75 μL of peptide-containing supernatant was removed carefully using a gel-loading pipette tip and transferred to a new low bind centrifuge tube. This step was repeated two more times with 75 μL of elution buffer and all eluent were collected into the same centrifuge tube (∼225 μL total). Peptides were dried on a speed vacuum, resulting peptide samples acidified in 5% (v/v) formic acid, and stored at -80°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
phosphoproteomics: Phosphopeptide identification and quantification pipeline processed on the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with internal third-party Byonic search engine. Processing parameters uniport mouse database, included trypsin (full) as enzyme, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance, 1% protein FDR, variable (common) modification of phosphorylated amino acids (+79.966331 Da for S, T, Y) and heavy-labeled amino acids (+10.0083 Da for R, +8.0142 Da for K), and fixed modification (+57.021465 Da for alkylated cysteine residues). Consensus steps included PSM filters of 5 ppm delta mass and Byonic score > 300, total peptide amount for normalization, t-test for hypothesis test, and protein modification report only for master protein. Protein ratios were calculated as pairwise ratio based. For SILAC ratio, maximum values were set to 20 and minimum values to 0.05 before log2 calculation. Volcano plot was given -log10(p-value) versus log2(SR) of all peptide groups based on t-test, where p < 0.05 was regarded as significant changes. GO enrichment analysis powered by PANTHER were used for fold change analysis in both phosphoproteomics and global proteomics analysis. Cluster heatmaps were generated using Heatmapper9. Venn plots were generated using InteractiVenn. chemical proteomics: SILAC ATP acyl phosphatase probe-modified proteome analysis was accomplished on Byonic software package (Protein Metrics) using uniport mouse database and Skyline-daily to determine the SR of light/heavy peptides as previously described. SILAC ratios of Skyline report were converted to heavy/light ratio, and maximum values were set to 20 and minimum values to 0.05 before log2 calculation. Search results were imported into R, joined with uniport mouse kinase database to select probed kinases in BMDMs, and filtered for a Byonic score of >300 (unless otherwise specified), minimum peptide length as 6, a precursor mass error between −5 and +5 ppm, dotp > 0.80, idotp > 0.80, and ATP acyl phosphatase probe modification. Grubbs outlier test was performed on GraphPad QuickCalcs Web (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA) with p < 0.01. GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA) was used for LKB1 probe-modified activity as mean ± SEM, statistical Z score versus fold change plot, and heatmap of unique probed-modified kinome sites. Identified unique BMDM kinases were imported on a web-based tool KinMap to plot the protein kinome tree.

### Publication Abstract
Diacylglycerol lipase-beta (DAGL&#x3b2;) serves as a principal 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) biosynthetic enzyme regulating endocannabinoid and eicosanoid metabolism in immune cells including macrophages and dendritic cells. Genetic or pharmacological inactivation of DAGL&#x3b2; ameliorates inflammation and hyper-nociception in preclinical models of pathogenic pain. These beneficial effects have been assigned principally to reductions in downstream proinflammatory lipid signaling, leaving alternative mechanisms of regulation largely underexplored. Here, we apply quantitative chemical- and phospho-proteomics to find that disruption of DAGL&#x3b2; in primary macrophages leads to LKB1-AMPK signaling activation, resulting in reprogramming of the phosphoproteome and bioenergetics. Notably, AMPK inhibition reversed the antinociceptive effects of DAGL&#x3b2; blockade, thereby directly supporting DAGL&#x3b2;-AMPK crosstalk in vivo. Our findings uncover signaling between endocannabinoid biosynthetic enzymes and ancient energy-sensing kinases to mediate cell biological and pain responses.

### Keywords
Ampk, Inflammation, Activity based protein profiling, Diacylglycerol lipase, Endocannabinoids

### Affiliations
University of Virginia
Associate Professor  Stephen F. and Fay Evans Martin Endowed Professorship in Chemistry CPRIT Scholar Department of Chemistry University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Miaomiao Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Ku-lung Hsu
Associate Professor  Stephen F. and Fay Evans Martin Endowed Professorship in Chemistry CPRIT Scholar Department of Chemistry University of Texas at Austin


