### Accession
PXD031877

### Title
plant RNA G-quadruplexe proteomics screening

### Description
RNA G-quadruplexes (rG4s) are non-canonical RNA second structures formed by guanine (G)-rich sequences. They play important regulatory roles in both animals and plants through their structural dynamics and are closely related to human diseases and plant growth, development, and adaption. Here, proteomics screening was used to identify rG4 specialized proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Sample Protocol
1 mg of streptavidin-coated beads (M-280 Dynabeads, Life Technologies) was washed with 200 μl protein-binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 300 mM KCl, 0.1% Tween-20, 2 mM EDTA, and 2‰ RNase inhibitor (v/v) (Promega)) and resuspended to a final concentration of 5 mg/ml. One equal volume of 4 µM biotin-modified RNA was added and incubated for 20 min at 20°C. The beads were then transferred and washed with pull-down buffer (protein-binding buffer, adding cocktail (Sigma)). One-gram samples of 7-day-old Arabidopsis were frozen with liquid nitrogen and ground into fine powder. Five milliliters of pull-down buffer was added and centrifuged for 20 min at 4°C and 16,000 g, followed by filtration through a 0.20-µm filter. The Arabidopsis lysates (5 ml per 1 mg of beads) were incubated with the substrate-conjugated Dynabeads at 4°C for 4 h, collected by magnetic rack, washed three times using the pull-down buffer, and then eluted with 50 μl SDS-PAGE loading buffer through boiling for 5 min. After two biological repeats for each substrate, the samples were run in an SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (BGI, Shenzhen, China).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were indentified against the protein database of Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Publication Abstract
RNA G-quadruplexes (rG4s) are noncanonical RNA secondary structures formed by guanine (G)-rich sequences. These complexes play important regulatory roles in both animals and plants through their structural dynamics and are closely related to human diseases and plant growth, development, and adaption. Thus, studying the structural dynamics of rG4s is fundamentally important; however, their folding pathways and their unfolding by specialized helicases are not well understood. In addition, no plant rG4-specialized helicases have been identified. Here, using single-molecule FRET, we experimentally elucidated for the first time the folding pathway and intermediates, including a G-hairpin and G-triplex. In addition, using proteomics screening and microscale thermophoresis, we identified and validated five rG4-specialized helicases in Arabidopsis thaliana. Furthermore, DExH1, the ortholog of the famous human rG4 helicase RHAU/DHX36, stood out for its robust rG4 unwinding ability. Taken together, these results shed light on the structural dynamics of plant rG4s.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Helicase, Plant rna g-quadruplex

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Adaptation and Improvement, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, School of Life Sciences, Henan University
Henan University

### Submitter
Wen-Qiang Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Wen-Qiang Wu
State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Adaptation and Improvement, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, School of Life Sciences, Henan University


