### Accession
PXD030396

### Title
Pterosin B treatment  protect cells from glutamate-induced cytotoxicity

### Description
The prevalence of neurodegenerative diseases is rapidly increasing with the aging trend of global populations, severely threatening human health and burdening society. However, to date, there is no effective treatment able to halt the progression or cure the diseases. Here, We aim to develop effective treatments for neurodegenerative diseases from novel sources by evaluating their neuroprotective activity and investigating the working mechanism. Primary screening on glutamate-induced excitotoxicity was assessed by MTT assay. The combination of transcriptomics and proteomics analysis were used to identify the targets of pterosin B. The key pathways were enriched by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). The core targets were analyzed by protein-protein interactions network by STRING. The mRNA expressions and protein expressions were evaluated using qPCR and western blot, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
For all proteomics experiments, four biological replicates were performed for each sample, including the control sample. Differentiated N2a cells were treated with glutamate or pterosin B for 24 h and harvested for proteomics analysis. After removing culture media, cells were washed with PBS once and lysed with lysis buffer (1X RIPA buffer (EMD Millipore, 20–188), 1X PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Roche Applied Science, 04906837001), and 1X complete protease inhibitor (Roche Applied Science, 04693159001)). Cell lysates were then collected and centrifuged (4℃, 15,000 rpm for 10 min) to remove cell debris and insoluble materials. Four sample volumes of the pre-cold (-20 ℃) acetone were added, and the mixed samples were then put to -20 ℃ for overnight precipitation. Protein pellets were collected by removing supernatant (4℃, 15,000 rpm for 30 min) followed by three times washing (500 μL acetone, 500 μL 70% ethanol, 500 μL, respectively, all reagents are pre-cold). Protein pellets were then freeze-dried and resuspended with 10 μL UA buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) without DTT). Then 1 μL of protein was taken out for concentration measurement using Invitrogen Qubit Protein Assay Kit. For each sample, 2.25 μL of 10 mM DTT (final concentration is 2mM) was added, vortexed, spun down, and kept at 30 ℃ for 1.5 hrs. Then 2.83 μL of 50 mM IAA buffer (final concentration is 10mM) was added, and the sample was vortexed, spun down, and put in the dark for 40 mins. 90 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was then added to the mixture. The final Urea concentration should be 0.7 M. Trypsin was added at a 1:1 ratio and incubated at 37 ℃ for 4 hrs. The same amount of trypsin was added for further overnight digestion. Then 10 % TFA (final concentration of 0.4 %) was added to stop the digestion. Then samples were concentrated to 20 μL by SpeedVac, desalted by Pierce C18 spin tip, and the eluent was dried using SpeedVac. Finally, samples were reconstituted to 200 ng/μL using 98 % H2O, 2 % ACN, and 0.1 % FA for timsTOF Pro analysis.   Briefly, protein samples were processed through Bruker nanoElute Ultra-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (TimsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray, Bruker Daltonics). A volume of 1 µl of the protein digest was injected into the UHPLC system and separated on an IonOpticks 25cm Aurora Series Emitter column with Captive Spray Insert (250 mm × 75 µm internal diameter, 120 Å pore size, 1.6 µm particle size C18) at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The mobile phase composition is 0.1% formic acid in water for solvent A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for solvent B. The gradient was applied as follows: From 2 to 5% of solvent B for the first 0.5 min, from 5 to 30% of solvent B for 26.5 min, from 30 to 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min, keeping 95% of solvent B for 0.5 min, and finally decreasing from 95 to 2% of solvent B for 0.1 min. Two minutes equilibration with 2% of solvent B was applied before the next injection. For the TimsTOF Pro Mass Spectrometer (MS), we set the accumulation and ramp time to 100 ms each and recorded mass spectra in the range from m/z 100 to 1700 using the positive electrospray mode. The ion mobility was scanned from 0.85 to 1.30 Vs/cm2, the quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700, and the collision energy was linearly increased from 27 eV to 45 eV as a function of increasing ion mobility. Low-abundance precursor ions with an intensity above a threshold of 2,500 counts but below a target value of 20,000 counts were repeatedly scheduled and otherwise dynamically excluded for 0.4 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted to mgf files by Bruker Compass DataAnalysis (version 5.2), and subsequently converted to mzML files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard (version 3.0.20229 64-bit). The mzML files were searched using Comet (version 2016.01 rev.2) against the Mus musculus protein sequence database (Proteome ID: UP000000589) obtained from UniProt (downloaded December 2020). Only the reviewed proteins were included in the database. The sequences of common contaminants, such as trypsin and human keratins, and decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequences in the database are used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The search parameters criteria were set as follows: 15 ppm peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 0.05 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0 amu fragment bin offset, carbamidomethylated cysteine, and oxidated methionine as the fixed and variable modifications respectively. The search results from Comet were processed by PeptideProphet, iProphet, and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) in the decoy-assisted non-parametric mode. Every mzML run was analyzed independently. Protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01 as predicted by ProteinProphet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuroprotective natural products, Ros, Mitochondria membrane potential, Glutamate excitotoxicity

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)


