### Accession
PXD035309

### Title
Lysine Acetylome Profiling Reveals Diverse Functions of Acetylation in Deinococcus Radiodurans

### Description
D. radiodurans is distinguished by the most radioresistant organism identified to date. Lysine acetylation is a highly conserved post-translational modification that plays an essential role in the regulation of many cellular processes and may contribute to its extraordinary radioresistance. We integrate acetyl-lysine enrichment strategy, high-resolution mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics to profile the lysine acetylated proteins for the first time. It is striking that almost half of the total annotated proteins are identified as acetylated forms, which is the largest acetylome dataset reported in D. radiodurans to date. The acetylated proteins are involved in metabolic pathways, propanoate metabolism, carbon metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. The results of this study reinforce the notion that acetylation plays critical regulatory roles in diverse aspects of the cellular process, especially in DNA damage repair and metabolism. It provides insight into the roles of lysine acetylation in the robust resistance to radiation.

### Sample Protocol
The growth and radiation conditions The strains were grown in TGY medium (1% Tryptone, 0.5% Glucose, 0.1% Yeast extract) at 30 ℃ and 150 rpm/min. For the radiation experiment, the strains were exposed to 6 kGy of 60Co γ-rays at a dose rate of 30 Gy/min (Peking University, Beijing, China). Subsequently, the non-irradiated control and irradiated samples were centrifuged (10000 × g, 5 min, 4 °C) and transferred to fresh TGY medium at an initial OD600 of 0.1 for post-irradiation recovery. The bacteria were collected at 0 h, 1 h, and 4 h during post-irradiation recovery. The cells were washed twice with PBS buffer and harvested after centrifugation (10000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C). The cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at - 80 ° C until further proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed using pfind against the Uniprot D. radiodurans database downloaded from UniProtKB (https://www.uniprot.org/) on October 22, 2019. The built-in label-free quantification algorithm in pFind was applied to quantification [26]. The following parameters were used: the precursor and fragment tolerance were both set to 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin/P with a maximum of three missed cleavages; Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (K) was searched as variable modification, and Carbamidomethyl (C) was searched as fixed modification; The other parameters in pFind were set with default values. The pFind search results were imported into Perseus (v.1.6.2.3) software for statistical analysis. First, the rows marked as “Reverse”, “Potential contaminants,” and “Proteins only identified by site” were excluded. The rows with no missing values across all samples were conserved for subsequent analysis to achieve high stringency and the intensity values were log-transformed with base 2. Then, the differentially abundant proteins were identified by unpaired two-tailed student's t-test with a significance threshold set at p-value <0.05 and fold change of intensities calculated as post-irradiation / control group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deinococcus radiodurans; lysine acetylation; dna damage; posttranslational modification

### Affiliations
Beijing Insititute of Technology
Beijing Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Yongqian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yongqian Zhang
Beijing Institute of Technology


