### Accession
PXD036818

### Title
FAM46C is an IFN stimulated gene that restricts lentiviral particle production by modulating autophagy

### Description
FAM46C is a multiple myeloma tumour suppressor whose function is only starting to be elucidated. We recently showed that in multiple myeloma cells FAM46C triggers apoptosis by inhibiting autophagy and altering intracellular trafficking and protein secretion. To date, both a physiological characterization of FAM46C role and assessment of FAM46C-induced phenotypes outside of multiple myeloma are lacking. Preliminary reports suggested an involvement of FAM46C with regulation of viral replication but results were scanty and contradictory. Here, we show that FAM46C is an IFN-stimulated gene and that expression in HEK 293T cells of wt FAM46C but not of its most frequently found mutant variants, inhibits replication of both HIV-1 and HIV-1-derived lentiviruses. We demonstrate that this effect does not require transcriptional regulation and does not depend on inhibition of either global or viral-specific translation, but rather mostly relies on FAM46C-induced deregulation of autophagy, a pathway which we show to be required for efficient lentiviral production. These studies not only provide new insights on the physiological role of the FAM46C protein but could also help implementing more efficient antiviral strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on SDS-PAGE (NuPAGE® Novex 4-12%), stained with Coomassie Brilliant blue (Sigma-Aldrich) and five consecutive bands were excised and trypsin-digested following the procedure descried by REF. Subsequently, peptides extracted from the gel pieces were cleaned up using homemade STAGE Tips microcolumns . Peptides were then eluted in 40 µl buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA)). ACN was evaporated using a speed vac concentrator (Eppendorf) and the volume of the eluates were adjusted to 5 µl with 1% TFA, to be then analysed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no LC140) connected to a Q-Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source (EASY-SPRAY, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with an EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) kept at 45°C constant. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. Samples were injected in aqueous 1% (TFA) at a constant pressure of 980 Bar. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5–30% solvent B over 35 min followed by a gradient of 20–30% for 5 min and 30–65% over 3  min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MSMS acquisition. MS spectra (from m/z 375-1650) were analysed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=70,000 at m/z 400. The 12 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3e6 and fragmented with a normalized collision energy setting of 28% in to the HCD cell. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20ms for full scans and 45ms for MSMS. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20s

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.3 integrated with Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Tow databases from UniProt were specified for the search:  UP000005640 (Human) and UP000002241 (HIV-1). The LFQ intensity calculation was enabled, as well as the match between runs (MBRs) feature. The “protein groups” output file from MaxQuant was analysed using Perseus software. Briefly, no imputation was used, and the data were filtered to have 75% valid values in at least one group. T-test statistic is used to identify significant proteins

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fam46c inhibits lentiviral production

### Affiliations
IEO
INGM, Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi", Milan, Italy.

### Submitter
alessandro cuomo

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Manfrini
INGM, Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi", Milan, Italy.


