### Accession
PXD007192

### Title
Arabidopsis LDIP is an LDAP-interacting protein that influences lipid droplet biogenesis and neutral lipid homeostasis in both leaves and seeds

### Description
Cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs) are found in all types of plant cells where they are derived from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and function as a repository for neutral lipids, as well as serving in lipid remodelling and signalling. However, the mechanisms underlying the formation and functioning of plant LDs, particularly in non-seed tissues, are relatively unknown. Previously, we showed that the LD-Associated Proteins (LDAPs) are a family of plant-specific, LD surface-associated coat proteins that are required for proper LD biogenesis and neutral lipid homeostasis in vegetative tissues. Here, we screened a yeast two-hybrid library using Arabidopsis LDAP3 as ‘bait’ in an effort to identify other novel LD protein constituents. One of the candidate LDAP3-interacting proteins was Arabidopsis At5g16550, which is a plant-specific protein of unknown function that we termed LDIP (LDAP-interacting protein). Using a combination of biochemical and cellular approaches, we show that LDIP targets specifically to the LD surface, contains a discrete amphipathic -helical targeting sequence, and participates in both homotypic and heterotypic associations with itself and LDAP3, respectively. Analysis of LDIP T-DNA knockdown and knockout mutants showed a decrease in LD abundance and increase in variability of LD size in leaves, with concomitant increases in total neutral lipid content. Similar phenotypes were observed in plant seeds, which showed enlarged LDs and increases in total seed oil amounts. Collectively, these data identify LDIP as a new player in LD biogenesis in plants that modulates both LD size and cellular neutral lipid homeostasis. Potential mechanisms of LDIP activity are discussed.

### Sample Protocol
250 mg of Arabidopsis seed (Col-0) was sterilized and stratified for 4 days in the dark at 4°C and then grown for 2 days in long-day conditions at 22°C on ½ MS media plates without sucrose. Seedlings were ground in sand and 4 mL grinding buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate buffer [pH 7.4], 0.5 mM Lohman’s reagent, and 10 mM N-ethylmalmeimide [Sigma-Aldrich]) for 1 min with a mortar and pestle. The resulting homogenate was spun for 10 s at 100 g and a 100 µL aliquot of the supernatant (‘total cell protein’ sample) was precipitated in 90% (v/v) ethanol at -20oC. The rest of the supernatant was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4°C and the resulting fat pad was washed twice with grinding buffer and finally delipidated in ethanol at -20°C. The protein pellet (‘LD fraction’ sample) was washed twice with ethanol, dried and resuspended in 6 M SDS and 5% (w/v) urea. Protein concentrations were determined with a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific‎). Ten µg of protein was run on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel until they entered into the separation gel. The Coomassie blue-stained protein bands were then excised and processed as described by Shevchenko et al. (1996). Peptides were desalted over a Supelco C18 column (Sigma-Aldrich) according to Rappsilber et al. (2007) and then subjected to LC-MS/MS (Schmitt et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data was analyzed with both Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and MaxQuant 1.5.6.0. Protein abundance was quantified using iBAQ label-free quantification implemented in the MaxQuant software (Schaab et al., 2012) and the values calculated as percentage of all values in one sample.

### Publication Abstract
Cytoplasmic lipid droplets (LDs) are found in all types of plant cells; they are derived from the endoplasmic reticulum and function as a repository for neutral lipids, as well as serving in lipid remodelling and signalling. However, the mechanisms underlying the formation, steady-state maintenance and turnover of plant LDs, particularly in non-seed tissues, are relatively unknown. Previously, we showed that the LD-associated proteins (LDAPs) are a family of plant-specific, LD surface-associated coat proteins that are required for proper biogenesis of LDs and neutral lipid homeostasis in vegetative tissues. Here, we screened a yeast two-hybrid library using the Arabidopsis LDAP3 isoform as 'bait' in an effort to identify other novel LD protein constituents. One of the candidate LDAP3-interacting proteins was Arabidopsis At5g16550, which is a plant-specific protein of unknown function that we termed LDIP (LDAP-interacting protein). Using a combination of biochemical and cellular approaches, we show that LDIP targets specifically to the LD surface, contains a discrete amphipathic &#x3b1;-helical targeting sequence, and participates in both homotypic and heterotypic associations with itself and LDAP3, respectively. Analysis of LDIP T-DNA knockdown and knockout mutants showed a decrease in LD abundance and an increase in variability of LD size in leaves, with concomitant increases in total neutral lipid content. Similar phenotypes were observed in plant seeds, which showed enlarged LDs and increases in total amounts of seed oil. Collectively, these data identify LDIP as a new player in LD biology that modulates both LD size and cellular neutral lipid homeostasis in both leaves and seeds.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ldap, Lipid droplet, Protein targeting, Neutral lipids, Ldip, Biogenesis, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
University of Goettingen Department for Plant Biochemistry
University of Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Till Ischebeck
University of Goettingen Department for Plant Biochemistry


