### Accession
PXD011096

### Title
Epistasis studies reveal redundancy among calcium-dependent protein kinases in motility and invasion of malaria parasites

### Description
In malaria parasites, evolution of parasitism has been linked to functional optimisation. Despite this optimisation, most members of a calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) family show genetic redundancy during erythrocytic proliferation. To identify relationships between phospho-signalling pathways, we here screen 294 genetic interactions among protein kinases in Plasmodium berghei. This reveals a synthetic negative interaction between a hypomorphic allele of the protein kinase G (PKG) and CDPK4 to control erythrocyte invasion which is conserved in P. falciparum. CDPK4 becomes critical when PKG-dependent calcium signals are attenuated to phosphorylate proteins important for the stability of the inner membrane complex, which serves as an anchor for the acto-myosin motor required for motility and invasion. Finally, we show that multiple kinases functionally complement CDPK4 during erythrocytic proliferation and transmission to the mosquito vector. This study reveals how CDPKs are wired within a stage-transcending signalling network to control motility and host cell invasion in malaria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation of CDPK4-3xHA, CDPK1-3xHA, MyoE-3xHA, SOC6-3xHA, GAP40-3xHA protein complexes were performed with schizont fixed for 10 minutes with 1% formaldehyde, lysed in RIPA buffer and the supernatant was subjected to affinity purification with magnetics beads conjugated with monoclonal anti-HA antibody, clone 3F10  (Sigma)Sigma-Aldrich, reference 000000011867431001). A WT control was included in parallel and proteins for which we recovered peptides in the WT control were not retained for further analysis.  Magnetic beads were suspended in 100 mL of 6 M Urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB). To this solution, 2 µl of DTT (50 mM in LC-MS grade water) were added and the reduction was carried out at 37°C for 1 hour. Alkylation was performed by adding 2 µL of iodoacetamide (400 mM in distilled water) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Urea concentration was lowered to 1M with 50 mM AB, and protein digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C with 15 µL of freshly prepared trypsin Promega (0.2 µg/µL in AB). After beads removal, the sample was desalted with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA), dried under speed-vacuum, and re-dissolved in H2O/CH3CN/FA 94.9/5/0.1 before LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75 μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18, 2μm Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 90 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0-5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B in 60 min, then to 10 % A and 90 % B in 10 min, and finally stay at 10 % A and 90 % B for 15 min. The entire run was at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. ESI was performed in positive mode. For MS survey scans, the resolution was set to 70 000, the ion population was set to 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a scan range window from 400 to 2000 m/z. For MS2 data-dependent acquisition, up to fifteen precursor ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The resolution was set to 17 500, the ion population was set to 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z units. The normalized collision energies were set to 27%. Peak lists were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched against the Plasmodium berghei_ANKA database (Plasmodium Genomic Resource, release 28, 5076 entries) using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.020 Da and parent ion tolerance to 10.0 ppm. Variable amino acid modification was oxidized methionine and fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.7.3 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0 % probability and contained at least 3 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In malaria parasites, evolution of parasitism has been linked to functional optimisation. Despite this optimisation, most members of a calcium-dependent protein kinase (CDPK) family show genetic redundancy during erythrocytic proliferation. To identify relationships between phospho-signalling pathways, we here screen 294 genetic interactions among protein kinases in Plasmodium berghei. This reveals a synthetic negative interaction between a hypomorphic allele of the protein kinase G (PKG) and CDPK4 to control erythrocyte invasion which is conserved in P. falciparum. CDPK4 becomes critical when PKG-dependent calcium signals are attenuated to phosphorylate proteins important for the stability of the inner membrane complex, which serves as an anchor for the acto-myosin motor required for motility and invasion. Finally, we show that multiple kinases functionally complement CDPK4 during erythrocytic proliferation and transmission to the mosquito. This study reveals how CDPKs are wired within a stage-transcending signalling network to control motility and host cell invasion in malaria parasites.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Cdpk, Schizont

### Affiliations
University of Geneva
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Mathieu Brochet

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Switzerland


