### Accession
PXD039300

### Title
Identification of the DNALI1 interactome from mouse testis to identify its role in spermatogenesis

### Description
DNALI1 was immunoprecipitated from mouse testis to identify the interactome of this protein for further functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse testis were isolated and lysed before a self-made anti-DNALI1 antibody was used to enrich the protein complexes. Testis from knock-out animals was used as negative control. Eluates were precipitated with five volumes of -20℃ pre-chilled acetone followed by trypsin digestion. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 20 μl/min in 0.1% formic acid in LC-grade water onto an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 25 cm; Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixture was separated by a linear gradient from 5% to 38% of buffer B ( 0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 53 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 38% to 90% buffer B in 1 minutes. Analysis of the eluted peptides was done on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. From the high-resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1400, the most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the orbitrap depending by using a high speed method if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 28 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 120,000. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 30 seconds by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) and Mouse reference proteome from SwissProt database (release 2019_07) using standard parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The axonemal dynein arms (outer (ODA) and inner dynein arms (IDAs)) are multiprotein structures organized by light, intermediate, light intermediate (LIC), and heavy chain proteins. They hydrolyze ATP to promote ciliary and flagellar movement. Till now, a variety of dynein protein deficiencies have been linked with asthenospermia (ASZ), highlighting the significance of these structures in human sperm motility. Herein, we detected bi-allelic DNALI1 mutations [c.663_666del (p.Glu221fs)], in an ASZ patient, which resulted in the complete loss of the DNALI1 in the patient's sperm. We identified loss of sperm DNAH1 and DNAH7 rather than DNAH10 in both DNALI1<sup>663_666del</sup> patient and Dnali1<sup>-/-</sup> mice, demonstrating that mammalian DNALI1 is a LIC protein of a partial IDA subspecies. More importantly, we revealed that DNALI1 loss contributed to asymmetries in the most fibrous sheath (FS) of the sperm flagellum in both species. Immunoprecipitation revealed that DNALI1 might interact with the cytoplasmic dynein complex proteins in the testes. Furthermore, DNALI1 loss severely disrupted the transport and assembly of the FS proteins, especially AKAP3 and AKAP4, during flagellogenesis. Hence, DNALI1 may possess a non-classical molecular function, whereby it regulates the cytoplasmic dynein complex that assembles the flagella. We conclude that a DNALI deficiency-induced IDAs injury and an asymmetric FS-driven tail rigid structure alteration may simultaneously cause flagellum immotility. Finally, intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) can effectively resolve patient infertility. Collectively, we demonstrate that DNALI1 is a newly causative gene for AZS in both humans and mice, which possesses multiple crucial roles in modulating flagellar assembly and motility.

### Keywords
Testis, Interactome, Spermatids, Dnali1, Mice

### Affiliations
Anhui Medical University
NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, Anhui Medical University, Anhui, China.

### Submitter
Rong Hua

### Lab Head
Dr Rong Hua
NHC Key Laboratory of Study on Abnormal Gametes and Reproductive Tract, Anhui Medical University, Anhui, China.


