### Accession
PXD028023

### Title
CHIP/CHN-1 and UFD-2 C. Elegans Proteomes

### Description
The E3 ubiquitin ligases CHIP/CHN-1 and UFD-2 team up to accelerate ubiquitin chain formation. However, it remained largely unclear how the high processivity of this E3 set is achieved. Here we studied the molecular mechanism and function of the CHN-1/UFD-2 complex in Caenorhabditis elegans. Our data show that UFD-2 binding promotes the cooperation between CHN-1 and ubiquitin-conjugating E2 enzymes by stabilizing CHN-1 U-box dimer. The HSP-1 chaperone outcompetes UFD-2 for CHN-1 binding and promotes the auto-inhibited CHN-1 state by acting on the conserved position of the U-box domain. The interaction with UFD-2 enables CHN-1 to efficiently ubiquitinate S-Adenosylhomocysteinase (AHCY-1), an enzyme crucial for lipid metabolism. Our results define the molecular mechanism underlying the synergistic cooperation of CHN-1 and UFD-2 in substrate ubiquitylation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion: For proteomic analysis, the following young adult strains were utilized: N2, ufd-2(tm1380), chn-1(by155) and ufd-2(tm1380); chn-1(by155). For lysis, 4% SDS in 100 mM HEPES pH = 8.5 was used, and the protein concentrations were determined. 50 µg of protein was subjected for tryptic digestion. Proteins were reduced (10 mM TCEP) and alkylated (20 mM CAA) in the dark for 45 min at 45 °C. Samples were subjected to SP3-based digestion (Hughes et al., 2014). Washed SP3 beads (SP3 beads (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic), and Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophilic)) were mixed equally, and 3 µL of beads were added to each sample. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50%, and the samples were washed twice using 70% ethanol (200 µL) on an in-house-made magnet. After an additional acetonitrile wash (200 µL), 5 µL of digestion solution (10 mM HEPES pH 8.5 containing 0.5 µg Trypsin (Sigma) and 0.5 µg LysC (Wako)) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were cleaned on a magnet using 2 x 200 µL acetonitrile washes. Peptides were eluted in 10 µL of 5% DMSO in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min. Formic acid and acetonitrile were added to final concentrations of 2.5% and 2%, respectively. Samples were frozen until LC-MS/MS analysis. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry: LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted of a nLC 1200 coupled to a nanoelectrospray source to a QExactive HF-x (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was performed on an in-house-packed column (75 µm inner diameter, 360 µm outer diameter), and the column temperature was maintained at 50 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V2). The LC buffer system consisted out of 0.1% formic acid (A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (B). Peptides were separated using a 90 min gradient applying a linear gradient for 70 min from 7 to 29 % B and then ramped to 65% B within 10 min, followed by a linear increase to 95% B within 5 min. 95% B was held for 5 min. Before each run, the column was re-equilibrated to 0%B.  The mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode targeting the top 22 peaks for collision-induced fragmentation and MS2 spectra acquisition. MS1 spectra were acquired in a scan range from 350 to 1650 m/z allowing a maximum injection time of 20 ms for an AGC target of 3e6. Spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z). Ions were isolated in an isolation window of 1.3 m/z using an AGC target of 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 22ms. Spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
The scan range for the MS2 spectra was set to 200–2000 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 28. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Data analysis: Acquired raw files were correlated to the Uniprot reference C. elegans proteome (downloaded: 06.2018) using MaxQuant (1.5.3.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the implemented Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Label-free quantification and matching between runs were enabled using default settings. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini were defined as variable modifications. FDR was controlled using the implemented revert algorithm to 1% at the protein and the peptide-spectrum match (PSM). To identify significantly changed proteins, we performed a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) correcting for multiple testing using a permutation-based approach (FDR < 0.05, # permutations: 500).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Ufd-2, Chn-1, Chip, E3, Proteo

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)
Institute of Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute of Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


