### Accession
PXD008220

### Title
Phosphoproteome analysis of DLC1 in breast cancer

### Description
Deleted in Liver Cancer-1 (DLC1), a member of the RhoGAP family of proteins, functions as a tumor suppressor in several cancers including breast cancer. However, its clinical relevance is unclear in breast cancer. In this study, expression of DLC1 was correlated with prognosis using publicly available breast cancer gene expression datasets and quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR in cohorts of Estrogen Receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer. Mutation and methylation status of DLC1 were assessed in these datasets including The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). To seek further insights in understanding the role of DLC1 in ER+ breast cancer, we developed a knock-in model of DLC1 in T47D breast cancer cells. Label-free global proteomic and TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment assays were performed and validated using Western blotting. Here, we report that low expression of DLC1 correlates with poor prognosis in patients with ER+ breast cancer with further decrease in metastatic lesions. Analysis of the TCGA data showed that down regulation of DLC1 is not due to methylation or mutations. Stable knock-in of DLC1-full-length inhibits cell growth significantly in vitro compared to its control counterpart. 6726 phosphopeptides were quantified by phosphoproteomics analysis in both conditons, whereas 205 and 122 were unique to DLC1 knock-in and T47D-control cells, respectively. Pathway analysis using DAVID showed the top three significant clusters of differentially identified phosphopeptides involving cell-cell adhesion, mRNA processing and splicing, and transcription regulation. Decreased phosphorylation of epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 (ECT2) at the residue T359, critical for its active conformational change was validated. In conclusion, this data suggests that high expression of DLC1 reduces cell growth and is associated with favorable prognosis. Our results document an inverse relation between ECT2 phosphorylation and DLC1 expression, promising a novel strategy for treating ER+ breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Global proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of control and DLC1-FL cells were performed at the Indiana University School of Medicine Proteomics Core facility including cell extract preparation, protein digestion with LysC/trypsin, enrichment of phosphopeptides, and analysis via liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Cell pellets were lysed and proteins extracted with 8M urea in Tris-HCl pH 8.0 by sonication and the resulting supernatants were recovered by centrifugation. The resulting peptides were subjected to reduction with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 10mM chloroacetamide (CAM) prior to digestion with LysC (Roche) and Trypsin Gold (Promega), as previously described. Peptide digestion reactions were cleaned up using a Waters Sep-Pak C18 column. Approximate 5% of the total peptide digestion was aliquoted for global proteomic analysis corresponding to ~50 µg of total protein. For phosphopeptide analysis, 1,000 µg of protein was phosphoenriched using a TiO2 column (Pierce™ Phosphoprotein Enrichment kit, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) as per manufacturer’s instructions, and were cleaned up on a graphite column. Briefly, ~20-25 µg digested total peptides or enriched phosphopeptides were injected onto a C18 Easy Spray 50 cm column and eluted with a 3 hour acetonitrile gradient (0-38%) in-line with a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (29). MS1 data was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 with the top fifteen most intense ions selected for MS/MS analysis in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was applied for a 50 second duration.

### Data Protocol
The resulting RAW files were analyzed in Thermo Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2. Database searches were performed with SEQUEST HT (as a node in PD 2.2)  as previously described with a few modifications: trypsin digestion, 2 maximum missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, a fixed modification of +57 Da on cysteine, and variable modifications of +16 Da on methionine and +80 Da on serine, threonine, and tyrosine. The spectral false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤ 1% as previously described (25). The FASTA database used was a human proteome downloaded from Uniprot on January 20, 2017 with addition of 73 common contaminants such as proteases and keratin, yielding a total of 21,010 non-redundant protein sequences. Prior to quantitation, the Spectrum Files RC node in PD 2.2 was utilized to perform spectrum recalibration.  In addition, the MS1 intensity quantitative tool Minora Feature Detector was utilized for label-free quantitation for area under the curve calculations for up to the top three unique plus razor peptides detected per unique protein. Normalization was performed using the total peptide amount to account for random errors.

### Publication Abstract
Deleted in Liver Cancer-1 (DLC1), a member of the RhoGAP family of proteins, functions as a tumor suppressor in several cancers including breast cancer. However, its clinical relevance is unclear in breast cancer. In this study, expression of DLC1 was correlated with prognosis using publicly available breast cancer gene expression datasets and quantitative Reverse Transcription PCR in cohorts of Estrogen Receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancer. Low expression of DLC1 correlates with poor prognosis in patients with ER+ breast cancer with further decrease in metastatic lesions. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data showed that down regulation of DLC1 is not due to methylation or mutations. To seek further insights in understanding the role of DLC1 in ER+ breast cancer, we stably overexpressed DLC1-full-length (DLC1-FL) in T-47D breast cancer cells; this inhibited cell colony formation significantly in vitro compared to its control counterpart. Label-free global proteomic and TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment assays (ProteomeXchange identifier PXD008220) showed that 205 and 122 phosphopeptides were unique to DLC1-FL cells and T-47D-control cells, respectively, whereas 6,726 were quantified by phosphoproteomics analysis in both conditions. The top three significant clusters of differentially phosphopeptides identified by DAVID pathway analysis represent cell-cell adhesion, mRNA processing and splicing, and transcription regulation. Phosphoproteomics analysis documented an inverse relation between DLC1 expression and several phosphopeptides including epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 (ECT2). Decreased phosphorylation of ECT2 at the residue T359, critical for its active conformational change, was validated by western blot. In addition, the ECT2 T359-containing phosphopeptide was detected in both basal and luminal patient-derived breast cancers breast cancer phosphoproteomics data on the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) Assay portal. Together, for the first time, this implicates ECT2 phosphorylation in breast cancer, which has been proposed as a therapeutic target in lung cancer. In conclusion, this data suggests that low expression of DLC1 is associated with poor prognosis. Targeting ECT2 phosphopeptides could provide a promising mechanism for controlling poor prognosis seen in DLC1low ER+ breast cancer.

### Keywords
Dlc1, Phosphoproteome, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN

### Submitter
Jason True

### Lab Head
Dr Sunil Badve
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN


