### Accession
PXD014187

### Title
Effect of Nop53 depletion on the exosome interactome

### Description
In order to evaluate how Nop53 modulates the interaction of Rrp6 and Rrp43 with other factors, a coimmunoprecipitation assay was performed both in the presence (-doxicycline) and upon depletion (+ doxicycline) of Nop53 using the condional strain Δnop53/tetOff::GFP-NOP53 carrying the Rrp6-TAP or Rrp43-TAP fusion. As a negative control, the same strain carrying only the TAP tag was employed. For each condition, the elution of biological triplicates was subjected to label free quantitative analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Rrp6-TAP and Rrp43-TAP separately expressed in the carbon-source conditional strain ∆Nop53/GAL::NOP53 grown in two culture conditions: galactosecontaining medium (permissive condition), and glucose-containing medium (restrictive condition) were used in coimmunoprecipitation experiments. The affinity purification procedure was carried out as previously described (31). For both conditions, 5L of cells grown to an OD600 1.0 were harvested by centrifugation, resuspended in resuspension buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)) and flash frozen in liquid N2. The total cellular extract, that was obtained by grinding in a Ball Mill device (Retsch, Mixer Mill MM 200), was cleared by centrifugation at 40,000 rpm for 1h at 4°C. The cleared supernatant was then incubated for 2h at 4°C with IgG Sepharose 6 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare®) previously equilibrated with resuspension buffer. After extensive washing with the same buffer, elution of the bound proteins was performed by incubation with 20 U of Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease (Invitrogen®) (Tris-HCl 50 mM pH 7,5, NaCl 150 mM, glycerol 10%, EDTA 0.5 mM, DTT 1 mM) for 16h at 4°C.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed with the PatternLab for proteomics 4.1.1.4 software that is freely available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org (34). The sequences from Saccharomyces cerevisiae were downloaded on May 7th, 2019 from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and then a target-decoy database was generated to include a reversed version of each sequence plus those from 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants. The Comet 2016.01 rev. 3 search engine was used for identifying the mass spectra (35). The search parameters considered: fully and semi-tryptic peptide candidates with masses between 550 and 5500 Da,up to two missed cleavages, 40 ppm for precursor mass and bins of 1.0005 m/z for MS/MS. The modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as fixed and variable, respectively. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches were assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) (36,37). The identifications were grouped by charge state (2+ and ≥ 3+), and then by tryptic status, resulting in four distinct subgroups. For each group, the XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaPPM, and Peaks Matches values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. The identifications were sorted in nondecreasing order according to the discriminator score. A cutoff score was accepting a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level based on the number of decoys. This procedure was independently performed on each data subset, resulting in an FDR that was independent of charge state or tryptic status. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of five amino-acid residues and protein score greater than 3 were imposed. Finally, identifications deviating by more than 10 ppm from the theoretical mass were discarded. This last filter led to FDRs, now at the protein level, to be lower than 1% for all search results (38).

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic ribosomal biogenesis is a high-energy-demanding and complex process that requires hundreds of <i>trans</i>-acting factors to dynamically build the highly-organized 40S and 60S subunits. Each ribonucleoprotein complex comprises specific rRNAs and ribosomal proteins that are organized into functional domains. The RNA exosome complex plays a crucial role as one of the pre-60S-processing factors, because it is the RNase responsible for processing the 7S pre-rRNA to the mature 5.8S rRNA. The yeast pre-60S assembly factor Nop53 has previously been shown to associate with the nucleoplasmic pre-60S in a region containing the "foot" structure assembled around the 3' end of the 7S pre-rRNA. Nop53 interacts with 25S rRNA and with several 60S assembly factors, including the RNA exosome, specifically, with its catalytic subunit Rrp6 and with the exosome-associated RNA helicase Mtr4. Nop53 is therefore considered the adaptor responsible for recruiting the exosome complex for 7S processing. Here, using proteomics-based approaches in budding yeast to analyze the effects of Nop53 on the exosome interactome, we found that the exosome binds pre-ribosomal complexes early during the ribosome maturation pathway. We also identified interactions through which Nop53 modulates exosome activity in the context of 60S maturation and provide evidence that in addition to recruiting the exosome, Nop53 may also be important for positioning the exosome during 7S processing. On the basis of these findings, we propose that the exosome is recruited much earlier during ribosome assembly than previously thought, suggesting the existence of additional interactions that remain to be described.

### Keywords
Nop53, Ribosome biogenesis, Rna exosome, Rrna processing

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo,São Paulo, SP, Brazil
Univestity of Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Felipe Bagatelli

### Lab Head
Dr Carla C. Oliveira
Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo,São Paulo, SP, Brazil


