### Accession
PXD008925

### Title
MOLT-4 radiosensitization by VE-821

### Description
DNA damage induction by either radio- or chemo-therapy has been the most widely used approach in cancer therapy, exploiting the genomic instability of cancer cells. A promising strategy takes advantage of tumour specific abnormalities in DNA damage response. Inhibition of the ATR/Chk1 pathway has been shown to be synthetically lethal in cells with high levels of oncogene-induced replication stress and in p53- or ATM- deficient cells. In the presented study, we aimed to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying radiosensitization of MOLT-4 cells by VE-821, a higly potent and specific inhibitor of ATR. We combined multiple approaches: cell biology techniques to reveal the inhibitor-induced phenotypes, and quantitative proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and metabolomics to comprehensively describe drug-induced changes in irradiated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample volumes corresponding to 2 mg of “light” (irradiated MOLT-4 cells) proteins and 2 mg of “heavy” (irradiated MOLT-4 cells pre-treated with 10 uM VE-821) proteins were pooled together to make a 1:1 protein sample. The protein samples were diluted in lysis buffer and reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 20 mM IAA (both Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and digested with trypsin (Sequencing grade modified, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) overnight at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:60 (sequence grade modified trypsin). Sodium deoxycholate was then extracted by ethyl acetate as described earlier; tryptic peptides were desalted via 500 mg Supelco C18 SPE cartridges according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried using SpeedVac. Sample preparation for the proteome analysis followed the protocol described above with minor modifications to adjust the volume and concentration of chemicals to a smaller sample amount (10+10 μg of the “heavy” and “light” samples).  Dried peptide samples were fractionated by HILIC according to a protocol that has been published previously using a 4.6 × 25 cm TSKgel® Amide-80 HR 5 μm particle column with a TSKgel® Amide-80 HR 5 μm 4.6 × 1 cm guard column (Tosoh Biosciences, Stuttgart, Germany) operated with Waters Separations Module e2695 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) at 0.5 mL/min. Briefly, 3.5 mg of evaporated samples were reconstituted in 80% B and loaded on to the HILIC column. Peptides were then separated by a gradient of A over B from 80% to 60% B in 40 min and from 60% to 0% B in 5 min. Across the gradient, 22 fractions were collected (2 × 2 and 20 × 1 mL) from each replicate. Mobile phase B consisted of 98% acetonitrile (Acn)/0.1% TFA; mobile phase A consisted of 2% Acn/0.1% TFA (all solvents purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).  Each HILIC fraction was enriched for phosphopeptides using titanium dioxide chromatography [45] using a protocol optimized in previous experiments [46–48]. At first, each fraction was supplemented with TFA and glutamic acid to reach final concentrations of 2% TFA and 100 mM glutamic acid. Titanium dioxide particles (Titansphere® 5 μm particles, GL Sciences, Japan) were suspended in a loading solution (65% Acn, 2% TFA, 100 mM glutamic acid; all Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and a volume of titanium dioxide suspension depending on the expected proportion of peptides and phosphopeptides in a particular fraction (based on previous experiments) was added to each sample. Microparticles with bound phosphopeptides were washed with 200 μL of loading solution, 200 μL of washing solution 1 (65% Acn/0.5% TFA), 200 μL of washing solution 2 (65% Acn/0.1% TFA) and 100 μL of washing solution 2. Phosphopetides were eluted by 150 μL of elution solution (20% Acn/NH4OH, pH 11.5) in two sequential elutions. Late fractions were subjected to a second enrichment. Eluates from the first and second enrichment were pooled together, acidified with 100% formic acid, and placed in a SpeedVac until all crystals of ammonium formate were evaporated.  LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled through Nanospray Flex ion source with Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). TiO2-enriched HILIC fractions were dissolved in 18 μL of 2% Acn/0.05% TFA and 3-8 μL according to the estimated peptide sample concentration were injected into the RSLCnano system. Peptides were loaded on a capillary trap column (C18 PepMap100, 3 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 20 mm) by 2% Acn/0.05% TFA mobile phase at flow rate 5 µL/min for 5 min and then eluted and separated on capillary column C18 PepMap RSLC, 2 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 150 mm (Dionex, Thermo Scientific™, Bremen, Germany). Elution was performed by step linear gradient of mobile phase B (80% Acn/0.1% FA) over mobile phase A (0.1% FA) from 4% to 34% B in 48 min and from 34% to 55% B in 15 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The temperature of the column was 40 °C and eluent was monitored at 215 nm during the separation. Spraying voltage was 1.7 kV and heated capillary temperature was 250 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode performing a survey MS (range 300 to 1800 m/z) and data-dependent MS/MS scans performed on the six most intense precursors with dynamic exclusion window of 40 s. MS scans were acquired with 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z from 1 × 106 accumulated charges (maximum fill time was 100 ms). Intensity threshold for triggering MS/MS was set at 5 × 104 for ions with z ≥ 2 with a 1.6 Da isolation window. Precursor ions were accumulated with AGC of 1 × 10 (maximum fill time was 100 ms) and the normalized collisional energy for HCD fragmentation was 27 units. MS/MS spectra were acquired with 17,500 resolution (at 200 m/z).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired by LC-MS/MS were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 [49]. Peak lists were searched against the human SwissProt database (November 2015) using Andromeda search engine [50]. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were used as variable modifications. Additionally, appropriate SILAC labels were selected (R6, K6), and the labelled amino acid filtering was disabled. Mass tolerances of 10 and 20 ppm were allowed for MS and MS2 peaks, respectively. Only proteins, peptides, and phosphorylation sites with false discovery rate (FDR) lower than 0.01 were accepted. For modified peptides, a minimal score (40) and minimal delta score (6) were set as additional cut-offs. For protein quantification, only unmodified peptides, peptides oxidized at methionine residues, or acetylated at the N-terminus were accepted; both razor and unique peptides were used for calculation of protein H/L ratios. The Re-quantify function was disabled, whereas Match between runs was enabled during the search.

### Publication Abstract
Current anti-cancer strategy takes advantage of tumour specific abnormalities in DNA damage response to radio- or chemo-therapy. Inhibition of the ATR/Chk1 pathway has been shown to be synthetically lethal in cells with high levels of oncogene-induced replication stress and in p53- or ATM- deficient cells. In the presented study, we aimed to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying radiosensitization of T-lymphocyte leukemic MOLT-4 cells by VE-821, a higly potent and specific inhibitor of ATR. We combined multiple approaches: cell biology techniques to reveal the inhibitor-induced phenotypes, and quantitative proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and metabolomics to comprehensively describe drug-induced changes in irradiated cells. VE-821 radiosensitized MOLT-4 cells, and furthermore 10 &#x3bc;M VE-821 significantly affected proliferation of sham-irradiated MOLT-4 cells. We detected 623 differentially regulated phosphorylation sites. We revealed changes not only in DDR-related pathways and kinases, but also in pathways and kinases involved in maintaining cellular metabolism. Notably, we found downregulation of mTOR, the main regulator of cellular metabolism, which was most likely caused by an off-target effect of the inhibitor, and we propose that mTOR inhibition could be one of the factors contributing to the phenotype observed after treating MOLT-4 cells with 10 &#x3bc;M VE-821. In the metabolomic analysis, 206 intermediary metabolites were detected. The data indicated that VE-821 potentiated metabolic disruption induced by irradiation and affected the response to irradiation-induced oxidative stress. Upon irradiation, recovery of damaged deoxynucleotides might be affected by VE-821, hampering DNA repair by their deficiency. Taken together, this is the first study describing a complex scenario of cellular events that might be ATR-dependent or triggered by ATR inhibition in irradiated MOLT-4 cells. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008925.

### Keywords
Ionizing radiation; small-molecule kinase inhibitors; ve-821; atr kinase; dna damage response; radio-sensitization; quantitative shotgun phosphoproteomics; titanium dioxide chromatography; silac; leukemia; molt-4 cells

### Affiliations
Department of Radiobiology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences in Hradec Králové, University of Defence in Brno, Hradec Králové, Czech Republic
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Barbora Salovska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleš Tichý
Department of Radiobiology, Faculty of Military Health Sciences in Hradec Králové, University of Defence in Brno, Hradec Králové, Czech Republic


