### Accession
PXD035590

### Title
Characterisation of the E. coli HMS and BLR host cell proteomes

### Description
In this project, we characterise and compare the host cell proteomes of E. coli BLR(DE3) and E. coli HMS174(DE3) strains using shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was performed according to recently published protocols by den Ridder et al. (Journal of Proteomics, 2022). Briefly, proteins were TCA precipitated, dissolved in 100 µL of 6 M Urea, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were then diluted to <1 M urea and digested using Trypsin (Promega,1:25 trypsin:protein ratio) over night. The obtained peptides were solid phase extraction purified using an Oasis HLB 96-well µElution Plate (Waters). The speedvac dried peptide fractions were resuspended in water containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.01% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) under careful vortexing. An aliquot corresponding to approximately 500 ng digest were analyzed using a nano-liquid-chromatography separation system consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm and 100 Å), and a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nL/minutes with solvent A water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in water and 0.1% formic acid. A gradient consisting of a linear increase of solvent B from 5 to 25% within 88 minutes, and finally to 55% over 30 minutes. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode acquiring spectra at 70 K resolution from 385–1250 m/z, where the top 10 signals were isolated with a window 2.0 m/z and 0.1 m/z isolation offset, for fragmentation using a  NCE of 28. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at 17 K resolution, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2e5, at a max IT of 75 ms. Unassigned, singly charged, 6x and higher charge states were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada) allowing 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 Da fragment ion mass error tolerance, considering 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The mass spectrometric raw data were further analyzed using strain specific proteome sequence databases obtained from NCBI (E.coli BLR(DE3): BioProject PRJNA379778 and E. coli HMS174 BioProject PRJEB6353) and the GPM crap contaminant proteins sequences (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Every sequence database contained additionally the sequence for bovine serum albumin, which was spiked to every sample before digestion as in process control. Additionally, decoy fusion was used for estimating false discovery rates. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and proteins with >1 unique peptide sequences were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E. coli host cell proteomics, Qe plus orbitrap, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


