### Accession
PXD004284

### Title
Mouse Liver LC-MSMS -  System-wide quantitative proteomics of the metabolic syndrome in mice: genotypic and dietary effects

### Description
Advances in mass spectrometry have made the quantitative measurement of proteins across multiple samples a reality, allowing for the study of complex biological systems such as the metabolic syndrome. Although deregulation of lipid metabolism and increased hepatic storage of triacylglycerides are known to play a part in the onset of the metabolic syndrome, its molecular basis and dependency on dietary and genotypic factors are poorly characterized. Here, we used a rich experimental design with two different mouse strains, dietary and metabolic perturbations to generate a compendium of quantitative proteome data, using three mass spectrometry strategies. The data recapitulates known properties of the metabolic system and indicate differential molecular adaptation of the two mouse strains to perturbations, contributing to a better understanding of the metabolic syndrome. We show that high-quality, high-throughput proteomic datasets provide an unbiased broad overview of complex systems upon perturbation.

### Sample Protocol
PBS-perfused mouse livers were homogenized using RIPA-modified buffer (1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, protease inhibitors EDTA-free, 10 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 5 mM 2-glycerophosphate) and a glass-glass tight douncer homogenizer (Wheaton Science Products, USA). Homogenates were centrifuged (20,000 g, 4 ºC, 15 min) and the supernatant was collected and kept at 4 ºC. Pellets were resuspended with Urea-Tris buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.1, 75 mM NaCl, 8 M urea, EDTA-free protease inhibitors, 10 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 5 mM 2-glycerophosphate), and after sonication, they were centrifuged again (20,000 g, 4 ºC, 15 min). The new supernatant was collected and mixed with the previous one whereas the resulting pellets were discarded. The total protein content was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) using bovine serum albumin as standard. Aliquots of the homogenates were immediately prepared and stored at -80 ºC. Sample quality and concentration was double checked with SDS-PAGE and silver staining. 1 mg of total protein was mixed with 1 mg of the heavy-labeled reference proteome and the mix was precipitated overnight with 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone (16 h, 20 ºC) for mass spectrometric analysis. The supernatant was discarded and pellets were dried and resuspended in freshly prepared digestion buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M NH4HCO3). Samples were reduced with 12 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, 37 ºC) and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (45 min, 25 ºC) in the darkness. Samples were diluted with 0.1 M NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea and digested overnight at 37 ºC with sequence grade trypsin (10 μg, Promega AG, Switzerland). After digestion, peptide mixtures were acidified to pH 2.8 with TFA and desalted with 500 mg Sep-Pak tC18 silica cartridges (Waters Inc., USA). Samples were dried under vacuum prior off-gel fractionation (24 wells, 310 pI strips) in a 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent Technologies). Peptide mixtures collected in each well were pooled in six different fractions (A: wells 1- 2, B: wells 3-4, C: wells 5-8, D: wells 9-11, E: wells 12-18 and F: wells 19-24), acidified to pH 2.8 with trifluoroacetic acid and desalted with MacroSpin C18 silica columns (The Nest Group Inc., USA). Samples were dried under vacuum and re-solubilised to 1 μg/μl in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile prior to MS analysis. A Hepa1-6 mouse cell line was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (cat. CRL-1830), labeled with SILAC medium and used as a heavy-labeled reference proteome in all samples. Cells were grown at 37 ºC and 5% CO2 in L-lysine- and L-arginine-depleted DMEM high glucose medium (Caisson Laboratories Inc) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FCS (BioConcept), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen) and L-13C615N4- arginine and L-13C615N2-lysine (Sigma-Aldrich GmbH). Cells were cultured in 15-cm plates and passaged at 80% confluence until an incorporation of the heavy amino acids above 95% was achieved. Then, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, scrapped from the plates and homogenised as described above.

### Data Protocol
Three replicates for each time point were used in these measurements. MS2 data were analysed with the Sequest search engine (Sorcerer 4.0.4 build) against a mouse Uniprot database (v. dated 07/2009) containing all reviewed proteins and their corresponding decoy entries generated by reversing the amino acid sequences of the tryptic peptides. Search parameters were set to 50 ppm for the precursor mass tolerance, fully tryptic peptides, two miscleavages were allowed, and a false discovery rate of 1% based on PeptideProphet probability and decoy assignments [Keller et al., 2005]. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation was used as a variable modification. Extracted MS1 peak intensities were used for protein quantification. Initially, mass spectrometric features were automatically detected, annotated, and aligned through the different samples using the software suite OpenMS (v1.7) [18].

### Publication Abstract
Advances in mass spectrometry have made the quantitative measurement of proteins across multiple samples a reality, allowing for the study of complex biological systems such as the metabolic syndrome. Although the deregulation of lipid metabolism and increased hepatic storage of triacylglycerides are known to play a part in the onset of the metabolic syndrome, its molecular basis and dependency on dietary and genotypic factors are poorly characterized. Here, we used an experimental design with two different mouse strains and dietary and metabolic perturbations to generate a compendium of quantitative proteome data using three mass spectrometric techniques. The data reproduce known properties of the metabolic system and indicate differential molecular adaptation of the two mouse strains to perturbations, contributing to a better understanding of the metabolic syndrome. We show that high-quality, high-throughput proteomic data sets provide an unbiased broad overview of the behavior of complex systems after perturbation.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland Department of Science, Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
Centre de Regulació Genòmica

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland Department of Science, Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland


