### Accession
PXD005563

### Title
Comparative genomics reveals high biological diversity and specific adaptations in the fungal genus Aspergillus

### Description
The project compares the genomes of multiple Aspergillus species. In particular, the genes involved in the degradation of plant-derived biomass have been analyzed. As well, the extracellular proteins produced by the fungi during the utilization of sugar beet pulp and wheat bran were examined by LC-MS/MS. Results show that closely related species can deploy different enzyme mixtures in the hydrolysis of plant-derived biomass. These results imply that efficient hydrolysis of biomass can be achieved by combining enzyme mixtures from two or more fungi.

### Sample Protocol
Aspergillus species were cultured in shaken suspension using fructose as carbon source. After overnight cultivation, mycelia were transferred to media containing either sugar beet pulp or wheat bran as carbon source. Following 24 hours of cultivation, fungal mycelia were removed by centrifugation. Extracellular proteins in the supernatant fluids were subjected trypsin digestion and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass analyzer (Thermo-Fisher).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was processed using the precursor ion detection workflow of Proteome Discoverer Quant 1.4 (Thermo-Fisher). Quantification was based on MS precursor ion signal. Extracted ion chromatogram peaks were used to determine the peptide area value associated to each identified precursor ion. A protein area value was calculated as the average of the three most intense, distinct, peptides assigned to a protein. Protein area values were Normalized using the area value for a set amount of spiked trypsin digested bovine serum albumin. The amounts of proteins associated with each enzyme activity were expressed as percentage of the amount of total extracellular proteins present in each culture condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomass degradation, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular proteins, Aspergilli

### Affiliations
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University The Netherlands
Concordia University

### Submitter
Marcos Di Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald de Vries
Fungal Physiology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre Institute of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences(KNAW) Fungal Molecular Physiology, Utrecht University The Netherlands


