### Accession
PXD015098

### Title
Systematic comparison of strategies for the enrichment of lysosomes by data independent acquisition

### Description
We describe a comparison of individual approaches for the enrichment of lysosomes comparing four different strategies using data independent acquisition (DIA). As a benchmark, we chose a crude enrichment strategy, which is the centrifugation of the PNS at 20,000 x g termed organelle enriched pellet (OEP), a two-step density gradient centrifugation (SDGC) approach employing sucrose, histodenz, and percoll, the SPIONs approach, which is based on the endocytosis of dextran coated nano-particles and their delivery to the lysosomal compartment, and the TMEM192-HA immunoprecipitation a 3 x HA tagged version of the lysosomal membrane protein TMEM192 used for lysosome isolation by anti-HA antibodies immobilized on magnetic beads. We evaluated the abundance and distributions of lysosomal, as well total proteins, allowing for the determination of lysosomal enrichment among the different strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Human embryonic kidney cells (HEK 293T) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) media. Lysosome enrichment was performed for each method in three biological replicates. Samples were digested and peptides were reconstituted in 5 % ACN / 5 % FA and analyzed using a nano-UHPLC-Dionex Ultimate 3000 system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For DDA analyses, for each sample the three biological replicates were pooled before their analysis. For all analyses, 1 µg of the sample was loaded directly on a 50 cm reversed phase analytical column at a flow rate of 600 nl / min using 100 % solvent A (0.1 % FA in water). Columns were produced in-house as follows: spray tips were generated from 360 μm outer diameter and 100 μm inner diameter fused silica capillaries using a P-2000 laser puller (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA) and packed with 1.9 μm Reprosil AQ C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Separation was performed with 240 min (DDA) and 120 min (DIA) linear gradients from 5 % - 35 % solvent B (95 % ACN, 0.1 % FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer from m/z 375-1575 at a resolution of 60,000 and with a dynamic exclusion of 120 s for 240 min gradients fragmenting charge states between 2+ to 8+. Peptides were fragmented using higher collision dissociation (30 %) fragmentation and MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer. The precursor isolation width was set to m/z 1.6 with an automatic gain control of 4 x 105 and 5 x 105 for the MS1 and MS2 scans, respectively. For data-independent acquisition (DIA), MS1 scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target setting of 5 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms covering a mass range of 375 to 1575 m/z. The MS1 scan was followed by 36 static DIA scans. The isolation window widths were adjusted to 24.1 to cover the same mass range as the MS1 scan including a 0.5 m/z overlap. The DIA scans were acquired with a resolution of 30,000, an AGC target setting of 1 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The HCD collision energy was set to 27 %. This window design resulted in total cycle time of 3.44 s for the 120 min gradient length.

### Data Protocol
For library generation, DDA MS*.raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut (Version: 13.2.19) by the Pulsar X algorithm in combination with the Homo sapiens 9606 database, release data 11.06.2019 with 21,155 entries. DDA and DIA MS*.raw files were analyzed using the default parameters (enzyme: trypsin, precursor ion mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance: 50 mmu; fixed/variable modifications: carbamidomethylation at cysteine / oxidation at methionine; number of allowed missed cleavages: 2; 3 to 6 fragment ions per peptide selected based on intensity). For retention time alignment, the high precision iRT concept (dynamic) was applied. Mass tolerances for matching of precursor and fragment ions as well as peak extraction windows were determined automatically by Spectronaut. The precursor information was only utilized in peak detection. A minimum of 3 fragment ions were required to detect a peak. Interference correction was enabled. Data were normalized using local regression normalization and results were filtered by 1 % FDR on precursor and peptide level (Q value <0.01).

### Publication Abstract
In mammalian cells, the lysosome is the main organelle for the degradation of macromolecules and the recycling of their building blocks. Correct lysosomal function is essential, and mutations in every known lysosomal hydrolase result in so-called lysosomal storage disorders, a group of rare and often fatal inherited diseases. Furthermore, it is becoming more and more apparent that lysosomes play also decisive roles in other diseases, such as cancer and common neurodegenerative disorders. This leads to an increasing interest in the proteomic analysis of lysosomes for which enrichment is a prerequisite. In this study, we compared the four most common strategies for the enrichment of lysosomes using data-independent acquisition. We performed centrifugation at 20,000 &#xd7; <i>g</i> to generate an organelle-enriched pellet, two-step sucrose density gradient centrifugation, enrichment by superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs), and immunoprecipitation using a 3xHA tagged version of the lysosomal membrane protein TMEM192. Our results show that SPIONs and TMEM192 immunoprecipitation outperform the other approaches with enrichment factors of up to 118-fold for certain proteins relative to whole cell lysates. Furthermore, we achieved an increase in identified lysosomal proteins and a higher reproducibility in protein intensities for label-free quantification in comparison to the other strategies.

### Keywords
Lysosomes, Data independent acquisition (dia), Enrichment methods

### Affiliations
University of Bonn
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn

### Submitter
Jasjot Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bonn


