### Accession
PXD015169

### Title
Proteomics analysis of 5 cell lines from the same donor

### Description
We wanted to compare the proteome of 5 different cell lines originating from the same donor.The proteomics data will be analized along with genomics data.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the cells using 80 µl lysis buffer (7 M urea, 30 mM Tris, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, pH 8.5). Samples were centrifuged at 1700g for 10 min at 4 °C and the collected supernatants were supplemented with 20 µl Laemmli buffer. 50 µl sample were loaded to 12% polyacrilamide gel and separated in a Bio-Rad mini tetra cell (Bio-Rad) on 100 V constant voltage for 1.5 hours. The protein bands were stained using PageBlue protein staining solution (Thermo Scientific). Samples were divided to four fractions covering the whole column containing the separated proteins and each fraction was excised from the gel and further subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. After destaining the proteins were reduced using 20 mM dithiothreitol (Bio-Rad) for one hour at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad) for 45 minutes in dark. Overnight trypsin digestion was carried out using MS grade stabilized TPCK-treated bovine trypsin (ABSciex) at 37°C and the digested peptides were extracted and dried in SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were re-dissolved in 10 μl 1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS analyses 5 µl samples were injected for each run and before the injection samples were supplemented with iRT peptides (Biognosys) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The same fraction of the different samples was analyzed in one batch file. All samples were analyzed in duplicates. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis the peptides were separated using a 180 min water/acetonitrile gradient on an Easy 1200 nano UPLC system (Thermo Scientific). First, the peptide mixture was enriched on an Acclaim PepMap C18 (20 x 75 µm, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific) trap column followed by a separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC (150 mm x 50 μm 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific) analytical column. The peptides were separated by a 5-7% gradient of solvent B over 5 minutes, 7-15% gradient of solvent B over 50 minutes, 15-35 % gradient of solvent B over 60 minutes, 35-40% gradient of solvent B over 28 minutes and 40-85% gradient of solvent B over 5 minutes. After 10 minutes hold of 85% solvent B the system returned to 5% solvent B in 1 minutes followed by a 16 minutes hold on. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in LC water (VWR International) and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid in LC acetonitrile (VWR International). The flow rate was set to 300 nl/min. Data-dependent acquisitions were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set to static 2300V with 2 Arb Sweep gas and the temperature of the ion transfer tube was set to 275oC. Survey mass scans were performed in the Orbitrap analyzer at 60000 resolution in 350-1600 m/z range in positive mode (AGC target: 4.0e5, RF lens: 60%, profile mode) followed by collision-induced dissociation tandem mass spectrometry of the 14 most intense ions in the ion trap analyzer (AGC target 2.0e3, CID collision energy: 35%, CID activation time: 10 msec, Activation Q: 0.25, centroid mode). Precursor ions were selected by the peptide monoisotopic peak determination setting with selection of ions with 2-7 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected m/z on an exclusion list for 45 seconds after a single MS/MS with +/- 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS spectra were searched against the human proteins downloaded from the UniProt database (release: 2018.10.10, 558590 sequence entries) and the sequence set of the iRT peptides using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10. search engine considering tryptic peptides up to two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The recorded spectra were searched against the contaminant sequence database of the MaxQuant software as well. Proteins with minimum one identified peptide were accepted and in this step FDR correction was not applied. The results of the protein identifications were imported into Scaffold 4.8.9 (Proteome Software) software. The four fractions of the same samples were combined and imported in one single file. Proteins were accepted as identification if minimum three peptides were identified at 0.1% FDR at peptide level and 1% FDR at protein level. For quantitative analysis ANOVA test was applied using total precursor intensity values after Benjamini-Hochberg correction. The level of significance was set to p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Cell line, Variability, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Debrecen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen, Hungary

### Submitter
Gergő Kalló

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Éva Csősz
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Debrecen, Hungary


