### Accession
PXD038372

### Title
Proteome of SUDIPG, SF7761 and primary non diseased brain samples

### Description
DIPG is a paediatric brainstem glioma with no cure. Cellular immunotherapy approaches require specific targeting of unique and tumour specific cell surface antigens, however, there is a paucity of known targets for DIPG. In this study we have used a proteomics approach to interrogate an array of patient derived DIPG cell lines to identify potential immunotherapy targets

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was performed on pHLA depleted cell lysates (n=5) as well as part of primary non-diseased brain sample controls (cerebellum, n=3) obtained from rapid autopsies of patients with DIPG, using sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-based suspension trapping (S-TRAP) method.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics samples were diluted 1:10 in 0.1% aqueous FA and spiked with iRT peptide mix. Samples were acquired using a hybrid trapped ion mobility-quadrupole time of flight (TOF) MS (Bruker TimsTOF pro, Bruker Daltonics, Germany) coupled to a nanoElute liquid chromatography system. 1-2 µL of sample was loaded directly onto the C18 analytical column (Aurora, IonOpticks) of 1.6 μm particle size and 75 μm x 25 cm and 120Å. For proteomics data analysis the .TDF generated on the Bruker TimsTOF for the DIPG cell lines and non-diseased brain samples were searched using MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 2.0 (Tyanova et al. 2015). The following search parameters were used, N-terminal acetylation along with oxidation at Met and deamidation at Asp and Gln were set as variable modifications. Cys carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Bruker TIMS selected under instruments with 20 ppm as first search peptide tolerance and 10 ppm as main search peptide tolerance. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were chosen. Quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the built-in extracted ion chromatogram-based label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al. 2014). The spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the human proteome (Uniprot, accessed 15/06/2017; 20,182 entries) including contaminants. Possible sequence matches were restricted to 8 to 25 aa, a maximum peptide mass of 4600 Da. An FDR of 0.01% was set for proteomic analysis. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Brain, S-trap, Proteomics, Dipg, Bruker

### Affiliations
Monash University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Kirti Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, VIC, Australia


