### Accession
PXD025186

### Title
The TDRD5/7-like protein, LOTR-1, functions within Z granules to balance epigenetic signals in the Caenorhabditis elegans germline

### Description
LOTUS and Tudor domain containing proteins have critical roles in the germline. Proteins that contain these domains, such as Tejas/Tapas in Drosophila, help localize Vasa to the germ granules and facilitate piRNA transposon mediated silencing.  The homologous proteins in mammals, TDRD5 and TDRD7, are required during spermiogenesis. Until now, LOTUS + Tudor domain proteins in C. elegans have remained elusive.  Here we describe LOTR-1 (D1081.7), which derives its name from its LOTUS and Tudor domains. Interestingly, LOTR-1 docks next to P granules to colocalize with the Z-granule component ZNFX-1.  LOTR-1’s Z-granule association requires its Tudor domain, but both LOTUS and Tudor deletions affect brood size when coupled with a knockdown of the Vasa homolog glh-1. LOTR-1 IP-mass spectrometry confirmed a Tudor-dependent association with Z-granule proteins ZNFX-1 and WAGO-1, but also with germ-granule proteins DEPS-1, the piRNA Argonaute PRG-1, and other WAGO-class Argonautes.  Like znfx-1, lotr-1 mutants redistribute the coverage of 22G-RNAs toward the 5’ end of mutator targets and impact transgenerational epigenetic inheritance.  Unlike znfx-1, the 5’ shift in 22G-RNA coverage does not extend to CSR-1 targets. Combined, these results suggest that LOTR-1 facilitates interactions between PRG-1/WAGO-class Argonautes, ZNFX-1 and target 3’UTRs to balance 22G-RNA distribution across mutator targets.

### Sample Protocol
IP samples were boiled at 70oC for 10 minutes and separated on a 4-12% gradient Bis-Tris gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #NP0321) in 1x MOPS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #NP0001) at 180 V for 10 minutes. Then, samples were processed separately, first by in-gel digestion [116,117], followed by desalting with a C18 StageTip.[118] Afterwards, the digested peptides were separated on a heated 50‐cm reverse‐phase capillary (75 μM inner diameter) packed with Reprosil C18 material (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted along a 90 min gradient from 6 to 40% Buffer B (see StageTip purification) with the EASY‐nLC 1,200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Measurement was done on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated with a Top15 data‐dependent MS/MS acquisition method per full scan.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and peptides were matched to the C. elegans Wormbase protein database (version WS269). Detailed MaxQuant settings can be retrieved from the uploaded parameter file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


