### Accession
PXD033646

### Title
Proteomic assessment of C57BL/6 hippocampi after non-selective pharmacological inhibition of all nitric oxide synthase activity

### Description
Nitric oxide is the smallest gaseous signaling molecule responsible for maintaining homeostasis in a myriad of tissues and molecular pathways in neurological and cardiovascular pathologies. In recent years, there has been increasing interest in the potential interaction between arterial stiffness (AS), an independent cardiovascular risk factor, and neurodegenerative syndromes given increasingly epidemiological study reports. For this reason, we previously sought to investigate the mechanistic convergence between AS and neurodegeneration via the progressive non-selective inhibition of all nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms with N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME) in C57BL/6 mice. Our results showed progressively increased arterial stiffness in vivo and impaired visuospatial learning and memory in L-NAME treated C57BL/6 mice. In this study, we sought to further investigate the progressive molecular signatures in hippocampal tissue via LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis

### Sample Protocol
Hippocampal tissues were homogenized in 2 ml urea lysis buffer containing 8 M urea and 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The samples were sonicated with 3 pulses of 15 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe, with incubation on ice for 1 minute between pulses. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 20,000 x g at room temperature, to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and from each sample 100 µg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (Agilent). Columns were first washed with 1 ml 100% acetonitrile (I) and pre-equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/I (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 750 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/I (40:60, v/v)). Purified peptides were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts, and stored at −20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl solvent A of which 2 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in line con-nected to a Q Exactive HF Biopharma mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany).  The peptides were separated on a nanoEase column (MZ HSS T3 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, Waters, part: 186008818) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 1 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/I (2:8, v/v)) over 100 minutes, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a 5-minutes wash reaching 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with 99% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1,500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 (minimum AGC of 1,000) were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28%. The C-trap was filled at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms and the MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap ana-lyzer with a fixed first mass of 145 m/z. Only peptides with charge states ranging from +2 to +6 were included for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 12 s. Qcloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project

### Data Protocol
All proteomic data was searched against the mouse proteome acquired from the Swiss-Prot Reference Proteome database (database release version of June 2019 con-taining 22,282 mouse protein sequences), using the Andromeda search engine from MaxQuant (version 1.6.11.0). Default settings were used, including a false dis-covery rate set at 1% on PSM and peptide level, a precursor mass tolerance of 4.5, and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. The identified peptides were further analyzed using the MSqRob2 R package to generate a list of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Peptide intensities were log-transformed, filtered, normalized and finally summarized into protein ex-pression values with robust model-based summarization. For this experiment the ‘Age x Treatment’ model was applied with additional inferences per treatment duration. DEPs of the acquired datasets were functionally annotated using gene ontology and pathway analysis. Gene ontology analysis of biological process, molecular function and cellular component as well as pathway analysis using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes (KEGG), The Reactome Knowledgebase (REACTOME) and Wik-iPathways databases, was performed by importing the DEP lists in the web-based g:Profiler database on a Mus musculus (Mouse) background. Query outputs were visualized using GraphPad Prism (version 9.1.2 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) and the Cytoscape software respectively. Mouse phenotypes re-lated to DEP lists were obtained via the Mouse Genomic Informatics (MGI) Mamma-lian Phenotype Level 4 (2021) database in the web-based gene lists enrichment analysis tool, Enrichr.

### Publication Abstract
Nitric oxide (NO) is a small gaseous signaling molecule responsible for maintaining homeostasis in a myriad of tissues and molecular pathways in neurology and the cardiovasculature. In recent years, there has been increasing interest in the potential interaction between arterial stiffness (AS), an independent cardiovascular risk factor, and neurodegenerative syndromes given increasingly epidemiological study reports. For this reason, we previously investigated the mechanistic convergence between AS and neurodegeneration via the progressive non-selective inhibition of all nitric oxide synthase (NOS) isoforms with N(G)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME) in C57BL/6 mice. Our previous results showed progressively increased AS <i>in vivo</i> and impaired visuospatial learning and memory in L-NAME-treated C57BL/6 mice. In the current study, we sought to further investigate the progressive molecular signatures in hippocampal tissue via LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. Our data implicate mitochondrial dysfunction due to progressive L-NAME treatment. Two weeks of L-NAME treatment implicates altered G-protein-coupled-receptor signaling in the nerve synapse and associated presence of seizures and altered emotional behavior. Furthermore, molecular signatures implicate the cerebral presence of seizure-related hyperexcitability after short-term (8 weeks) treatment followed by ribosomal dysfunction and tauopathy after long-term (16 weeks) treatment.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Nitric oxide, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Physiopharmacology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Guido De Meyer
Laboratory of Physiopharmacology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium


