### Accession
PXD043400

### Title
Co-immunoprecipitation coupled with mass for RNR10 in rice&Identification of ubiquitination sites in rice DNR1

### Description
RNR10 is a key factor that regulates the response of rice roots to nitrogen.In an attempt to determine the target(s) of RNR10, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) coupled with mass spectrometry analysis to search for RNR10 interactors.DNR1 is a downstream target gene of RNR10.Previous studies have shown that rice DNR1 is subjected to ubiquitination modification. In order to identify the ubiquitination modification sites of DNR1,we performed mass spectrometry analyses.

### Sample Protocol
RNR10-Flag or DNR1-Flag fusion protein and its interacting proteins were immunoprecipitated from protein extract of ZH11/pAct::RNR10-Flag or ZH11/pAct::DNR1-Flag transgenic lines with magnetic beads conjugated with an anti-DDDDK-tag antibody (MBL, M185-11), and then eluted with 3×Flag peptide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were electrophoretically separated by SDS-PAGE, and gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Target protein bands were excised and cut into 1 mm3 pieces, which were then destained thoroughly. These gel pieces were subsequently dehydrated twice in acetonitrile (ACN), before being reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 1 h. The supernatant was removed after returning to room temperature, and the gel was immediately alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 45 mins. Next, the gel was washed twice with destaining solution and once with deionized water, dehydrated in ACN, air-dried for 10 mins, and digested with 0.01 µg/µL trypsin in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted initially with 50% ACN, vortex for 5 mins, and centrifuge at 5,000 g for 1 min. The extraction was repeated with 100% ACN, before the supernatants were pooled. The extracts were freeze-dried and stored at -20 °C.  Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, extracted peptides were reconstituted in solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 mins. The supernatant was separated by the UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) and the peptides were trapped at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and gradient-eluted as follows: 0-5 min, 5% solvent B (98% CAN, 0.1% FA); 5-45 min, 25% solvent B; 45-50 min, 35% solvent B; 50-52 min, 80% solvent B; 54-60 min, 5% solvent B.  Eluted peptides were ionised by a nanoESI source before entering a tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data dependent acquisition) analysis using the manufacturer’s default parameters. The resulting candidates were identified by a database search performed by Mascot 2.3.02

### Data Protocol
The protein identification uses experimental MS/MS data and aligns them with theoretical MS/MS data from database to obtain results. The whole process starts from converting raw MS data into a peak list and then searching matches in the database. The search results are subject to strict filtering and quality control, and possible protein identifications are produced. The specific filtering parameters can be referred to "Quality Control" section. Finally, from the final protein identification list, functional annotation analysis such as GO, COG/KOG, and Pathway analysis are performed. Database selection:The database used in this project is rice MSU annotation(http://rice.uga.edu/) Mascot Search: Mascot is one of the most important and widely used protein identification software in the field of proteomics. The version used in the project is Mascot 2.3.02. In the operation, the mgf file was used as the original file, and the database that has been constructed was selected, and then the database search was performed. Quality Control: In this pipeline, results from search engine were pre-processed and re-scored using Percolator \[1\] to improve the matching accuracy. The output was then filtered by  FDR  1% at spectral level (PSM-level  FDR  <= 0.01) to obtain a significant identified spectrum and peptide list. Then based on the parsimony principle, we performed protein inference on peptides and generated a series of protein groups. iBAQ Quantification:In order to obtain the iBAQ value of each protein, this pipeline used BGI’s own software to complete the extraction of peptide XIC and calculate the peak area. Then based on the iBAQ algorithm [1], the total peak area in each protein group is divided by the number of theoretical peptides to obtain the final iBAQ value.

### Publication Abstract
Plant nitrogen (N)-use efficiency (NUE) is largely determined by the ability of root to take up external N sources, whose availability and distribution in turn trigger the modification of root system architecture (RSA) for N foraging. Therefore, improving N-responsive reshaping of RSA for optimal N absorption is a major target for developing crops with high NUE. In this study, we identified RNR10 (REGULATOR OF N-RESPONSIVE RSA ON CHROMOSOME 10) as the causal gene that underlies the significantly different root developmental plasticity in response to changes in N level exhibited by the indica (Xian) and japonica (Geng) subspecies of rice. RNR10 encodes an F-box protein that interacts with a negative regulator of auxin biosynthesis, DNR1 (DULL NITROGEN RESPONSE1). Interestingly, RNR10 monoubiquitinates DNR1 and inhibits its degradation, thus antagonizing auxin accumulation, which results in reduced root responsivity to N and nitrate (NO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>) uptake. Therefore, modulating the RNR10-DNR1-auxin module provides a novel strategy for coordinating a desirable RSA and enhanced N acquisition for future sustainable agriculture.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Rnr10, Ip-ms, Dnr1, Rice

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University
1. State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics & Germplasm Enhancement and Utilization, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

### Submitter
Yunzhi Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yunzhi Huang
1. State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics & Germplasm Enhancement and Utilization, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.


