### Accession
PXD004439

### Title
Time-course global proteome analyses in the APPNL-F mouse model of Alzheimer disease

### Description
A hallmark of Alzheimer Disease is the accumulation of aggregation-prone amyloid beta peptides, which can assemble into smaller aggregates and deposit in the form of amyloid plaques. Here we used the recently introduced APPNL-F mouse model of Alzheimer Disease, which faithfully recapitulates the amyloid beta pathology of the disease, to identify early changes to the global proteome. Using a workflow that interrogated the brain proteome of these mice by quantitative mass spectrometry at five, ten and fifteen months of age.

### Sample Protocol
The APP knock-in mouse line was originally from Dr. Takaomi C. Saido (RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Japan). APPNL-F/NL-F and APPwt/wt mice were obtained by breeding heterozygous (APPNL-F/wt) mice on a C57BL/6 genomic background. Mice were euthanized and the brains were rapidly extracted. Half-brains were homogenized by bead beating in 2% SDS, 62.5 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 8.0; preheated to 90°C with zirconia beads. Brain extract proteins were denatured with 9 M urea, reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, alkylated with 4-vinylpyiridine and digested with trypsin.  Tryptic digests were modified with tandem mass tags (Thermo) then those from APPNL-F/NL-F and APPwt/wt mice were mixed and subjected to reversed phase and strong cation exchange chromatography in parallel prior to on-line C18 reversed phase nanoflow HPLC-MS/MS.  Orbitrap MS3 spectra were used for relative peptide quantification.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences and relative quantification information were obtained from mass spectra using Mascot and Sequest run on Proteome discoverer 1.4. Data were searched against the mouse international protein index database version 3.87.Precursor ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm. Product ion mass tolerance: 0.6 Da. Fixed modifications: Deamidation (N,Q), Oxidation (M), Phospho (S,T,Y), Pyridylethyl (C). Static modifications: TMT6plex, +229.163 Da (N-terminus, K). The Percolator algorithm was used for false discovery rate estimation with validation based on q-Value. Quantification was performed with an integration tolerance of 20 ppm using the most confident centroid integration method.  All signals for each of the six reporter ion masses were normalized on protein median with a minimum protein count of 100.  A detailed description of the data processing protocol is available in Gunawardana et. al. 2015. Mol Cell Proteomics 14: 3000-3014.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer disease (AD) stands out amongst highly prevalent diseases because there is no effective treatment nor can the disease be reliably diagnosed at an early stage. A hallmark of AD is the accumulation of aggregation-prone amyloid &#x3b2; peptides (A&#x3b2;), the main constituent of amyloid plaques. To identify A&#x3b2;-dependent changes to the global proteome we used the recently introduced APPNL-F mouse model of AD, which faithfully recapitulates the A&#x3b2; pathology of the disease, and a workflow that interrogated the brain proteome of these mice by quantitative mass spectrometry at three different ages. The elevated A&#x3b2; burden in these mice was observed to cause almost no changes to steady-state protein levels of the most abundant &gt;2,500 brain proteins, including 12 proteins encoded by well-confirmed AD risk loci. The notable exception was a striking reduction in immunoglobulin heavy mu chain (IGHM) protein levels in homozygote APPNL-F/NL-F mice, relative to APPNL-F/wt littermates. Follow-up experiments revealed that IGHM levels generally increase with age in this model. Although discovered with brain samples, the relative IGHM depletion in APPNL-F/NL-F mice was validated to manifest systemically in the blood, and did not extend to other blood proteins, including immunoglobulin G. Results presented are consistent with a cause-effect relationship between the excessive accumulation of A&#x3b2; and the selective depletion of IGHM levels, which may be of relevance for understanding the etiology of the disease and ongoing efforts to devise blood-based AD diagnostics.

### Keywords
Brain, Amyloid beta, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto


