### Accession
PXD045163

### Title
Cellular proteome profiling of Cryptococcus neoformans KN99 and C8

### Description
Comparison of the proteome of the two strains to assess the presence of PDE2

### Sample Protocol
Both strains were cultured in YPD media to log phase prior to collection. Briefly, cell pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and lysed using a probe sonicator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to final concentrations of 2% and 10 mM, respectively, followed by incubation at 95˚C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm, and incubation with of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min in the dark. Next, 100% ice cold acetone was then added to the samples to a final concentration of 80% and incubated overnight at -20˚C. Samples were collected by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm, 4˚C, for 10 min, washed with 80% acetone twice, air dried, and resuspended in 8 M urea/40 mM HEPES. Protein concentrations were determined using a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay. Samples were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and normalized to 100 µg of protein prior to overnight digestion with a mixture LysC and trypsin proteases (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1). To stop the digestion, 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added, and 50 µg of acidified peptides were desalted and purified using C18 (three layers) Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips. Samples were analyzed on a Vanquish Neo - Orbitrap Exploris 240.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using MaxQuant v 2.0.3. The search was completed using the incorporated Andromeda search engine against a modified C. neoformans var. grubii serotype A (strain H99/ATCC 208821) proteome (July 2023; 7,430 sequences) from Uniprot. The parameters established include: trypsin enzyme specificity with 2 max missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; fixed modifications – carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modifications – methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of proteins. Peptide spectral matches were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with a minimum of two peptides required for protein identification. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min, in which LFQ used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptococcus neoformans

### Affiliations
University of Guelph
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1

### Submitter
Arjun Sukumaran

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1


