### Accession
PXD032792

### Title
Integrated Multi-Omics Reveal Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Restricts Human Trophoblast Induction

### Description
Human naive pluripotent stem cells have unrestricted lineage potential. Underpinning this property, naive cells are thought to lack chromatin-based lineage barriers. However, this assumption has not been tested. Here, we define the chromatin-associated proteome, histone post-translational modifications and transcriptome of human naive and primed pluripotent stem cells. Our integrated analysis reveals differences in the relative abundance and activities of distinct chromatin modules. We identify a strong enrichment of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2)-associated H3K27me3 in naive pluripotent stem cell chromatin, and H3K27me3 enrichment at promoters of lineage-determining genes, including trophoblast regulators. PRC2 activity acts as a chromatin barrier restricting the differentiation of naive cells towards the trophoblast lineage, while inhibition of PRC2 promotes trophoblast fate induction and cavity formation in human blastoids. Together, our results establish that human naive pluripotent stem cells are not epigenetically unrestricted, but instead possess chromatin mechanisms that oppose the induction of alternative cell fates.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were extracted in acid and precipitated from nuclei. The concentration of histones present was estimated using the Bradford assay. About 20 µg of purified histones in 20 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) were derivatized in 5 µL of propionylation reagent (mixture of propionic anhydride with acetonitrile at 1:3, v/v), for 15 min at room temperature. This reaction was repeated to ensure complete propionylation of unmodified lysines. Following this, histones were digested with 1 µg trypsin overnight at room temperature. After digestion, the N-termini of peptides were derivatized by two more rounds of propionylation. For injection into the mass spectrometer, the samples were desalted using C18 stage-tips. Liquid-chromatography and tandem mass-spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) fitted with a nano-column packed with 75 µm ID x 17 cm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Online mixing of solvents was as follows: 2% to 28% solvent B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 95% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) over 45 min followed by from 28% to 80% solvent B in 5 min and 80% B for 10 min at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min, which allowed separation of analyte components and spray into the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A data-independent acquisition (DIA) method, consisting of a full scan MS spectrum (m/z 300−1100) at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z), and MS/MS of windows of 50 m/z at a resolution of 15,000 was used. MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were searched using an in-house software, EpiProfile (Yuan et al., 2015). this software was used to calculate peptide relative ratio using the total area under the extracted ion chromatograms of all peptides with the same amino acid sequence (including all of its modified forms) as 100%.  Ref: Yuan ZF, Lin S, Molden RC, Cao XJ, Bhanu NV, Wang X, Sidoli S, Liu S, Garcia BA.  EpiProfile Quantifies Histone Peptides With Modifications by Extracting Retention Time and Intensity in High-resolution Mass Spectra.Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Jun;14(6):1696-707. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.046011.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H3k27me3, Trophoblast fate, Polycomb repressive complex 2 (prc2), Human pluripotent stem cells, Chromatin proteomes

### Affiliations
Raymond H. Wittcoff Distinguished Professor and Head Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Washington University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO 63110
Washington University

### Submitter
Natarajan Bhanu

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A Garcia
Raymond H. Wittcoff Distinguished Professor and Head Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics Washington University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO 63110


