### Accession
PXD013724

### Title
Characterizing fruit ripening in plantain and Cavendish bananas: a proteomics approach

### Description
The fruit physiology of banana cultivars is poorly understood. To study the ripening of plantain, a high-throughput proteomics experiment was executed and compared to the better known Cavendish. The starch content in plantain was at the onset of ripening very high and decreased to undetectable levels. Multivariate analysis of the proteins was performed correlated to the starch dynamics. The drop in sucrose synthase and the raise of acid invertase during ripening indicated a change in the balance of the sucrose fate. During ripening, sugars may no longer be available for respiration since they are stored in the vacuoles, making citrate the preferred respiratory substrate. One isoform of alfa amylase acted during the early phases of starch breakdown while another acted during the later phases when the starch branches are simpler in structure. We found significant variety specific differences in granule-bound starch synthase, alpha- and beta amylases, cell wall invertase and sucrose synthase that corroborate the difference in starch content/structure between both bananas. Differences in small heat shock proteins and in the cell wall-modifying enzyme xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase support respectively the presumed higher carotenoid content and the firmer fruit structure of plantains.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates from both Cavendish and plantains fruits were collected from the incubator every day (for Cavendish during 7 days and for plantain during 14 days) until they reached the senescence stage. Pulps and peels were cut into small pieces individually and kept in the storage bags with proper tagging. All bags were then immediately transferred to liquid nitrogen to stop enzymatic activities. Samples were lyophilized using the lyophilizer Christ alpha 1-4 LSC, ANALIS SA/NV and lyophilizer Christ alpha 1-4 LSCplus, ANALIS SA/NV. Extractions were performed using the phenol extraction/ammonium acetate precipitation described previously in But et al. 2014  20 μg of proteins was processed furhter into peptides.   The resulting peptide mixture of each protein was analyzed by LC MS/MS (Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry) using Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (model Dionex UltiMate 3000, Thermo Scientific). The digested samples (1 µg /5 µL) were injected and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, ThermoScientific) equipped with a Acclaim PepMap100 pre column (C18 3 µm–100 A°, Thermo Scientific) and an C18 PepMap RSLC (2 µm, 50 µm-15cm,Thermo Scientific) using a linear gradient (300 µL/min) of 0–4% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) in 3 min, 4–10% B in 12 min, 10–35% in 20 min, 35–65% in 5 min, 65–95% in 1 min 95% for 10 min, 95–5% in 1 min, 5% 10 min. The Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) was operated in positive ion mode with a nano spray voltage of 1.5 kV and a source temperature of 250 ºC. Proteo Mass LTQ/FT-Hybrid ESI Pos Mode Cal Mix (MS CAL5-1EASUPELCO, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as an external calibrant and the lock mass 445.12003 as an internal calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70 000 (fw hm at m/z 200) for the mass range of m/z 400–1600 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the top ten most intense peaks with +2, +3, +4, and +5 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16000 at 17500 resolution using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 eV with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 10 s. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, all LC-MS (Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry) data were converted into mgf. files by the software Progenesis version 4.1 and processed using MASCOT version 2.2.06 (Matrix Science) against our in-house Musa A_B database (76,220 proteins). The parameters used to search at MASCOT were: parent tolerance of 10 PPM, fragment tolerance of 20 mmu, variable modification oxidation of M, fixed modification with carbamidomethyl C and up to one missed cleavage for trypsin. To calculate the FDR and protein inference, all sample specific mgf files were loaded into Scaffold 3. The proteins were quantified in Progenesis based on all matching features. The GreenPhylV4 (www.greenphyl.org), UniprotKB (https://www.uniprot.org/) and the banana hub (https://banana-genome-hub.southgreen.fr/) databases were used to know the annotation or function of proteins. KEGG Pathway (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html). Database was used to know the metabolic pathway of the enzymatic proteins. Statistical analysis Protein quantifications were exported from Progenesis subjected for additional statistical analysis in the software Statistica 8. For proteomics analysis, the ANOVA value generated by progenesis was corrected for repeated testing (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) and the significant proteins (p ≤0.01) were submitted for 2 way ANOVA in the software Statistica 8. Protein abundances were investigated in relation to the starch content via the PLS-DA NIPALS algorithm. All correlations between protein and starch content have a P value ≤ 0.001.

### Publication Abstract
The fruit physiology of banana cultivars other than Cavendish is poorly understood. To study the ripening process, samples were taken daily from plantain and Cavendish bananas and the ripening stages were determined. We present data from the green to the fully mature stage. By analyzing the protein abundances during ripening we provide some new insights into the ripening process and how plantains fruits are different. Multivariate analysis of the proteins was performed correlated to the starch dynamics. A drop in sucrose synthase and a rise of acid invertase during ripening indicated a change in the balance of the sucrose fate. During ripening, sugars may no longer be available for respiration since they are stored in the vacuoles, making citrate the preferred respiratory substrate. We found significant cultivar specific differences in granule-bound starch synthase, alpha- and beta amylases and cell wall invertase when comparing the protein content at the same ripening stage. This corroborates the difference in starch content/structure between both banana types. Differences in small heat shock proteins and in the cell wall-modifying enzyme xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase support respectively the presumed higher carotenoid content and the firmer fruit structure of plantains. SIGNIFICANCE: We follow the proteome during ripening and correlate the proteins to the measured starch content. We discuss the changes in two contrasting genotypes. This gives us for the first time insight into the ripening of plantain and how this is different from the well-known Cavendish banana. This will revive the plantain breeding programs since for the first time we get insight into the plantain ripening.

### Keywords
Ripening, Plantain, Fruit, Banana

### Affiliations
SYBIOMA KULeuven
KULeuven

### Submitter
Sebastien Carpentier

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastien Carpentier
SYBIOMA KULeuven


