### Accession
PXD000461

### Title
Identification of telomere-binding proteins by enChIP-MS

### Description
We identified the telomere associated molecules by engineered DNA-binding molecule-mediated chromatin immunoprecipitaion (enChIP). Purified proteins were analyzed by GeLC-MS/MS. Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Proteome Discoverer 1.2. Database searchs were submitted to an in-house Mascot server version 2.4.1. Mascot was set up to search the Swissprot database assuming the digestion enzyme as trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Oxidized methionine, acetylation of N terminus and conversion of glutamine to Pyro-Glu at N terminus were set as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerances were 10 ppm and the tolerance of the MS/MS ions was 0.8 Da. In Scaffold 3.4.5, database search results were grouped according to gel bands.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Biochemical analysis of molecular interactions in specific genomic regions requires their isolation while retaining molecular interactions in vivo. Here, we report isolation of telomeres by engineered DNA-binding molecule-mediated chromatin immunoprecipitation (enChIP) using a transcription activator-like (TAL) protein recognizing telomere repeats. Telomeres recognized by the tagged TAL protein were immunoprecipitated with an antibody against the tag and subjected to identification of telomere-binding molecules. enChIP-mass spectrometry (enChIP-MS) targeting telomeres identified known and novel telomere-binding proteins. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000461. In addition, we showed that RNA associated with telomeres could be isolated by enChIP. Identified telomere-binding molecules may play important roles in telomere biology. enChIP using TAL proteins would be a useful tool for biochemical analysis of specific genomic regions of interest.

### Keywords
Mouse, Telomere binding protein, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases

### Submitter
Kazunobu Saito

### Lab Head


