### Accession
PXD038179

### Title
Decoupling of mRNA and protein expression in aging brains reveals the age-dependent adaptation of specific gene subsets

### Description
During aging, changes in gene expression are associated with decline in physical and cognitive abilities. Here, we investigated the connection between changes of mRNA and protein expression in the brain by comparing the transcriptome and proteome of the mouse cortex during aging. Our transcriptomic analysis revealed that aging mainly triggers gene activation in the cortex. We showed that increase of mRNA expression correlates with protein expression, specifically in the anterior cingulate cortex where we also observed an increase of cortical thickness during aging. Genes exhibiting an aging-dependent increase of mRNA and protein levels are involved in sensory perception and immune functions. Our proteomic analysis also identified changes in protein abundance in the aging cortex and highlighted a subset of proteins that were differentially enriched but exhibited stable mRNA levels during aging, implying the contribution of aging-related post transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms. These specific genes were associated with general biological processes such as translation, ribosome assembly and protein degradation, but also important brain functions related to neuroplasticity. By decoupling mRNA and protein expression, we have thus characterized distinct subsets of genes that differentially adjust to cellular aging in the cerebral cortex.

### Sample Protocol
Sample prepapration: Proteins were reduced by incubation in Laemmli with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C. Alkylation was carried out by adding 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature. 20 µg of proteins were loaded onto a 4-20% PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Biorad). The gel was stained with Invitrogen™ SimplyBlue™ SafeStain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The gel was then cut in 4 fractions ranging from 250-75 kDa, 75-37 kDa, 37-20 kDa, and 20-10 kDa. Each fraction was diced into 1mm cubes and then the gel pieces were destained. All incubation steps were performed at 30°C at 800 RPM in a thermoshaker. The pieces were first washed in MS-grade H20 for 30 min. Then we added the same volume of CH3CN for a final concentration of 50% v:v CH3CN:H20, incubated for 15 min. The supernatant was removed, and the pieces were resuspended in 20 mM NH4CO3 for 15 min. Then the supernatant was removed and the pieces were resuspended in 50% v:v CH3CN, 10 mM NH4CO3 for 15 min. The last two steps were repeated until no trace of blue was visible in the gel pieces. The proteins were digested by adding 1 µg Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) diluted in 20 mM NH4CO3 and incubated overnight at 37°C. An equal volume of CH3CN (equivalent to that of the trypsin NH4CO3) was added onto the gel pieces and incubated 30 min at 30°C at 850 RPM in a thermoshaker. The supernatant containing the peptides was transferred into low-bind Eppendorf™ microcentrifuge tubes. An equal volume of 1% (v:v) Formic Acid (FA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to the gel pieces and the sample incubated for 20 min. This second supernatant was transferred in the same tube with the first supernatant. Then 150µL of CH3CN were added and the mixture was incubated for 15 min and the supernatant was again transferred to the tube. These samples were thereafter concentrated by a centrifugal evaporator at 65°C until complete drying (4-6h), and resuspended in 30 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) buffer.The peptides were purified with ZipTip 10ul micropipette tips containing a C18 column (EMD Millipore). Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Binary RSLCnano for High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). 1.5 µg of peptides per fraction were loaded onto an OrbiTrap mass spectrometer. With a constant flow of 4 µl/min the samples were loaded and separated onto a nanoHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 nano column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Cormporation, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were then eluted off towards an analytical column heated to 40°C (PepMap C18 column (75 µm x 50cm)) with a linear gradient of 5-45% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over a 4h gradient at a constant flow of 450 nl/min. Peptides were analyzed using an OrbiTrap QExactive (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using an EasySpray source at a voltage of 2.0kV and the temperature of the column set to 40°C. Acquisition of the full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 using 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions with maximum filling times of 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. All unassigned charge states as well as species with single, seven or eight charge for precursor ion were rejected. A dynamic exclusion list was set to 500 entries with a retention time of 40 s (10 ppm mass window). Data acquisition was done using Xcalibur (version 4.2). PRM acquisition: Protein quantification was performed using label-free PRM method. For quantification on an OrbiTrap mass spectrometer, the 3 fractions containing the peptides of interest were pooled in equal concentration and were loaded and separated onto a nanoHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) with a constant flow of 4 µl/min onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 nano column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Cormporation). Peptides were then eluted off towards an analytical column heated to 40°C (PepMap C18 column; 75 µm x 50cm) with a linear gradient of 5-45% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over a 4-h gradient at a constant flow of 450 nl/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed on an OrbiTrap QExactive (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using an EasySpray source at a voltage of 2.0kV. Acquisition of the MS/MS spectra (m/z 350-1600) was performed in the Orbitrap. An inclusion list containing the m/z values corresponding to the monoisotopic form of the selected peptides was generated. The collision energy was set at 28% at 140 000 for 1 000 000 ions with maximum filling times of 250 ms with an insulation width of 0.6. Data acquisition was done using Xcalibur (version 4.2).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann 2008) (1.6.17). For statistical analysis Prostar software package (Wieczorek et al. 2017) (Prostar 1.26.3; DAPAR 1.26.1) was used with the following settings. Potential contaminants as well as reverse sequences identified were removed and only proteins with at least two unique peptides detected in all replicates of at least one condition were kept. Partially observed values (POV) were imputed using SLSA (Structured Least Square Adaptative) regression-based imputation method while values missing in the entire condition (MEC) using DetQuantile with a low deterministic value. Hypothesis testing was performed using Limma test. Log2 Fold Change threshold was set at 1 and –log10 p-value threshold at 1.3. Results were visualized on a volcano plot using VolcaNoseR tool (Goedhart and Luijsterburg 2020). From the significantly different proteins heatmap was generated using Heatmapper tool (Babicki et al. 2016) with average linkage clustering and Pearson distance measurement. Peak list files were searched from the Openprot mouse proteome (openprot.org; version 1.6).  PRM data analysis:Identification and quantification of peptides was performed on Skyline software (21.1.0.146). The relative amount of proteins was calculated using peptide peak areas extracted from retention time points for all fragment ions (if possible the 3-5 most abundant ions were chosen for quantification for each peptide) and normalized against peptides of endogenous proteins whose abundance did not change in the samples. Normalized values were then used to calculate ratios between the two experimental groups (24-month/6-month) and values of technical replicates were used for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
During aging, changes in gene expression are associated with a decline in physical and cognitive abilities. Here, we investigate the connection between changes in mRNA and protein expression in the brain by comparing the transcriptome and proteome of the mouse cortex during aging. Our transcriptomic analysis revealed that aging mainly triggers gene activation in the cortex. We showed that an increase in mRNA expression correlates with protein expression, specifically in the anterior cingulate cortex, where we also observed an increase in cortical thickness during aging. Genes exhibiting an aging-dependent increase of mRNA and protein levels are involved in sensory perception and immune functions. Our proteomic analysis also identified changes in protein abundance in the aging cortex and highlighted a subset of proteins that were differentially enriched but exhibited stable mRNA levels during aging, implying the contribution of aging-related post- transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms. These specific genes were associated with general biological processes such as translation, ribosome assembly and protein degradation, and also important brain functions related to neuroplasticity. By decoupling mRNA and protein expression, we have thus characterized distinct subsets of genes that differentially adjust to cellular aging in the cerebral cortex.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Proteomics, Cortex, Aging, Mrna

### Affiliations
Laurent's Lab, Department of Biochemistry and Functional Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Cancer Research Institute (PRAC), Univeriste de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada
Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Benoit Laurent

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Laurent
Laurent's Lab, Department of Biochemistry and Functional Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Cancer Research Institute (PRAC), Univeriste de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada


