### Accession
PXD041467

### Title
Promotion of Subtotal Uterine Reconstruction by a Tissue-engineered Uterus Biomimeticing Structure and Extracellular Matrix Microenvironment

### Description
To better characterize the ECM signature of the ECMEC-SIS and ECMSMC-PU/SIS, a 4D label free proteomic analyses was carried out.  In total 2761 and 1520 proteins have been identified for the ECMEC-SIS and ECMSMC-PU/SIS, respectively, including 1055 in common . An ECM-specific categorization database, MatrisomeDB 2.0, was employed to analyze the ECM matrisome protein and ECM-associated proteins.In the ECMEC-SIS group, the ECM matisome, matrisome-associated, and other proteins have accounted for 17.87%, 17.00%, and 65.13%, respectively. However, the proportion of ECM proteins, especially glycoproteins and regulators, was greater in ECMSMC-PU/SIS group compared with the ECMEC-SIS group. In the ECMSMC-PU/SIS group, the ECM matisome, matrisome-associated, and other proteins have accounted for 26.39%, 20.85%, and 52.77%, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Uterine ECs, SMCs and MSCs were purchased from iCell Bioscience Inc., Shanghai, China. The ECs were collected from proliferation stage. 1 × 105 ECs were seeded onto the SIS for 7 days. 4 × 105 of SMCs were seeded onto the PU/SIS for 14 days. Thereafter, the cell-scaffold composites were frozen at −80℃ for 40 min and thawed at 37℃ for 40 min and repeated twice. Thereafter, the composites were treated with pre-heated 1% Triton X-100 at 37℃ for 5 min, and washed with PBS. The prepared ECMEC-SIS and ECMSMC-PU/SIS were freeze-dried. The PU emulsion was used to stick the ECMEC-SIS onto the ECMSMC-PU/SIS to derive an ECM-SPS scaffold. SDT(4%SDS，100mM Tris-HCl，1mM DTT，pH7.6) buffer was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) that was coupled to Nanoelute (Bruker Daltonics) for 60/120/240 min. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. The mass spectrometer collected ion mobility MS spectra over a mass range of m/z 100-1700 and 1/k0 of 0.6 to 1.6, and then performed 10 cycles of PASEF MS/MS with a target intensity of 1.5k and a threshold of 2500. Active exclusion was enabled with a release time of 0.4 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data for each sample were combined and searched using the MaxQuant 1.5.3.17  software for identification and quantitation analysis. Enrichment analysis were applied based on the Fisher’ exact test, considering the whole quantified proteins as background dataset. Benjamini- Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived p-values. And only functional categories and pathways with p-values under a threshold of 0.05 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
The recurrence rate for severe intrauterine adhesions is as high as 60%, and there is still lack of effective prevention and treatment. Inspired by the nature of uterus, we have developed a bilayer scaffold (ECM-SPS) with biomimetic heterogeneous features and extracellular matrix (ECM) microenvironment of the uterus. As proved by subtotal uterine reconstruction experiments, the mechanical and antiadhesion properties of the bilayer scaffold could meet the requirement for uterine repair. With the modification with tissue-specific cell-derived ECM, the ECM-SPS had the ECM microenvironment signatures of both the endometrium and myometrium and exhibited the property of inducing stem cell-directed differentiation. Furthermore, the ECM-SPS has recruited more endogenous stem cells to promote endometrial regeneration at the initial stage of repair, which was accompanied by more smooth muscle regeneration and a higher pregnancy rate. The reconstructed uterus could also sustain normal pregnancy and live birth. The ECM-SPS may thereby provide a potential treatment for women with severe intrauterine adhesions.

### Keywords
Smooth muscle, Endometrial epithelium, Cell-derived ecm

### Affiliations
sichuan university
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Orthopedic Research Institute, Department of Orthopedics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.

### Submitter
Long-mei Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Hui-qi Xie
Laboratory of Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering, Orthopedic Research Institute, Department of Orthopedics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.


