### Accession
PXD043182

### Title
Proximal proteomics connects NRF2 suppression to ZNF746/PARIS-driven oxidative stress and apoptosis in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) transcription factor activates cytoprotective and metabolic gene expression in response to various electrophilic stressors. In disease, constitutive NRF2 activity promotes cancer progression while decreased NRF2 function contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. In contrast to the regulation of NRF2 protein stability in the cytoplasm, co-complexed proteins that govern NRF2 activity on chromatin are less clear. Using biotin proximity proteomics, we report networks for NRF2 and its family members NRF1, NRF3 and the NRF2 heterodimer MAFG. We found that the Parkinson’s disease zinc finger transcription factor ZNF746 (PARIS) physically associated with NRF2 and MAFG, resulting in suppression of NRF2-driven transcription. ZNF746 expression increased oxidative stress and apoptosis, phenotypes that were reversed by chemical and genetic hyperactivation of NRF2. This study presents a functionally annotated proximity network for NRF2 and suggests that ZNF746 overexpression in Parkinson’s disease directly inhibits NRF2-driven neuroprotection

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing miniTurbo-fused proteins were treated with 50 µM biotin for 1 h. Cells were then lysed in RIPA containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors and benzonase. Protein concentrations were determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit and equal amounts of lysates (5-10 mg for WB and 19 mg for MS) were incubated with 30 µL of packed streptavidin beads (Cytiva) overnight at 4°C on a rotator. The beads were washed 2x with WB1 (2% SDS), 1x with WB2 (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1.0% Triton-X, and 0.1% NaDeoxycholate), 1x with WB3 (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, and 0.5% NaDeoxycholate), 1x with WB4 (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl), and 3x with 50 mM ammonium biocarbonate. Purified biotinylated proteins were then either processed for mass spectrometry (see below) or eluted for WB by incubating the beads in 2x LDS buffer (Invitrogen) containing 10% BME and 1 mM biotin at 70°C for 10 min.  The streptavidin beads containing purified biotinylated proteins were resuspended in 0.1% Rapigest (Waters), reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60°C for 30 min, alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide at room temp for 20 min, and on-bead digested with 2.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 18 h. The trypsin was neutralized with 50 mM HCl and incubated at 37°C for 45 min. Samples were centrigued at 400g for 2 min to remove the beads and then at 21,000g for 5 min to remove insoluble cleaved Rapigest. The peptides were dried in a speed vac and then resuspended in 0.5% TFA. The samples were de-salted using C18 spin columns (Pierce) and then any remaining detergent was removed using ethyl acetate. Peptides were dried in a speed vac and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  Trypsinized peptides were loaded onto a µPACᵀᴹ Trapping column (PharmaFluidics) and separated on µPACᵀᴹ columns (PharmaFluidics). The NRF1/2/3 miniTurbo samples were separated on a 200 cm column operated at 30°C using a 100 min gradient from 2% to 25% buffer B, followed by a 20 min gradient from 25% to 35% buffer B, flowing at 300 nL/min. The ZNF746 miniTurbo samples were separated on a 50 cm column operated at 30°C using a 4 min gradient from 2% to 7% buffer B flowing at 1.0 µL/min, then a 106 min gradient from 7% to 25% buffer B flowing at 300 nL/min, and lastly a 5 min gradient from 25% to 30% buffer B flowing at 300 nL/min. The µPACᵀᴹ columns were Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The NRF1/2/3 miniTurbo MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution, with a 250% normalized automated gain control (AGC) target, auto max injection time, and a 375-1500 m/z scan range. Both the linear ion trap and the Orbitrap were used for the NRF1/2/3 miniTurbo MS2 scans. MS2 targets with a charge of +2 or +3, and ≥90% precursor fit at either a 0.8 m/z or 0.4 m/z-wide isolation window were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) with a 35% normalized collision energy and scanned in the linear ion trap at the widest window width that passed the thresholds. All remaining MS2 targets with charge from +2 to +6, ≥5e4 intensity, and ≥10% precursor fit at isolation widths of 1.6 m/z, 0.8 m/z, or 0.4 m/z wide were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation at 30% normalized collision energy and scanned in the Orbitrap at 15k resolution at the widest window width that passed the thresholds. MS2 AGC targets and maximum injection times were set to standard and auto for their respective analyzers. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds. Acquisition was performed with a 2.7 second cycle time. The ZNF746 miniTurbo MS scan methods were as follows. The MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 240k resolution, with a 250% normalized automated gain control (AGC) target, auto max injection time, and a 375-2000 m/z scan range. MS2 targets were filtered for charges states 2-7, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds, and were accumulated using a 0.7 m/z quadrupole isolation window. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap at a turbo scan rate following CID with a 35% normalized collision energy. MS2 scans used a 100% normalized AGC target and 35 ms max injection time.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) using the UniProtKB/SwissProt human canonical sequence database (downloaded March 2021) (105). The following parameters were used: specific tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethyl modification, variable modifications for protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and biotin, match between runs, and label-free quantification. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification. Each bait was given a replicate number >1 away from all other baits in ensure match between runs occurred only for replicates of the same bait. The confidence of bait-prey protein interactions compared to the controls (V5, NLS, NES) were scored using SAINTexpress (v3.6.3) with an L-value of 3 for NRF1, 2, and 3 dataset and an L-value of 2 for the ZNF746 and MAFG dataset (57)/ Proteins that passed the following bait-specific thresholds were included in downstream analysis. NRF2 (SAINT≥0.42, BFDR ≤0.28), NRF1 (SAINT≥0.44, BFDR ≤0.26), NRF3 (SAINT≥0.44, BFDR ≤0.26), ZNF746 (SAINT≥0.7, BFDR ≤0.05), and MAFG (SAINT≥0.7, BFDR ≤0.05). Common BioID contaminants deposited in the BioID CRAPome database were filtered out of the dataset (106). Multi-validated prey-prey interactions that had at least two experimental evidences listed in the BioGRID database were included.(58) Protein networks were generated in Cytoscape (v 3.9.1) (107). Specifically for the MAFG localization network, an additional threshold of avg. spectral counts ≥20 was included for visualization purposes (Fig. 1C).

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2) transcription factor activates cytoprotective and metabolic gene expression in response to various electrophilic stressors. Constitutive NRF2 activity promotes cancer progression, whereas decreased NRF2 function contributes to neurodegenerative diseases. We used proximity proteomic analysis to define protein networks for NRF2 and its family members NRF1, NRF3, and the NRF2 heterodimer MAFG. A functional screen of co-complexed proteins revealed previously uncharacterized regulators of NRF2 transcriptional activity. We found that ZNF746 (also known as PARIS), a zinc finger transcription factor implicated in Parkinson's disease, physically associated with NRF2 and MAFG, resulting in suppression of NRF2-driven transcription. ZNF746 overexpression increased oxidative stress and apoptosis in a neuronal cell model of Parkinson's disease, phenotypes that were reversed by chemical and genetic hyperactivation of NRF2. This study presents a functionally annotated proximity network for NRF2 and suggests a link between ZNF746 overexpression in Parkinson's disease and inhibition of NRF2-driven neuroprotection.

### Keywords
Mafg, Oxidative stress, Parkinson's disease, Nrf3, Nrf2, Znf746, Nrf1, Proximity proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Kyle LaPak

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ben Major
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. Louis


