### Accession
PXD015617

### Title
Environmental conditions steer phenotypic switching in AHPND-causing Vibrio parahaemolyticus, affecting PirABVP toxin production

### Description
Bacteria in nature are widely exposed to differential fluid shears which are often a trigger for phenotypic switches. The latter mediates transcriptional and translation remodeling of cellular metabolism impacting among others virulence, antimicrobial resistance and stress resistance. In this study, we evaluated the role of fluid shear on phenotypic switch in an acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease (AHPND)-causing Vibrio parahaemolyticus M0904 strain under both in vitro and in vivo conditions. The results showed that V. parahaemolyticus M0904 grown at lower shaking speed (110 min-1 constant agitation, M0904/110), causing low fluid shear, develop cellular aggregates or floccules. These cells increased levan production (as verified by concanavalin binding) and developed differentially stained colonies on Congo Red agar plates and resistance to antibiotics. In addition, the phenotypic switch causes a major shift in the protein secretome. At 120 min-1 (M0904/120), PirA/B toxins are mainly produced, while at 110 min-1 PirA/B toxin production is stopped and an alkaline phosphatase PhoX becomes the dominant protein in the protein secretome. These observations are matched with a very strong reduction in virulence of M0904/110 towards two crustacean larvae, namely Artemia and Macrobrachium. Taken together, our study provides substantial evidence for the existence of two phenotypic forms in AHPND Vibrio parahaemolyticus strains displaying differential phenotypes that could be of interest in understanding the epidemiology of AHPND under aquaculture conditions. It might provide the basis for AHPND control by steering phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the presumptive proteins produced by V. parahaemolyticus AHPND strain from different culture conditions, the concentrated VPAHPND ECP samples were combined with loading buffer, vortexed, heated for 5 min at 95 °C and separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-20% polyacrylamide gel (BioRad, Belgium), with each lane receiving equivalent volume (10 µl) of protein. The gels were stained with Coomassie Biosafe (BioRad, Belgium) and the signals were detected by a ChemiDoc MP imaging system (BioRad, Belgium). The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method using bovine serum albumin as standard. The possible candidate bands of PirAVP and PirBVP toxin and alkaline phosphatase PhoX on Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gels were excised using a clean scalpel (preferentially under the laminar flow to avoid the keratin contamination) and the gel-pieces (with a clean pincet) were transferred into sterile eppendorf tubes. The gel-pieces were rinsed twice with 500 µl sterile distilled water and stored at -20 °C until further processing by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.  To prepare the samples for LC-MS/MS, the gel pieces were washed consecutively with water, acetonitrile (ACN) in water (50/50, v/v) and ACN and were then dried completely using a rotary evaporator. The dried gel bands were rehydrated with 15 µl of a trypsin-containing solution (5 ng/µl in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and after swelling of the gel pieces 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added until the bands were completely submerged. The samples were incubated overnight at 37°C for trypsin digestion and elution of the resulting peptides from the gel. Next day formic acid was added to the eluted peptides to deactivate trypsin and the peptides were dried completely in a rotary evaporator. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the dried peptide samples were dissolved in 20 µl loading buffer (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile, 2/98 (v/v)) and half of each sample was injected on a tandem configurated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany) in-line connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) equipped with a pneu-Nimbus dual ion source (Phoenix S&T) and a Butterfly nano-LC column oven (Phoenix S&T) to keep the column temperature constant at 50°C. The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm I.D. x 20 mm length, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) and after flushing from the trapping column, the sample was separated on a reverse-phase analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 200 mm length, 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated with a non-linear 90 min gradient from 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/ACN 20:80 (v/v)), all at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min followed by a 5 min wash reaching 99% solvent B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 20 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set at 3 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C.  In the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite, full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (m/z 300−2,000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 100 ms) with a resolution of 60 000 (at 400 m/z). The 20 most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 103 ions, maximum ion injection time 20 ms, exclusion of unassigned and singly charged precursors, dynamic exclusion time 20 s) were then isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented in the high-pressure cell of the ion trap. The CID collision energy was set to 35 V and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120028 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on the PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the proteins of Vibrio parahaemolyticus strain 20130626002S01 in the database (CP020076) (containing 5004 Vibrio protein sequences) supplemented with the sequences of the PirAVP (gi|922664586) and PirBVP toxins (gi|922664588). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, propionamidation of cysteine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were selected. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. The resulting protein lists from the MaxQuant protein groups file were sorted on descending iBAQ ratio, revealing PirAVP, PirBVP and PhoX as most abundant protein in their respective protein bands. The identified peptides of PirAVP and PirBVP toxins were mapped on the corresponding protein sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria in nature are widely exposed to differential fluid shears which are often a trigger for phenotypic switches. The latter mediates transcriptional and translation remodelling of cellular metabolism impacting among others virulence, antimicrobial resistance and stress resistance. In this study, we evaluated the role of fluid shear on phenotypic switch in an acute hepatopancreatic necrosis disease (AHPND)-causing Vibrio parahaemolyticus M0904 strain under both in vitro and in vivo conditions. The results showed that V. parahaemolyticus M0904 grown at lower shaking speed (110&#x2009;rpm constant agitation, M0904/110), causing low fluid shear, develop cellular aggregates or floccules. These cells increased levan production (as verified by concanavalin binding) and developed differentially stained colonies on Congo red agar plates and resistance to antibiotics. In addition, the phenotypic switch causes a major shift in the protein secretome. At 120&#x2009;rpm (M0904/120), PirA<sup>VP</sup> /PirB<sup>VP</sup> toxins are mainly produced, while at 110&#x2009;rpm PirA<sup>VP</sup> /PirB<sup>VP</sup> toxins production is stopped and an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) PhoX becomes the dominant protein in the protein secretome. These observations are matched with a very strong reduction in virulence of M0904/110 towards two crustacean larvae, namely, Artemia and Macrobrachium. Taken together, our study provides substantial evidence for the existence of two phenotypic forms in AHPND V. parahaemolyticus strain displaying differential phenotypes. Moreover, as aerators and pumping devices are frequently used in shrimp aquaculture facilities, they can inflict fluid shear to the standing microbial agents. Hence, our study could provide a basis to understand the behaviour of AHPND-causing V. parahaemolyticus in aquaculture settings and open the possibility to monitor and control AHPND by steering phenotypes.

### Keywords
Phenotype switching, Virulence, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Antimicrobial resistance, Biological features, Fluid shear

### Affiliations
Lab of Aquaculture & Artemia Reference Center, Department of Animal Sciences and Aquatic Ecology, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Bossier
Lab of Aquaculture & Artemia Reference Center, Department of Animal Sciences and Aquatic Ecology, Faculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium


