### Accession
PXD022393

### Title
Circadian Regulation of Protein Cargo in Exosomes

### Description
The circadian clock controls many aspects of physiology, but it remains undescribed whether extracellular vesicles (including exosomes) involved in cell-cell communications between tissues are regulated in a circadian pattern. We demonstrate a 24 h rhythmic abundance of individual proteins in exosomes using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry in circadian-synchronised tendon fibroblasts. Further, the release of exosomes enriched in RNA-binding proteins was temporally separated from those enriched in cytoskeletal and matrix proteins, which peaked during the end of the light phase. Finally, we targeted the protein sorting mechanism in the exosome biogenesis pathway and established (by knockdown of circadian-regulated flotillin-1) that matrix metalloproteinase 14 abundance in tendon fibroblast exosomes is under flotillin-1 regulation. In conclusion, we have identified proteomic time signatures for exosomes released by tendon fibroblasts which supports the view that the circadian clock regulates protein cargo in exosomes involved in cell-cell crosstalk.

### Sample Protocol
Time series exosome protein isolation In our experimental set up samples were isolated independently for each 24 h time series, i.e. samples for 4, 8, 12, 16, 20 and 24 h after synchronisation were isolated from one experiment, samples for 28, 32, 36, 40, 44 and 48 h after synchronisation were isolated from another experiment. For each set of time series samples (4-24 h (n=3), 28-48 h (n=3), and control 4- 24 h (n=3)), isolates from two independent experiments were pooled together for sufficient material for analysis. Exosomes pellets resulting from ultracentrifugation of the 34 and 40% sucrose fractions from each experiment were resuspended and lysed with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Protein concentrations were determined by Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Tryptic digestion of exosome proteins and LC-MS Exosome proteins were digested for LC-MS as described previously (ref fibroblast paper). Samples for the first 24 h, second 24 h and control time series were processed in three batches. For each sample, 500 ng peptides were loaded onto a 2-cm C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected in-line to a 50-cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Easy-Spray LC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using 0.1% formic acid in water at 750 bar, using the Easy-nLC 1200 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the column oven operating at 45oC. Peptides were eluted over a 140-minute gradient ranging from 6% to 60% of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min, and the Orbitrap Fusion instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a data-dependent-MS/MS (DD-MS2) top speed method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an AGC target of 4x105 or maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range of 400–1500 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained in the ion trap operating at rapid speed, with an AGC target value of 1x104 or maximum injection time of 35 ms, a normalised higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) collision energy of 30 and an intensity threshold of 1.7e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, and ions with a charge state <2, >7 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) with the data set identifier XXX – Erwin to upload please. The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the Mus musculus validated databases obtained from Uniprot. Dynamic modifications were set as oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR, and protein quantitation done using the built-in Minora Feature Detector. Only proteins for which two unique peptides were detected were analysed. Proteins suggest by the Minimal Information of Studies for EVs 2018 (49) were used for protein content-based EV characterisation.

### Publication Abstract
The circadian clock controls many aspects of physiology, but it remains undescribed whether extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes, involved in cell-cell communications between tissues are regulated in a circadian pattern. We demonstrate a 24-hour rhythmic abundance of individual proteins in small EVs using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry in circadian-synchronized tendon fibroblasts. Furthermore, the release of small EVs enriched in RNA binding proteins was temporally separated from those enriched in cytoskeletal and matrix proteins, which peaked during the end of the light phase. Last, we targeted the protein sorting mechanism in the exosome biogenesis pathway and established (by knockdown of circadian-regulated flotillin-1) that matrix metalloproteinase 14 abundance in tendon fibroblast small EVs is under flotillin-1 regulation. In conclusion, we have identified proteomic time signatures for small EVs released by tendon fibroblasts, which supports the view that the circadian clock regulates protein cargo in EVs involved in cell-cell cross-talk.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Circadian rhythm, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Hospital, and Center for Healthy Aging, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Kjaer
Institute of Sports Medicine Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Hospital, and Center for Healthy Aging, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.


