### Accession
PXD021541

### Title
The Serine/Threonine kinase PrkC of Clostridioides difficile regulates export of CD1135, a septal peptidoglycan hydrolase

### Description
Cell growth and division require a balance between synthesis and hydrolysis of the peptidoglycan (PG). Inhibition of PG synthesis or uncontrolled PG hydrolysis can be lethal for the cells, making it imperative to control peptidoglycan hydrolase (PGH) activity. The activity of  several enzymes involved in PG synthesis is regulated by serine/threonine kinase (STKs). In firmicutes, inactivation of genes encoding STKs is associated with a range of phenotypes including cell division defects and changes in cell wall metabolism, but only a few kinase substrates have been identified. We previously demonstrated that the STK PrkC plays an important role in cell division, cell wall metabolism and drug resistance in Clostridioides difficile. In this work, we identified and characterized a PGH, CD1135 that is a PrkC substrate. We showed that CD1135 hydrolyses PG between daughter cells to allow cell separation. We demonstrated that CD1135 phosphorylation inhibits CD1135 its export, therefore controlling the hydrolytic activity in the cell wall. High level of CD1135 in the cell wall leads to cell elongation, whereas low level causes cell separation defects. We provided evidences that the STK signaling pathway regulates PGHs homeostasis to control PG hydrolysis during growth and cell division.

### Sample Protocol
His6-PrkC was used to phosphorylate His6-CD1135 in vitro. Phos-Tag Acrylamide was used to separate phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated forms based on phosphorylation levels, proteins were run on a 12% SDS-PAGE supplemented with 50 µM of Phos-tagTM Acrylamide (AAL-107, Wako) and 100 µM MnCl2. After running, the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue. The band corresponding to His6-CD1135 was excised. In-gel digestion was performed and resulting peptides were dried in a Speed-Vac and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched Maxquant software version 1.5.3.8 with Andromeda as a search engine against an internal C. difficile database containing 3,957 protein, usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of three missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable), Nter acetylation (variable) and phospho (Ser, Thr, Tyr, variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 4.5 ppm for the main search and 20 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and seven amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was applied for samples having the same experimental condition with a maximal retention time window of 0.7 minute. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification for the phospho-enrichment analysis. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Qexactive plus, Phostag, Phosphoproteomics, Clostridium difficile

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur
Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, UMR CNRS 2001, Université de Paris, Paris, France

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Martin-Verstraete
Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, UMR CNRS 2001, Université de Paris, Paris, France


