### Accession
PXD009561

### Title
Extended ZIKV-NS4B interactome (AP-MS/MS analysis of ZIKV interacting proteins)

### Description
To identify the cellular interactors of ZIKV-NS4B-interacting proteins and their differential composition upon ZIKV infection, individual cDNAs expressing FLAG-tagged variants of the following ZIKV-NS4B-interacting proteins were generated (GeneBank and UniProt Accession numbers are given in parenthesis): CEND1 (BC034732.1; Q8N111), CHP1 (BC031293; Q99653), CLN6 (BC010849.1; Q9NWW5), TMEM41b (BC035034.1; Q5BJD5), RBFOX2 (NM_001082579.1; O43251-6), BSG (BC009040.2;P35613). Lentiviruses expressing each of these proteins were used to transduce SK-N-BE2 cells, which were either mock-infected or infected with ZIKV (H/PF/2013, MOI=3), and 72 hours later subjected to AP-MS/MS to identify the respective cellular interactors.

### Sample Protocol
For the determination of the ZIKV interactome, four independent affinity purifications were performed for each FLAG-tagged cellular protein under infected or uninefected conditions. SK-N-BE2 cells were transduced with an MOI of 3 of each lentivirus (8x10^6 cells/dish) and 72 hours later cells were scraped in 1 ml of Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris pH=8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and FLAG-affinity purifications performed as described before. Briefly, clarified cell lysates were incubate with anti-FLAG-specific beads for 3h at 4°C, and non-specifically bound proteins removed by three washes with Lysis buffer and 5 washes with Washing Buffer (50 mM Tris pH=8, 150 mM NaCl).  Bound proteins were denatured by incubation in 20 µl Guanidinium Chloride buffer (600 mM GdmCl, 1mM TCEP, 4mM CAA, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8). After digestion with 1 µg LysC (WAKO Chemicals USA) at room temperature for 3 h, the suspension was diluted in 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8), and the protein solution was digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature. Peptides were purified on stage tips with three C18 Empore filter discs (3M) and analyzed by mass spectrometry as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass-spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant (software version 1.5.7) using the built-in Andromeda search engine to search against the human proteome (UniprotKB release 2015_08 including isoforms and unreviewed sequences) containing forward and reverse sequences plus ZIKV virus polyprotein (ZIKV strain H/PF/2013, Asian lineage, NCBI GenBank KJ776791.2 with individual viral cleavage products manually annotated), and the label-free quantitation algorithm as described previously. In MaxQuant, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation and N-acetylation as variable modifications, using an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. MaxQuant output files (proteinGroups.txt) were processed by a combination of in-house R (version 3.3), Julia (version 0.5) and Stan (version 2.14) scripts. More detailed description of statistical analysis of MS data can be found in the Material and Methods section of the related manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) has recently emerged as a global health concern owing to its widespread diffusion and its association with severe neurological symptoms and microcephaly in newborns<sup>1</sup>. However, the molecular mechanisms that are responsible for the pathogenicity of ZIKV remain largely unknown. Here we use human neural progenitor cells and the neuronal cell line SK-N-BE2 in an integrated proteomics approach to characterize the cellular responses to viral infection at the proteome and phosphoproteome level, and use affinity proteomics to identify cellular targets of ZIKV proteins. Using this approach, we identify 386 ZIKV-interacting proteins, ZIKV-specific and pan-flaviviral activities as well as host factors with known functions in neuronal development, retinal defects and infertility. Moreover, our analysis identified 1,216 phosphorylation sites that are specifically up- or downregulated after ZIKV infection, indicating profound modulation of fundamental signalling pathways such as AKT, MAPK-ERK and ATM-ATR and thereby providing mechanistic insights into the proliferation arrest elicited by ZIKV infection. Functionally, our integrative study identifies ZIKV host-dependency factors and provides a comprehensive framework for a system-level understanding of ZIKV-induced perturbations at the levels of proteins and cellular pathways.

### Keywords
Zikv, Rbfox2, Cln6, Ap-ms/ms, Cend1, Chp1, Lc-ms/ms, Tmem41b

### Affiliations
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Institute of Virology Technical University of Munich Munich, Germany


