### Accession
PXD008054

### Title
Comprehensive Profiling of Lysine Acetylome in Baculovirus Infected Silkworm (Bombyx mori) Cells

### Description
Bombyx mori is one of the key lepidopteran model species, and is economically important for silk production and proteinaceous drug expression. Baculovirus and insect host are important natural biological models for studying host-pathogen interactions. The impact of Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) infection on the proteome and acetylome of Bombyx mori ovarian (BmN) cells were explored to facilitate a better understanding of infection-driven interactions between BmNPV and host in vitro. The proteome and acetylome were profiled through 6-plex Tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling-based quantitative proteomics. Totally, 4,194 host proteins were quantified, of which 33 were up-regulated and 47 were down-regulated in BmN cells at 36 h post-infection. Based on the proteome, quantifiable differential Kac proteins were identified and functionally annotated to gene expression regulation, energy metabolism, substance synthesis and metabolism after BmNPV infection. Altogether, 644 Kac sites in 431 host proteins and 39 Kac sites in 22 viral proteins were identified and quantified in infected BmN cells. Our study demonstrated that BmNPV infection globally impacts the proteome and acetylome of BmN cells. The viral proteins are also acetylated by the host acetyltransferase. Protein acetylation is essential for cellular self-regulation and response to virus infection. This study provides new insights for understanding the host-virus interaction mechanisms, and the role of acetylation in BmN cellular response to viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
1.Protein Extraction Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 3 μM TSA, 50mM NAM 10 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2.Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  3.TMT Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 1mg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  4.HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 5.Affinity Enrichment To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. 6.LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 8% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 22 min, 22% to 36% for 10 min and climbing to 85% in 5 min then holding at 85% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5E3 in the MS survey scan with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbitrap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against bombyx mori database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, Acethylation on Lys and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6-plex was selected. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Bombyx mori is one of the key lepidopteran model species, and is economically important for silk production and proteinaceous drug expression. Baculovirus and insect host are important natural biological models for studying host-pathogen interactions. The impact of Bombyx mori nucleopolyhedrovirus (BmNPV) infection on the proteome and acetylome of Bombyx mori ovarian (BmN) cells are explored to facilitate a better understanding of infection-driven interactions between BmNPV and host in vitro. The proteome and acetylome are profiled through six-plex Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling-based quantitative proteomics. A total of 4194 host proteins are quantified, of which 33 are upregulated and 47 are downregulated in BmN cells at 36 h post-infection. Based on the proteome, quantifiable differential Kac proteins are identified and functionally annotated to gene expression regulation, energy metabolism, substance synthesis, and metabolism after BmNPV infection. Altogether, 644 Kac sites in 431 host proteins and 39 Kac sites in 22 viral proteins are identified and quantified in infected BmN cells. Our study demonstrates that BmNPV infection globally impacts the proteome and acetylome of BmN cells. The viral proteins are also acetylated by the host acetyltransferase. Protein acetylation is essential for cellular self-regulation and response to virus infection. This study provides new insights for understanding the host-virus interaction mechanisms, and the role of acetylation in BmN cellular response to viral infection.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Proteome, Bombyx mori, Bmnpv

### Affiliations
Zhejiang Sci-tech University
Institute of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences Zhejiang Sci-Tech University

### Submitter
Hu Dongbing

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yu
Institute of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences Zhejiang Sci-Tech University


