### Accession
PXD005461

### Title
Galectin-1 and Galectin-3 interactors

### Description
Identification of interactors is a major attempt in cell biology. Not only protein-protein but also protein-carbohydrate interactions are of high relevance for signal transduction in biological systems. Here we aim to identify novel interacting binding partners for the β-galactoside-binding proteins Galectin-1 (Gal-1) and Galectin-3 (Gal-3) in context of the eye disease proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR). PVR is one of the most common failures after retinal detachment surgeries and is characterized by the migration, adhesion and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE) and the subsequent formation of sub- and epiretinal fibrocellular membranes. Gal-1 and Gal-3 bind in a dose- and carbohydrate-dependent manner to mesenchymal RPE cells and inhibit cellular processes like attachment and spreading. Yet knowledge about glycan-dependent interactors of Gal-1 and Gal-3 on RPE cells is very limited, although this is a prerequisite to unravel the influence of galectins on distinct cellular processes in RPE cells. In this approach, we identified by galectin pull-down experiments and quantitative proteomic screening 131 Galectin-3 and 15 Galectin-1 interactors. They mainly play a role in multiple binding processes and are mostly membrane proteins. Here we focused on two novel identified interactors of Gal-1 and Gal-3 in the context of PVR: the low-density lipoprotein receptor LRP1 and the platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta PDGFRB. We observed crosslinking and lattice formation of exogenous Gal-1 and Gal-3 with LRP1/PDGFRB and ITGB1 on the cell surface of human RPE cells. Weaker binding of Gal-1 and Gal-3 on these interactors and no lattice formation on the cell surface was seen, when complex-type-N-glycosylation was inhibited by treatment of the cells with Kifunensine. In conclusion, the identified specific glycoprotein ligands for Gal-1 and Gal-3 give us new insights in the highly specific binding of galectins to dedifferentiated RPE cells and the resulting prevention of PVR-associated cellular events.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry ß-lactose eluates of the Gal-1, Gal-3 and ProteinG pull-down experiments were proteolysed with Lys-C and trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) using a modified filter aided sample preparation protocol 64. Briefly, protein eluates were diluted with ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC, Sigma) to a final volume of 100µl, followed by reduction using 1µl 1M dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 60°C. After cooling down to RT, 100µl 8M Urea Buffer (UA, Sigma), pH 8.5, was added and proteins were alkylated with 10µl 300 mM iodoacetamide (Merck) for 30 min at RT in the dark. 2µl 1M DTT was added to quench unreacted iodacetamide and protein eluates were transferred to 30 kDa cut-off centrifuge filter (Pall Corporation, NY). After washing 3 times with 400µl UA buffer and twice with 100µl 50mM ABC, the proteins were subjected to a 2h digest at RT with 1µg Lys-C followed by tryptic digest (2µg trypsin) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation through the filter and acidified with TFA (pH2). Mass Spectrometry Label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously on a LTQ OrbitrapXL (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) 65-68. Briefly, every sample was automatically loaded onto an Ultimate3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex) with a nano trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) at a flow rate of 30µl/min in HPLC buffer containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 5 minutes. Peptides were separated on a reversed phase chromatography (PepMap, 25 cm, 75µm ID, 1µm/100 Å pore size, LC Packings) over 80 or 140 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using increasing ACN concentrations in 0.1% formic acid. Maximal injection time for MS spectra was 100ms, for MSMS spectra 500ms. MS data were acquired using from the high resolution MS prescan the 10 most abundant peptide ions for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, if they were at least doubly charged and have an intensity of at least 200 counts, with a dynamic exclusion of 45 seconds and an isolation width of 2 amu. MS spectra were recorded within a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 full widths at half-maximum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra of the different samples were analyzed using Progenesis QI software for proteomics (Version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) for precursor intensity-based label-free quantification, as previously described 65-68. Peak lists with respective m/z values, intensities, abundances and m/z width were generated out of the profile data of the MS scans. MS/MS spectra were also transformed and stored in peak lists incorporating m/z and abundance. The retention times of all samples were aligned to the most complex sample as reference. Alignment to a maximal overlay of all 2D features was done both automatically and manually. Only features with charges of at least 2 and not more than seven were included in further analyses. After alignment and feature exclusion, samples were divided into their respective experimental groups (Gal1, Gal3, ProtG lactose eluates), and raw abundances of all features were normalized. Peptide identification was done with Mascot (MatrixScience, London, UK; version 2.5.1) using the Ensembl human protein database (homo sapiens, release: 75, 105287 sequences; release: 80, 100208 sequences). The parameters for the search were 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance and 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. One missed cleavage was allowed. When searching was done on all Mascot generic files (mgf) with a percolator ion score cut-off of 15 and a correlated significance threshold p, false discovery rate (FDR) was set to <1.25% in Mascot integrated decoy database search. Peptide assignments were reimported into Progenesis QI and all normalized abundances of unique peptides of an identified protein were summed to calculate the total cumulative normalized abundance of the respective protein. These abundances were used to calculate the enrichment factors of the quantified proteins in the lactose eluates of the galectin pull-downs compared to ProteinG pull-downs. No minimal thresholds were set neither for the method of peak picking nor selection of data to use for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of interactors is a major goal in cell biology. Not only protein-protein but also protein-carbohydrate interactions are of high relevance for signal transduction in biological systems. Here, we aim to identify novel interacting binding partners for the &#x3b2;-galactoside-binding proteins galectin-1 (Gal-1) and galectin-3 (Gal-3) relevant in the context of the eye disease proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR). PVR is one of the most common failures after retinal detachment surgeries and is characterized by the migration, adhesion, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of retinal pigment epithelial cells (RPE) and the subsequent formation of sub- and epiretinal fibrocellular membranes. Gal-1 and Gal-3 bind in a dose- and carbohydrate-dependent manner to mesenchymal RPE cells and inhibit cellular processes like attachment and spreading. Yet knowledge about glycan-dependent interactors of Gal-1 and Gal-3 on RPE cells is very limited, although this is a prerequisite for unraveling the influence of galectins on distinct cellular processes in RPE cells. We identify here 131 Gal-3 and 15 Gal-1 interactors by galectin pulldown experiments combined with quantitative proteomics. They mainly play a role in multiple binding processes and are mostly membrane proteins. We focused on two novel identified interactors of Gal-1 and Gal-3 in the context of PVR: the low-density lipoprotein receptor LRP1 and the platelet-derived growth factor receptor &#x3b2; PDGFRB. Addition of exogenous Gal-1 and Gal-3 induced cross-linking with LRP1/PDGFRB and integrin-&#x3b2;1 (ITGB1) on the cell surface of human RPE cells and induced ERK/MAPK and Akt signaling. Treatment with kifunensine, an inhibitor of complex-type <i>N</i>-glycosylation, weakened the binding of Gal-1 and Gal-3 to these interactors and prevented lattice formation. In conclusion, the identified specific glycoprotein ligands shed light into the highly specific binding of galectins to dedifferentiated RPE cells and the resulting prevention of PVR-associated cellular events.

### Keywords
Galectin, Retina, Pull-down, Interactors

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre Munich
Research Unit Protein Science Helmholtz Center Munich Germany

### Submitter
Jara Obermann

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science Helmholtz Center Munich Germany


