### Accession
PXD011263

### Title
Investigating Lactococcus lactis MG1363 response to phage p2 infection  at the proteome level

### Description
Phages are viruses that specifically infect and kill bacteria. Bacterial fermentation and biotechnology industries see them as enemies, however, they are also investigated for the treatment or prevention of infections caused by multidrug resistant bacteria. Whether foes or allies, their importance is undeniable. Despite decades of research some aspects of phage biology are still poorly understood. In this study, we used label-free quantitative proteomics to reveal the proteotypes of Lactococcus lactis MG1363 during infection by the virulent phage p2, a model for studying the biology of phages infecting Gram-positive bacteria. Our approach resulted in the high-confidence detection and quantification of 59% of the theoretical bacterial proteome, including 226 bacterial proteins detected only during phage infection and 6 proteins unique to uninfected bacteria. We also identified many bacterial proteins of differing abundance during the infection. Using this high-throughput proteomic datasets, we selected specific bacterial genes for inactivation using CRISPR-Cas9 to investigate their involvement in phage replication. One knockout mutant lacking gene llmg_0219 showed resistance to phage p2 due to a deficiency in phage adsorption. Furthermore, we detected and quantified 78% of the theoretical phage proteome and identified many proteins of phage p2 that had not been previously detected. Among others, we uncovered a conserved small phage protein (ORFN1) coded by an unannotated gene. We also applied a targeted approach to achieve greater sensitivity and identify undetected phage proteins that were expected to be present. This allowed us to follow the fate of ORF46, a small phage protein of low abundance. In summary, this work offers a unique view of the virulent phages’ takeover of bacterial cells and provides novel information on phage-host interactions.

### Sample Protocol
L. lactis MG1363 cells were incubated at 30˚C and grown until the OD600 reached 0.5. The culture was then concentrated 5-fold by centrifugation and resuspended in fresh medium. A sample of uninfected bacteria (T0) was collected just prior to adding the purified phage p2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5. The infected culture was kept at 30°C and samples T10, T20 and T40 were collected 10, 20 and 40 minutes post-infection, respectively. All samples were centrifuged immediately and cell pellets were frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80°C. Time-course infections were done in biological triplicates. For protein extraction, samples were rapidly thawed and lysed in 50 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris)-HCl pH 8.0 containing 5% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) pH 8.0, 100 mM dithiothreitol, 10% (v/v) glycerol and bromophenol blue. Cells were disrupted with 0.1 mm glass beads and a homogenizer (5 cycles of 30 seconds at 6.5 m/s). Between each cycle, samples were placed on ice for 5 minutes. Glass beads were removed by centrifugation and subsequent pipetting of the homogenates. For GeLC-MS protein extracts were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE (12% polyacrylamide) and the gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. For each sample, ten gel bands were excised, destained and digested with trypsin. To recover the peptides, gel pieces were covered with ultra-pure water and incubated 15 minutes in an ultrasonic water bath. Just before MS analysis, the indexed retention time (iRT) standard kit (Biognosys, Switzerland) was prepared according to manufacturer’s instructions and was added to each sample in a 1:100 ratio. Tryptic peptides were separated by liquid chromatography (LC) using an EASY-nLC II system and measured online by ESI-mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Velos instrument. Peptides were loaded on a self-made analytical column (Aeris PEPTIDE 3.6 µm XB – C18 (phenomenex), OD 360 µm, ID 100 µm, length 20 cm) and eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5–55% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 100 minutes with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For MS analysis, a full scan in the Orbitrap (m/z 300-1,700) with a resolution of 60,000 was followed by CID MS/MS experiments of the twenty most abundant precursor ions acquired in the linear ion trap.  For Targeted MS three additional biological replicates of a time-course phage infection assay were performed as described above, except that samples were taken at 0 (uninfected culture), 5, 12, 15, 20, 30 and 40 min post-infection. Cell pellets were resuspended in TE-buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA) and disrupted similarly to GeLC-MS/MS samples (homogenization with glass beads). Protein concentration was determined for every sample using the Bradford assay. Synthetic peptides containing an isotopically labeled amino acid (Innovative Peptide Solutions) were used to optimize MS-parameters to achieve the highest sensitivity. For quantification, 20 µg of every biological replicate was prepared for in solution digest. For digestion with AspN, protein concentration was adjusted to 1 µg/µl using 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. For digestion with GluC, protein concentration was adjusted to the same concentration using 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0). All samples were reduced with 500 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 45 minutes at 65 °C and subsequently alkylated with 500 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 15 minutes at room temperature. Successively, the samples were spiked with the corresponding synthetic peptides and digested with either 0.5 µg AspN at 37°C overnight (16 hours) or with 0.4 µg GluC at 27°C for 8 hours. The digested samples were desalted via C18 columns (StageTip, Thermo) and mixed with iRT peptides (Biognosys) for retention time alignment according to the manufacture’s protocol, before being subjected to selected reaction monitoring (SRM) analysis in three technical replicates using a TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer. The selectivity for both Q1 and Q3 were set to 0.7 Da (FWHM). The instrument was operated in SRM mode applying a collision gas pressure of 1.2 mTorr in Q2. The collision energy was optimized before analysis. Sequences of quantified peptides and their optimized acquisition parameters are provided in the Supporting Information.

### Data Protocol
For GeLC-MS/MS, relative protein quantification was achieved using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.1.)and the Andromeda plug-in. The *.raw files were searched against a Lactocooccus lactis MG1363 and a lactococcal phage p2 database (downloaded from Uniprot on June 23rd, 2015) including one entry for iRT peptides (2,433 entries in total). For proteogenomics, phage p2 genome was translated to amino acid sequences using all 6 reading frames with the Geneious software (version 7.1.4). Peptide fragments with at least 33 amino acids were retained. MaxQuant’s generic contamination list was included during search. Database search was performed with following parameters: digestion mode, trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages; variable modification, methionine oxidation, and maximal number of 5 modifications per peptide; activated LFQ option with minimal ratio count of 2 and ‘match-between-runs’ feature. The false discovery rates of peptide spectrum match and protein were set to 0.01. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. The data from MaxQuant output files were filtered for contaminants, only identified by site and reverse hits with the Perseus software (v. 1.6.0.2), log2-tranformed, and used for statistical analysis. Proteins were accepted if at least two unique peptides could be identified in at least two of the three biological replicates (filtered in Perseus, version 1.6.0.2.). For classification and visualization purposes, all L. lactis MG1363 proteins were assigned a TIGRFAM functional role (TIGRRole). Voronoi treemaps were built to compare protein expression between samples. For targeted MS, data were analyzed using Skyline (most recent version on February 7th, 2017). Statistical analysis (ANOVA) was performed using TM4.

### Publication Abstract
Phages are viruses that specifically infect and eventually kill their bacterial hosts. Bacterial fermentation and biotechnology industries see them as enemies, however, they are also investigated as antibacterial agents for the treatment or prevention of bacterial infections in various sectors. They also play key ecological roles in all ecosystems. Despite decades of research some aspects of phage biology are still poorly understood. In this study, we used label-free quantitative proteomics to reveal the proteotypes of <i>Lactococcus lactis</i> MG1363 during infection by the virulent phage p2, a model for studying the biology of phages infecting Gram-positive bacteria. Our approach resulted in the high-confidence detection and quantification of 59% of the theoretical bacterial proteome, including 226 bacterial proteins detected only during phage infection and 6 proteins unique to uninfected bacteria. We also identified many bacterial proteins of differing abundance during the infection. Using this high-throughput proteomic datasets, we selected specific bacterial genes for inactivation using CRISPR-Cas9 to investigate their involvement in phage replication. One knockout mutant lacking gene <i>llmg_0219</i> showed resistance to phage p2 because of a deficiency in phage adsorption. Furthermore, we detected and quantified 78% of the theoretical phage proteome and identified many proteins of phage p2 that had not been previously detected. Among others, we uncovered a conserved small phage protein (pORFN1) coded by an unannotated gene. We also applied a targeted approach to achieve greater sensitivity and identify undetected phage proteins that were expected to be present. This allowed us to follow the fate of pORF46, a small phage protein of low abundance. In summary, this work offers a unique view of the virulent phages' takeover of bacterial cells and provides novel information on phage-host interactions.

### Keywords
Lactococcus lactis, Genome editing, Mass spectrometry-based proteomics, Label-free quantification, Phage infection

### Affiliations
Institut für Mikrobiologie Dept. Mikrobielle Proteomik Universität Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Becher
Institut für Mikrobiologie Dept. Mikrobielle Proteomik Universität Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8 17489 Greifswald


