### Accession
PXD029195

### Title
Integrative multi-omic profiling of adult mouse brain endothelial cells and potential implications in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Blood-brain barrier (BBB) critically regulate the homeostasis of central nervous system (CNS). This barrier property allows cerebral vessels to meet the extremely high metabolic demand of neural activities and meanwhile protect sensitive neurons from toxic plasma components, blood immune cells and xenobiotics. Therefore, a comprehensive inventory of the molecular determinants of BBB would substantially facilitate understanding of the pathogenesis of neurological disorders involving BBB dysfunction and promote development of novel CNS drug delivery strategies. Here, we established the proteome activity landscapes of adult mouse brain, lung and liver ECs. In this study, we produced a comprehensive molecular atlas of adult mouse BBB and revealed novel insights into adult BBB in health and Alzheimer’s disease.

### Sample Protocol
Brain ECs (~9 x 10^5), lung ECs (~1.5x10^6) and liver ECs (~5x10^5) were isolated from adult mice (n= 9-14). For all samples, lysis and digestion were conducted with pressure cycling technology (PCT). Briefly, 30 μL lysis buffer was added into the cell concrete of every sample (6M Urea, 2M thiourea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABB) pH ~8), then 5μL DNase was added and tubes were tight-capped. Lysis and digestion of the samples were performed with the Barocycler NEP2320EXT (Pressure BioSciences, Inc.) at 30°C. Lysis was conducted using the PCT-MicroPestle with 60 cycles consisting of 25 s at 45 kpsi followed by 10 s at atmospheric pressure. For reduction and alkylation, the buffer was diluted to 1.6 M urea with 100μL 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, before peptides were simultaneously reduced with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark at 25°C. The first digestion step was performed using Lys C (enzyme/protein ratio of 1:40; w/w), and was carried out in the Barocycler using 45 cycles of 50 s at 20 kpsi followed by 10 s at atmospheric pressure at 30 °C. For the second digestion, samples were diluted to 1 M urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested using Trypsin (estimated enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50; Promega) for 90 cycles at 30 °C consisting of 50 s at 20 kpsi followed by 10 s at atmospheric pressure. The digestion was quenched by acidifying samples to pH 2-3 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were desalted using C18-columns (The Nest Group Inc.) and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water, getting eluted with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile or 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water. The buffer was evaporated using vacuum centrifugation at 45 °C. Dried peptides were either dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile in water supplemented. NanoDrop 1000 was used for peptide quantification. Samples with iRT peptides (Biognosys, ThermoFisher) (Samples/iRT peptides ratio of 1:10, v/v) were identified by LC-MS/MS (EASY-nLC 1200, Q Exactive HF, ThermoFisher) after injection into the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS /MS identification was divided into two main steps. The first step was to establish the protein spectrum database by using the traditional DDA method. The second step was to collect the mass spectrum data of each sample by using DIA technology, and then carry out spectral matching, quantitative information extraction and subsequent statistical analysis based on the DDA database. DIA Raw data is processed by using Spectronaut software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Endothelial cell, Mouse, Lung, Liver, Dia-ms

### Affiliations
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Shilun Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Junlei Chang
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology,Chinese Academy of Sciences


