### Accession
PXD016317

### Title
Basic Strong Cation Exchange Chromatography, BaSCX, a Highly Efficient Approach for C-Terminomic Studies Using LysargiNase Digestion

### Description
Decoding protein C-termini is a challenging task in protein chemistry using conventional chemical/enzymatic approaches. With the rapid development in modern mass spectrometer, many advanced mass spectrometry (MS) based protein C-termini analysis approaches have been established. Although great progresses have been continually achieved, it is still nec-essary to develop more efficient approaches in order to discover a proteome-scale protein C-termini (C-terminome), and consequently to help understand their biological functions. In this report, we describe a simple method, termed BaSCX, for basic strong cation exchange chromatography, to study C-terminome.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation TIMING 3 h 1) Protein extraction. Firstly, collected cells are washed with PBS for three times. Then, cell lysate is applied by adding 20 volumes of lysis buffer (4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB, 10mM DTT) and sonicate for 20 min (2 s sonication with 5 s intervals). Lastly, centrifuge cell lysate (20,000 g, 20 min, 4 °C) and collect the supernatant. 2) Protein determination. Protein concentration is determined using Bradford assay. 3) Reduction and alkylation. Add 10 mM DTT and incubate at 37 °C for 45 min. Next, add 100 mM acrylamide and incubate at 25°C for 1 h. Protection at protein level TIMING 12h 4) Protein acetylation. Add 10 mM Ac-NHS and incubate at 25°C for 1h. To achieve more complete protection, add another 10mM Ac-NHS and incubate at 25°C for 1h. After acetylation, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.80) is added to quench the Ac-NHS. And then 100 mM NH2OH is added to reverse the undesired partial acetylation on Ser/Thr. 5) Buffer displacement. Transfer samples to Microcon PL-10 filter and centrifuge at 13,800 g 25 °C to cast away lysis buffer. With three times displacement, samples are now dissolved in carboxyl protection buffer (4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM MES and 2 M ethanolamine, pH 4.5).  6) Protein carboxyl protection. Add 50 mM NHS and 100 mM EDC to the filter and incubate at 25 °C for 2 h. To achieve more complete protection, another 100 mM EDC is added and incubate at 25 °C for another 2 h. Digestion TIMING 21-24 h 7) Buffer displacement. Centrifuge at 13,800 g 25 °C to cast away carboxyl protection buffer. 400 μL LysargiNase active buffer (50 mM HEPES and 10 mM CaCl2, pH 7.5) with 20% ACN and 400 μL LysargiNase active buffer are added in order and centrifuge at same condition. 8) LysargiNase digestion. LysargiNase should be activated by incubating in LysargiNase active buffer for 12-16 h at 20 °C before use. Activated LysargiNase was added at the ratio of enzyme: protein as 1: 25 and the digestion was carried out at 37 °C for 14 h. 9) Sample collection. Centrifuge at 13,800 g at 25 °C and collect the proteolytic peptides into new tubes. For better recovery of hydrophobic peptides, wash the filter with 20% ACN and collect the filtrates by centrifuging at 13,800 g. 10)  Removing ACN. Remove ACN with Speedvac. 11)  TEAB treatment. Add 500 mM TEAB and incubate at 37 °C for 12 h. Desalting TIMING 6 h 12) Acidification. Add TFA to acidify the samples. 13) Sample desalting. Strata C18-E solid phase extraction (SPE) sorbents (55 μm, 70 Å, 50mg/1mL, Phenomenex, USA) is used for desalting. Firstly, wash the column with ACN and equilibrate the column with 0.1% TFA. Next, load the acidic peptide and wash the column with 0.1% TFA. Lastly, 30% ACN and 60% ACN are used to elute peptides from columns successively, and the eluents are pooled together. 14) Sample drying. Dry the samples in Speedvac. The dried samples could be stored at -20 °C. BaSCX TIMING 6 h  15) Peptide re-dissolving. Before SCX-HPLC, peptide samples are redissolved in buffer A (2 mM ammonium phosphate, 30% ACN, pH 8.0). 16) BaSCX-HPLC. The mobile phase comprised buffer A (2 mM ammonium phosphate, 30% ACN, pH 8.0) and buffer B (2mM ammonium phosphate, 1 M NH4Cl, 30% ACN, pH 8.0). The gradient was: 0-10 min, 0% buffer B, 200 μL/min; 10 - 25 min, 0-50% buffer B, 200 μL/min; 25-30min, 50-100% buffer B, 200 μL/min; 30-35 min, 100% buffer B, 200 μL/min; 35-36min, 100-0% buffer B from, 300 μL/min; 36-50 min, 0% buffer B, 300 μL/min; 100 μg peptides are loaded each time. Collect fractions from 13 to 22 min. 17) Sample mixing. Take 80 μL out from each fraction and mix together, then dry the samples by Speedvac to remove ACN. Desalting TIMING 2h 18) Acidification. Add TFA to acidify the samples. 19) Sample desalting. Same method as above. 20) Reconstitute with 1% FA

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (ver-sion 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mas-cot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, U.K.).22 Human protein database (20160213, 20,186 sequences) was downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: Arg-N as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propio-namidation on cysteine, acetylation on lysine, ethanola-mine protection on aspartate and glutamate as fixed modi-fications; acetylation on protein N-terminus, ethanolamine protection on protein C-terminus, oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. For neo-C-termini search, acety-lation on peptide N-term, ethanolamine protection on pep-tide C-term and semiArg-N were used while other parame-ters remain unchanged. The incorporated Percolator in Pro-teome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were ac-cepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Decoding protein C-termini is a challenging task in protein chemistry using conventional chemical and enzymatic approaches. With the rapid development in modern mass spectrometer, many advanced mass spectrometry (MS)-based protein C-termini analysis approaches have been established. Although great progress is being continually achieved, it is still necessary to develop more efficient approaches in order to discover a proteome-scale protein C-termini (C-terminome) and consequently to help understand their biological functions. In this report, we describe the BaSCX method, for <u>ba</u>sic <u>s</u>trong <u>c</u>ation e<u>x</u>change chromatography, for C-terminome studies. Taking advantage of carboxylic amidation, LysargiNase digestion, and optimized search parameters, BaSCX enables identification of 1806 and 1812 database-annotated human protein C-termini from HeLa and 293T cells, resepctively, by triplicate experiments using 40 &#x3bc;g proteins each. Combined together, 2151 human protein C-termini, nearly three times the recently reported largest human C-terminome data set, are reported in this study. Similar results were acquired in different organisms, including mice, <i>C. elegans</i>, and tomatoes. Furthermore, we report for the first time the discovery of C-terminal-specific modifications using a proteomic approach, including three methyl-esterified protein C-termini and 16 &#x3b1;-amidated protein C-termini, demonstrating the excellent performance and great potential of BaSCX in C-terminomic studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016317.

### Keywords
C-terminomics / lysarginase / scx / bascx / mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Qingqing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


