### Accession
PXD037937

### Title
The effect of multiple phaJ deletions Pseudomonas putida KT2440 on polyhydroxyalkanoates synthesis (part2)

### Description
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is a well-known model organism for the medium chain length (mcl) PHA accumulation. (R)-Specific enoyl-coenzyme A hydratase (PhaJ) was considered to be the main supplier of monomers for PHA synthesis by converting the -oxidation intermediate, trans-2-enoyl-CoA to (R)-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA when fatty acids (FA) are used. Three PhaJ homologues, PhaJ1, PhaJ4 and MaoC are annotated in P. putida KT2440. To investigate the relationship of fatty acids - PHA metabolism and the role of each PhaJ in PHA biosynthesis in P. putida KT2440, a series of P. putida KT2440 knockouts was obtained.  PHA content and monomer composition in WT and mutants under different growth conditions were analysed.  However, when all three PhaJ homologues were deleted, the mutant still accumulated PHA up to 10.7 % of the cell dry weight (CDW). To identify other potential PHA monomer suppliers by analysing the proteome of the phaJ1maoCphaJ4. The deletion of (R)-3-hydroxydecanoyl-ACP:CoA transacylase (PhaG), which connects de novo FA and PHA synthesis pathways, while causing further 1.8-fold decrease in PHA content, did not abolish PHA accumulation. Further proteome analysis revealed quinoprotein alcohol dehydrogeanses PedE and PedH as potential monomer suppliers, but when these were deleted PHA level remained at 2.2 – 14.8 % CDW depending on the fatty acid used, and whether nitrogen limitation was applied. To identify the other non-specific dehydrogenases supply monomers for PHA synthesis, we analysed the proteome of the sextuple mutant under nitrogen limiting and non-limiting conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type P. putida KT2440 and phaJ1maoCphaJ4phaGpedHpedE deletion strains were grown in 50 ml of MSM medium with either glucose or sodium octanoate, under nutrient-excess, nitrogen-limited and phosphorus-limited conditions. Cell pellets were harvested from 50 ml of culture by centrifugation at 7800 xg, at 4C for 10 min at exponential growth phase and then lysed by 8 M urea solution. The samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. pH was adjusted to 7 with 200 mM NH4HCO3, and proteins were digested using proteomics grade trypsin. The pH of the solution was brought to 2.5 with formic acid, and peptides were purified using ZipTip C18 columns. The samples were loaded onto EvoTips and run on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) coupled to the EvoSep One system (EvoSep BioSystems, Odense, Denmark). The peptides were separated on a reversed-phase C18 Endurance column (15cm x 150μm ID, C18, 1.9 μm) using the preset 30 SPD method. Mobile phases were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (phase A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (phase B). The peptides were separated by an increasing gradient of mobile phase B for 44 minutes using a flow rate of 0.5 uL/min.   The timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity with TIMS  (Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry) and PASEF (Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation) modes enabled.  The accumulation and ramp times for the TIMS were both set to 100 ms., with an ion mobility (1/k0) range from 0.6 to 1.6 Vs/cm.  Spectra were recorded in the mass range from 100 to 1,700 m/z.  The precursor (MS) Intensity Threshold was set to 2,500 and the precursor Target Intensity set to 20,000.  Each PASEF cycle consisted of one MS ramp for precursor detection followed by 10 PASEF MS/MS ramps, with a total cycle time of 1.16 s.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were identified, and proteins were quantified using the Andromeda peptide identification algorithm integrated into MaxQuant (v2.1.4.0), searching against the UniProt database of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 ((taxonomy_id:160488) in UniProtKB search (5529) | UniProt). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was used to compare the expression level of proteins present in different samples.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is a well-known model organism for the medium-chain-length (mcl) polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) accumulation. (R)-Specific enoyl-coenzyme A hydratase (PhaJ) was considered to be the main supplier of monomers for PHA synthesis by converting the &#x3b2;-oxidation intermediate, trans-2-enoyl-CoA to (R)-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA when fatty acids (FA) are used. Three PhaJ homologues, PhaJ1, PhaJ4 and MaoC, are annotated in P. putida KT2440. To investigate the relationship of fatty acids-PHA metabolism and the role of each PhaJ in PHA biosynthesis in P. putida KT2440, a series of P. putida KT2440 knockouts was obtained. PHA content and monomer composition in wild type (WT) and mutants under different growth conditions were analysed. PhaJ4 was the main monomer supplier for PHA synthesis with FA as sole carbon and energy source, with preference towards C8 and C10 substrate, whereas PhaJ1 showed preference for the C6 substrate. However, when all three PhaJ homologues were deleted, the mutant still accumulated PHA up to 10.7% of the cell dry weight (CDW). The deletion of (R)-3-hydroxydecanoyl-ACP:CoA transacylase (PhaG), which connects de novo FA and PHA synthesis pathways, while causing a further 1.8-fold decrease in PHA content, did not abolish PHA accumulation. Further proteome analysis revealed quinoprotein alcohol dehydrogenases PedE and PedH as potential monomer suppliers, but when these were deleted, the PHA level remained at 2.2-14.8% CDW depending on the fatty acid used and whether nitrogen limitation was applied. Therefore, it is likely that some other non-specific dehydrogenases supply monomers for PHA synthesis, demonstrating the redundancy of PHA metabolism. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; &#x3b2;-oxidation intermediates are converted to PHA monomers by hydratases PhaJ1, PhaJ4 and MaoC in Pseudomonas putida KT2440. &#x2022; When these are deleted, the PHA level decreases, but it is not abolished. &#x2022; PHA non-specific enzyme(s) also contributes to PHA metabolism in KT2440.

### Keywords
De novo fatty acid synthesis, Enzyme redundancy, -oxidation pathway, Polyhydroxyalkanoate, Pseudomonas putida

### Affiliations
UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science
UCD Earth Institute and School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland BiOrbic - Bioeconomy Research centre, Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland

### Submitter
Si Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin E. O’Connor
UCD Earth Institute and School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland BiOrbic - Bioeconomy Research centre, Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland


