### Accession
PXD007949

### Title
MEERCAT: Multiplexed Efficient Cell Free Expression of Recombinant QconCATS for Large Scale Absolute Proteome Quantification C4PR_LIV

### Description
A major challenge in proteomics is the absolute accurate quantification of large numbers of proteins. QconCATs, artificial proteins that are concatenations of multiple standard peptides, are well established as an efficient means to generate standards for proteome quantification. Previously, QconCATs have been expressed in bacteria, but we now describe QconCAT expression in a robust, cell-free system. The new expression approach rescues QconCATs that previously were unable to be expressed in bacteria and can reduce the incidence of proteolytic damage to QconCATs. Moreover, it is possible to co-synthesise QconCATs in a highly-multiplexed translation reaction, co-expressing tens or hundreds of QconCATs simultaneously. By obviating bacterial culture and through the gain of high level multiplexing, it is now possible to generate tens of thousands of standard peptides in a matter of weeks, rendering absolute quantification of a complex proteome highly achievable in a reproducible, broadly deployable system.

### Sample Protocol
For cell-free synthesis of QconCATs, we used the WEPRO8240H kit from Cell Free Sciences, Matsuyama, Japan. In the wheat germ cell-free synthesis experiment, transcription and translation reactions are performed independently and the mRNA used for cell-free synthesis was prepared by in vitro transcription reaction using SP6 RNA polymerase for 6 h at 37 °C. Translation in vitro of heavy-labeled QconCAT proteins, using the bilayer method was for 20 h at 16 °C. In small-scale synthesis experiments, 200 μL substrate layer and 40 μL translation layer were prepared in a 96-well microplate. In large-scale co-synthesis experiments, translation in vitro was in a 6-well microplate (1 mL translation layer and 5 mL substrate layer) or a 12-well microplate (0.2 mL translation layer and 1 mL substrate layer). For high efficiency stable-isotope labeling, [13C6,15N4]Arg and [13C6,15N2]Lys were added to the translation layer (final concentration of 20 mM each). For global proteome analysis, the protein concentration of all samples for data directed acquisition (DDA) was determined using a NanoDrop™ spectrophotometer. All samples were diluted appropriately in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate for each digest volume of 50 μL to contain 25μg protein. Samples were treated with RapiGest™ at 80°C for 10minutes and proteins were reduced with 3mM DTT at 60°C for 10m, alkylated with 9mM IAA at room temperature in the dark and digested with a 50:1 ratio to Trypsin Gold (Promega). Digestion was overnight at 37°C. The resulting digest was acidified with 1% (v/v) final concentration of trifluoroacetic acid for 45min followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 30min. Peptides were analysed on a Thermo QExactive HF using a one hour gradient.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were processed using Progenesis (ver 3.0) and searched using Mascot (ver 2.6) against a database containing the 75 QconCAT sequences included in the synthesis with fixed acrylamide modification of cysteine residues, variable Met oxidation, and for labelled samples, labelling with [13C6,15181N4]Arg and [13C6,15182N2]Lys. Label free quantitative values were obtained from MS1 signal intensities summed for all unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
A major challenge in proteomics is the absolute accurate quantification of large numbers of proteins. QconCATs, artificial proteins that are concatenations of multiple standard peptides, are well established as an efficient means to generate standards for proteome quantification. Previously, QconCATs have been expressed in bacteria, but we now describe QconCAT expression in a robust, cell-free system. The new expression approach rescues QconCATs that previously were unable to be expressed in bacteria and can reduce the incidence of proteolytic damage to QconCATs. Moreover, it is possible to cosynthesize QconCATs in a highly-multiplexed translation reaction, coexpressing tens or hundreds of QconCATs simultaneously. By obviating bacterial culture and through the gain of high level multiplexing, it is now possible to generate tens of thousands of standard peptides in a matter of weeks, rendering absolute quantification of a complex proteome highly achievable in a reproducible, broadly deployable system.

### Keywords
Qconcat meercat

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Biosciences Building, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZB

### Submitter
Victoria Harman

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Jeffrey Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, Biosciences Building, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZB


