### Accession
PXD022926

### Title
Nano-LC-MS/MS proteomics in amniotic fluid from CAKUT patients

### Description
The objective of the present work was to identify new renal proteins responsible for Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney and of the Urinary Tract (CAKUT pathophysiology). We conducted a comparative LC-MS/MS-based proteomics analysis of amniotic fluids (AF)  collected from non-severe CAKUT (ns-CAKUT; n=19), severe CAKUT (s-CAKUT; n=14), and healthy controls (cont; n=22) fetuses. We identified a total of 224 gestational age independent proteins that were significantly different in abundance when comparing (one-way ANOVA corrected p<0.05) the 3 groups of amniotic fluids 2 by 2. We identified 8 gestational-age independent proteins that were in common when comparing the 3 groups two by two, and that were considered as associated to both CAKUT onset and CAKUT severity.

### Sample Protocol
An AF aliquot containing 0.6mg of proteins was depleted of the two most abundant proteins using the PureProteome album/IgG Depletion Kit according to instructions from the supplier (Millipore). Then, protein concentration was measured using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFischer Scientific). 50 µg of protein from the depleted samples were air-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and then reconstituted in 1× final Laemmli buffer containing 25 mM dithiothreitol and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Cysteines were alkylated for 30 min at room temperature by the addition of a solution of 75 mM chloroacetamid. Proteins were loaded onto a 12% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and concentrated in a single band visualized by Coomassie staining (Instant Blue - Expedeon). The gel band containing the whole sample was cut and washed several times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate:acetonitrile (1:1) for 15 min at 37 °C. Proteins were in-gel-digested using 0.6 μg of modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel by two incubations in 10% formic acid:acetonitrile (1:1) for 15 min at 37 °C. The extracted fractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant and dried under speed-vaccum. The resulting peptides were resuspended with 25 µL in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Detection and quantification of the proteins present in AF were conducted as follows. Raw nanoLC-MS/MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and for quantitative analysis. Data were searched against “Human” entries in the Swiss-Prot protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase release 2016_09; 552259 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the precursor ion. It was set for fragment ions to 0.8 Da in CID mode and to 20 mmu in HCD mode. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and minimum number of unique peptides was set to 1. Andromeda results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at both a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 3 min to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs.  To perform relative quantification between proteins identified in different biological conditions, we used the LFQ metric from the MaxQuant “proteinGroup.txt” output file (reflecting a normalized protein quantity deduced from all peptides intensity values). Protein entries identified as potential contaminants were eliminated from the analysis. Only the proteins which were present (intensity values retrieved by MaxQuant) in at least 50% of the AF samples in one group were considered for further processing and statistical analysis. Missing values were then replaced by a constant noise value determined independently for each analytical run as the abundance of the first percentile of the total protein population. The mean proportion of missing values over the whole analytic run was 30 %.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital anomalies of the kidney and the urinary tract (CAKUT) are the first cause of chronic kidney disease in childhood. Several genetic and environmental origins are associated with CAKUT, but most pathogenic pathways remain elusive. Considering the amniotic fluid (AF) composition as a proxy for fetal kidney development, we analyzed the AF proteome from non-severe CAKUT (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;19), severe CAKUT (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;14), and healthy control (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;22) fetuses using LC-MS/MS. We identified 471 significant proteins that discriminated the three AF groups with 81% precision. Among them, eight proteins independent of gestational age (CSPG4, LMAN2, ENDOD1, ANGPTL2, PRSS8, NGFR, ROBO4, PLS3) were associated with both the presence and the severity of CAKUT. Among those, five were part of a protein-protein interaction network involving proteins previously identified as being potentially associated with CAKUT. The actin-bundling protein PLS3 (plastin 3) was the only protein displaying a gradually increased AF abundance from control, via non-severe, to severe CAKUT. Immunohistochemistry experiments showed that PLS3 was expressed in the human fetal as well as in both the fetal and the postnatal mouse kidney. In zebrafish embryos, depletion of PLS3 led to a general disruption of embryonic growth including reduced pronephros development. In postnatal Pls3-knockout mice, kidneys were macroscopically normal, but the glomerular ultrastructure showed thickening of the basement membrane and fusion of podocyte foot processes. These structural changes were associated with albuminuria and decreased expression of podocyte markers including Wilms' tumor-1 protein, nephrin, and podocalyxin. In conclusion, we provide the first map of the CAKUT AF proteome that will serve as a reference for future studies. Among the proteins strongly associated with CAKUT, PLS3 did surprisingly not specifically affect nephrogenesis but was found as a new contributor in the maintenance of normal kidney function, at least in part through the control of glomerular integrity. &#xa9; 2021 The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

### Keywords
Cakut, Amniotic fluid, Proteomics, Chronic kidney disease, Plastin-3

### Affiliations
CNRS
I2MC Inserm U1048 - Toulouse

### Submitter
Mylène CAMUS

### Lab Head
Dr Joost-Peter Schanstra
I2MC Inserm U1048 - Toulouse


