### Accession
PXD029852

### Title
Mouse Bladder LC-MS after bladder wall injection with Schistosoma haematobium eggs

### Description
Urogenital schistosomiasis (caused by Schistosoma haematobium) remains a major public health concern worldwide. In response to parasite egg deposition, the host bladder undergoes gross and molecular morphological changes relevant for disease manifestation. However, limited mechanistic studies to date imply that the molecular mechanisms underlying pathology have not been well-defined. We leveraged a mouse model of urogenital schistosomiasis to perform for the first time, proteome profiling of the early molecular events that occur in the bladder after exposure to S. haematobium eggs, and to elucidate the protein pathways involved in urogenital schistosomiasis-induced pathology. Purified S. haematobium eggs or control vehicle were microinjected into the bladder walls of mice. Mice were sacrificed seven days post-injection and bladder proteins isolated and processed for proteome profiling using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse bladder tissue samples were suspended in lysis buffer for homogenization and supersonication. Protein content was measured through BCA protein assay. Sample protein content was then normalized across all samples. Precisely 150μg o fprotein content from each sample was digested.The samples were reduced and alkylated using Dithiothreitol (DTT) and Iodoacetamide (IAM). The alkylated samples were then quenched with DTT and digested with Trypsin/LysC. Digested samples were quenched b y10% TFA. Samples were then cleaned up by C18 stage-tip. Samples were dried by SpeedVac. Samples were reconstituted with 100mM HEPES, pH8.5, and TMT labelled at room temperature for 1 hour. Approximately 1% of sample from each channel were mixed, dried down, stage-tipped and injected into the mass spec for label check. Once the TMT label check was finished, the label reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. All channels were mixed and fractionated using offline HPLC.  The 12 Fractions were dried down, stage-tipped and loaded on instrument with MS2-based TMT method.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Because all peptides were labeled with TMT tags, TMT quantitative proteomics searches were performed.  All searches were performed in Sequest HT node with mass tolerance of 20 ppm MS and 0.05 Da for MS The Mus Musculus Mouse reference proteome (Uniprot, Proteome ID UP000000589) was searched.

### Publication Abstract
Urogenital schistosomiasis remains a major public health concern worldwide. In response to egg deposition, the host bladder undergoes gross and molecular morphological changes relevant for disease manifestation. However, limited mechanistic studies to date imply that the molecular mechanisms underlying pathology are not well-defined. We leveraged a mouse model of urogenital schistosomiasis to perform for the first time, proteome profiling of the early molecular events that occur in the bladder after exposure to S. haematobium eggs, and to elucidate the protein pathways involved in urogenital schistosomiasis-induced pathology. Purified S. haematobium eggs or control vehicle were microinjected into the bladder walls of mice. Mice were sacrificed seven days post-injection and bladder proteins isolated and processed for proteome profiling using mass spectrometry. We demonstrate that biological processes including carcinogenesis, immune and inflammatory responses, increased protein translation or turnover, oxidative stress responses, reduced cell adhesion and epithelial barrier integrity, and increased glucose metabolism were significantly enriched in S. haematobium infection. S. haematobium egg deposition in the bladder results in significant changes in proteins and pathways that play a role in pathology. Our findings highlight the potential bladder protein indicators for host-parasite interplay and provide new insights into the complex dynamics of pathology and characteristic bladder tissue changes in urogenital schistosomiasis. The findings will be relevant for development of improved interventions for disease control.

### Keywords
Urogenital schistosomiasis, Bladder; bladder wall injection; mice; proteomics; schistosoma haematobium; schistosomiasis

### Affiliations
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Sheikh Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation, Children’s National Hospital, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America.  Departments of Urology, Department of Pediatrics, and Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, The George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America
Children’s National Hospital

### Submitter
Derick Osakunor

### Lab Head
Dr Michael H. Hsieh
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Sheikh Zayed Institute for Pediatric Surgical Innovation, Children’s National Hospital, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America.  Departments of Urology, Department of Pediatrics, and Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Tropical Medicine, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, The George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia, United States of America


### SDRF
- organism: mus musculus
- organism part: bladder
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: schistosomiasis
- label: TMT126, TMT127N, TMT127C, TMT128N, TMT128C, TMT129N, TMT129C, TMT130N, TMT130C, TMT131
- instrument: orbitrap eclipse

