### Accession
PXD006342

### Title
Mouse CSF Analyses of middle cerebral ischemic/reperfusion (CI/R) injury followed by Buyang Huanwu Decoction

### Description
Ischemic stroke is one of the most common causes of death worldwide and a major cause of acquired disability in adults. Buyang Huanwu decoction (BHD), a traditional Chinese medicine prescription, has long been used clinically for neurological recovery after stroke. Its molecular characteristics and related biomarkers for the therapeutic effect in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are yet to be explored. In this project, CSF was obtained from acute ischemic stroke induced mice by a middle cerebral ischemic/reperfusion (CI/R) injury. Proteomic and metabolomic analyses of CSF were performed using LC-MS/MS to define the neuroprotective effect of BHD and the related biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
CSF collection was performed as followed. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized by ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg), administered intraperitoneally. During the time of anesthesia induction, the mice were kept in a 37-degree incubator. The anesthetized mice were placed horizontally, and their cisterna magna were surgically exposed. The opened meninges were stabbed with laboratory-produced capillary tube that had a tapered tip and CSF samples were collected. For proteomic analyses, Sample preparation for proteomic and LC-MS/MS metabolomic profilings, highly abundant proteins in CSF were immunodepleted using Seppro Mouse Spin Columns. The immunodepleted CSF samples were digested and fractionated as followed. In brief, the proteins were resuspended in a digestion buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide), heated at 95°C for 5 min, and digested by trypsin at a protein/trypsin ratio (w/w) of 50:1 at 37°C for overnight. The digested peptides were desalted by SDB-RPS membrane (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA), and eluted into three fractions. The fractionated peptides were analyzed using the LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), which is on-line coupled with Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification were done by MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8, Martinsried, Germany) against the SWISS-PROT sequence database (version 2014_11 with 16,697 mouse sequence entries). The false discovery rate for both peptide and protein identifications were fixed at 1%. Label-free quantitation information were also calculated by MaxLFQ algorithm, which was part of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemic stroke is one of the most common causes of death worldwide and is a major cause of acquired disability in adults. However, there is still a need for an effective drug for its treatment. Buyang Huanwu decoction (BHD), a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) prescription, has long been used clinically to aid neurological recovery after stroke. To establish potential clinical indicators of BHD efficacy in stroke treatment and prognosis, we conducted a combined proteomic and metabolomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples in a mouse stroke model. CSF samples were obtained from male mice with acute ischemic stroke induced by middle cerebral ischemic/reperfusion (CI/R) injury, some of which were then treated with BHD. Label-free quantitative proteomics was conducted using nano-LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap mass and metabolomic analysis was performed using nanoprobe NMR and UHPLC-QTOF-MS. The results showed that several proteins and metabolites were present at significantly different concentrations in the CSF samples from mice with CI/R alone and those treated with BHD. These belonged to pathways related to energy demand, inflammatory signaling, cytoskeletal regulation, Wnt signaling, and neuroprotection against neurodegenerative diseases. In conclusion, our in silico data suggest that BHD treatment is not only protective but can also ameliorate defects in pathways affected by neurological disorders. These data shed light on the mechanism whereby BHD may be effective in the treatment and prevention of stroke-related neurodegenerative disease.

### Keywords
Buyang huanwu decoction, Mouse csf, Chinese herb medicine, Ischemic stroke

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University
Fu Jen Catholic University

### Submitter
Wei-Chi Ku

### Lab Head
Dr Wei-Chi Ku
School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University


