### Accession
PXD015040

### Title
Mouse connective tissue mast cell proteome

### Description
Mast cells are hematopoietic cells that reside preferentially in tissues exposed to internal and external environments. Mast cells sense immunological, inflammatory and environmental stimuli, and can be activated to release granules and generate inflammatory mediators. Mast cell-derived products confer protection against snake venoms and some parasite infections. Aberrant activation of mast cells is a major contributor to human pathology, including allergy, asthma and adverse drug reactions. Their strict tissue location has largely impeded the isolation of large numbers of primary mast cell for further analysis. To better understand the biology of mast cells, we analyzed the proteome of primary mouse mast cells by quantitative mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of mouse cells, sorted peritoneal mast cells as well as total peritoneal exudate cells (PEC) from C57BL/6 Cpa3+/+ and Cpa3Cre/+ mice were centrifuged and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed in 0.1% RapiGest (Waters, Milford, USA) and 50 mM (NH4)HCO3, extracted proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM DTT and 10 mM iodoacetamide. After precipitation with TCA and washing with acetone proteins were digested overnight with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA). Peptides were labelled differentially with stable isotope dimethyl labels on a column as described previously. The light and heavy labels were swapped between the two technical replicates. Labelled peptides were mixed 1:1:1 (i. e. equally from the three samples) according to cell number (50.000 cells per sample), and separated by offline high pH reverse phase fractionation over a 90-minute gradient on a C18 column (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany) with an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. Thirty-two fractions were collected and subsequently pooled into 10 fractions. Pooled peptide fractions were separated with the nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, Milford, USA) fitted with a trapping column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18). Peptides were separated on a 120-minute gradient and were analyzed by electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) on a linear trap quadrupole Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Full-scan spectra from a mass/charge ratio of 300 to 1,700 at a resolution of 30.000 full width at half maximum were acquired in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer. From each full-scan spectrum, the 15 ions with the highest intensity were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap. A lock-mass correction with a background ion (mass/charge ratio, 445.12003) was applied. Technical replicate a labellingc - Cpa3 cre/+ PEC Heavy, Cpa3 +/+ sorted MC Light, Cpa3 +/+ PEC Medium. Technical replicate b labelling - Cpa3 cre/+ PEC Light, Cpa3 +/+ sorted MC Heavy, Cpa3 +/+ PEC Medium

### Data Protocol
MS raw files of other human blood cell types published previously21 were re-analyzed with MaxQuant software. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database. N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at NQ, and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was selected as trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. Peptide identifications were matched across all samples within a time window of 1 min of the aligned retention times. Protein identification required at least 1 'razor peptide' in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peritoneal mast cell, Mouse, Mast cell

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, Germany
German Cancer Reseach Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Thomas Plum

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Reimer Rodewald
Department of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, Germany


