### Accession
PXD002476

### Title
Arabidopsis chloroplast N-terminome

### Description
Protein N-termini are prone to post translational modification and are major determinants of protein stability in bacteria, eukaryotes, and perhaps also in chloroplasts. Most chloroplast proteins undergo N-terminal maturation, but this is poorly understood due to insufficient experimental information and the N-termini of mature chloroplast proteins cannot be accurately predicted. This motivated an extensive characterization of chloroplast protein N-termini using terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS). Many nuclear-encoded plastid proteins accumulated with two or three different N-termini; we evaluated the significance of these different proteoforms. Ala, Val, Thr (often in N-α acetylated form) and Ser were the most frequently observed N-terminal residues, even after normalization for their frequency in the plastid proteome, while other residues were absent or highly under-represented. Plastid-encoded proteins showed a similar distribution of N-terminal residues, but with a higher frequency of Met. Infrequent residues such as Ile, Arg, Cys, Pro, Asp and Glu were observed for several abundant proteins likely reflecting functional regulation through their N-termini. In contrast, the thylakoid lumenal proteome showed a wide diversity of N-terminal residues, including those typically associated with instability (Asp, Glu, Leu, Phe). We propose that after cleavage of the chloroplast transit peptide by stromal processing peptidase, additional processing by unidentified peptidases occurs to avoid unstable or otherwise unfavorable N-terminal residues. The possibility of a chloroplast N-end rule is discussed. This work provides a baseline for understanding N-terminal processing and maturation of chloroplast proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The soluble proteome was extracted from purified Arabidopsis chloroplasts or from whole leaves. The TAILS method for enrichment of N-terminal peptides was performed (Kleifeld 2011 Nat. Protocols). Briefly, intact proteins were dimethyl labeled by reductive amination and digested with trypsin and or GluC. Protein N-termini were purified by crosslinking internal peptides to hyper-branched polyglycerol aldehyde polymer, which was subsequently removed by ultrafiltration. N-terminal peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (mgf files) were generated from Thermo raw data files using DTA Supercharge and searched using MASCOT 2.4.1 against TAIR10, appended with all reverse sequences (Decoy) and common contaminants (71,149 sequences and 29,099,754 residues). Following an initial database search performed at 30 ppm MS tolerance, 0.8 Da MSMS tolerance, the peak list was then recalibrated as previously described using an in house script. A semi-specific enzyme search was then conducted - semiArgC, semiGluC (V8), or semi(ArgC and GluC) - allowing for two missed cleavages, 4 ppm MS tolerance and 0.8 Da MSMS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carboxamidomethyl Cys and dimethyl Lys; variable modifications were oxidized Met, pyroGlu Gln N-term, acetyl N-term and dimethyl N-term (light, +28 Da or heavy, +32 Da). Each MASCOT result (MS/MS ion search) was filtered, P < 0.01, minimum ion score 30. The spectra were then exported and sorted to remove any contaminant peaks such as trypsin and keratin and to ensure the number of reverse hits gave an FDR of < 1% with FDR =  2* FP/(FP + TP). Identified peptides from all database searches were combined and all peptides without an N-terminal label removed leaving only those with either dimethyl, acetyl or pyroGlu Gln N-terminus.

### Publication Abstract
Protein amino (N) termini are prone to modifications and are major determinants of protein stability in bacteria, eukaryotes, and perhaps also in chloroplasts. Most chloroplast proteins undergo N-terminal maturation, but this is poorly understood due to insufficient experimental information. Consequently, N termini of mature chloroplast proteins cannot be accurately predicted. This motivated an extensive characterization of chloroplast protein N termini in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) using terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates and mass spectrometry, generating nearly 14,000 tandem mass spectrometry spectra matching to protein N termini. Many nucleus-encoded plastid proteins accumulated with two or three different N termini; we evaluated the significance of these different proteoforms. Alanine, valine, threonine (often in N-&#x3b1;-acetylated form), and serine were by far the most observed N-terminal residues, even after normalization for their frequency in the plastid proteome, while other residues were absent or highly underrepresented. Plastid-encoded proteins showed a comparable distribution of N-terminal residues, but with a higher frequency of methionine. Infrequent residues (e.g. isoleucine, arginine, cysteine, proline, aspartate, and glutamate) were observed for several abundant proteins (e.g. heat shock proteins 70 and 90, Rubisco large subunit, and ferredoxin-glutamate synthase), likely reflecting functional regulation through their N termini. In contrast, the thylakoid lumenal proteome showed a wide diversity of N-terminal residues, including those typically associated with instability (aspartate, glutamate, leucine, and phenylalanine). We propose that, after cleavage of the chloroplast transit peptide by stromal processing peptidase, additional processing by unidentified peptidases occurs to avoid unstable or otherwise unfavorable N-terminal residues. The possibility of a chloroplast N-end rule is discussed.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Chloroplast protein import, N-terminome, Chloroplast transit peptide, Proteolysis, Protein processing, Tails, Protein maturation

### Affiliations
Dept. Plant Biology Cornell University
Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Elden Rowland

### Lab Head
Dr Klaas van Wijk
Dept. Plant Biology Cornell University


