### Accession
PXD007673

### Title
Chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry for systems structural biology in mouse heart tissue.

### Description
While modern structural biology technologies have greatly expanded the size and type of protein complexes that can now be studied, the ability to derive large-scale structural information on proteins and complexes as they exist within tissues is practically non-existent.  Many protein properties and their involvement in disease pathways are not replicated in cell culture and some complexes are not amenable to purification.  Thus, the lack of tissue-level structural information limits molecular-level insight on diseases such as heart failure.  Here we demonstrate the application of XL-MS to identify protein structural features and interactions in tissue samples, providing the first systems structural biology insight on protein complexes as they exist in the mouse heart.

### Sample Protocol
Hearts were exciesed from four mice, minced into 1 cubic mm pieces and subjected to chemical cross-linking with 10 mM final concentration of the Protein Interaction Reporter (PIR) cross-linker BDP-NHP.  After 30 min reaction at room temp, the tissue was pelleted and the reaction supernatant was removed. Two hearts were processed for full tissue protein extraction by cryogenic grinding, while the other two were subjected to subcellular fractionation to enrich the mitochondria.  Protein was extracted from all samples using 8 M urea and ultrasonication to homogenize the samples.  A small fraction of protein (100 ug) was subjected to avidin affinity enrichement to identify putative cross-linked proteins and form a stage 1 database used for later identification of cross-linked peptide pairs. Protein was reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin. Cross-linked peptide pairs were enriched by strong cation exchange chromatography followed by avidin affinity enrichment. Standard data dependant LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q-Excative Plus instrument with an Easy-nLC for the stage 1 database sample. Samples containing enriched cross-linked peptides were analyzed using a Velos-FTICR mass spectrometer coupled with a Waters nano-Acquity. The instrument was operated using ReACT, a realtime adaptive method to selectively target PIR cross-linked peptide pairs. Ions with a charge state of 4 or greater are subjected to high resolution MS2. An on the fly check for the PIR mass relationship (mass precursor = mass peptide 1 + mass peptide 2 + mass reporter ion) is performed. If statisfied within 20 ppm mass error the released peptides are sequentially analyzed by MS3 to obtain their primary sequence information.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were converted to mzXML using tools in the TPP. Comet was used for database searching.  Data from the Q-Exactive instument was searched against the complete mouse protein database containing both forward and reverse protein sequences (33,670 total sequences) and filtered to less than 1% FDR (reverse/forward) at the peptide spectrum match level. This resulted in 2063 non-redundant protein sequences used to generate a stage 1 database for searching the data from the enriched cross-linked pepitde pair samples. Comet was used to search the MS3 data against a database containing forward and reverse sequences for the 2063 proteins. PSMs were matched back to the PIR relationships identified during the MS2 scans. Each cross-linked peptide pair was assigned the highest (worst) E-value of the two peptides.  A maximum E-value cutoff of 0.2 was applied resulting in a PSM level FDR of 0.75%.

### Publication Abstract
While modern structural biology technologies have greatly expanded the size and type of protein complexes that can now be studied, the ability to derive large-scale structural information on proteins and complexes as they exist within tissues is practically nonexistent. Here, we demonstrate the application of crosslinking mass spectrometry to identify protein structural features and interactions in tissue samples, providing systems structural biology insight into protein complexes as they exist in the mouse heart. This includes insights into multiple conformational states of sarcomere proteins, as well as interactions among OXPHOS complexes indicative of supercomplex assembly. The extension of crosslinking mass spectrometry analysis into the realm of tissues opens the door to increasing our understanding of protein structures and interactions within the context of the greater biological system.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Cross-linking, Mass spectrometry, Structural biology, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Genome Sciences, University of Washington, USA

### Submitter
Juan Chavez

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
Genome Sciences, University of Washington, USA


