### Accession
PXD025331

### Title
Proteomic profile of Pinus pinaster roots under ammonium nutrition

### Description
Ammonium nutrition was studied at short times (24 hours) in roots from one month-old seedlings of maritime pine. Control seedlings were irrigated with 80 mL of water (C) and the experimental seedlings with 80 mL of 3 mM NH4Cl. Root samples were collected at 24 hours post-irrigation and immediately frozen in liquid N. This experiment was carried out three independent times.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The proteins were extracted following the protocol described by González Fernández et al. (2014 Plant Proteomics: Methods and Protocols, 2nd Edition, 1072, 93). The extractions were carried out with 200 mg of sample. Protein content was determined using a commercially kit (Protein Assay Dye Reagent; Bio-Rad, CA, USA) and bovine serum albumin as a standard (Bradford, 1976, Analytical Biochemistry, 72, 248). Protein extracts were cleaned-up in 1D SDS-PAGE at 10% polyacrilamyde as described in Valledor & Weckwerth (2014, Plant Proteomics: Methods and Protocols, 2nd Edition, 1072, 347). Samples were loaded onto the stacking gel and 80 V was applied until the electrophoresis front reached the resolving gel. The run was stopped when the protein extract had entered 1 cm into the resolving gel and the gel was stained with Commasie Blue. Protein bands were cut off, diced and kept in water at 4ºC until digestion.  Protein digestion Protein digestion were carried out in the Proteomics Facility at Research Support Central Service, University of Cordoba. Briefly, gel dices were distained in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB)/50% acetonitrile for 15 min followed by 5 min in 100 % Acetonitrile. Protein was reduced by addition of 20 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM AB and incubated for 20 min at 55 °C. The mixture was cooled down to room temperature, followed by alkylation of free thiols by addition of 40 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM AB, in the dark for 20 min and the gel pieces were then washed twice in 25 mM AB. Proteolytic digestion was performed by addition of Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 12.5 ng/µL of enzyme in 25 mM AB and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. Protein digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid at 1% final concentration and the digested samples were finally Speedvac dried.  nLC-MS2 analysis Protein analysis were carried out in the Proteomics Facility at Research Support Central Service, University of Cordoba. Nano-LC was performed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific) with a C18 75 μm x 50 Acclaim Pepmam column (Thermo Scientific). The peptide mix was previously loaded on a 300 μm x 5 mm Acclaim Pepmap precolumn (Thermo Scientific) in 2% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA for 5 min at 5µL/min. Peptide separation was performed at 40°C for all runs. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water, 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of 20% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were separated at 300 nL/min. Elution conditions were: 4-35%B for 60 min; 35-55% B for 3 min; 55-90% B for 3 min followed by 8 min wash at 90% B and a 12 min re-equilibration at 4%B. Total time of chromatography was 85 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by nano electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Da with the quadrupole, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The AGC ion count target was set to 2 x 103 and the max injection time was 300 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–5 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top 30 mode with 3 s cycles, meaning the instrument would continuously perform MS2 events until a maximum of top 30 non-excluded precursors or 3s, whichever is shorter.

### Data Protocol
Protein database creation for identification method The root transcriptome from Pinus pinaster (https://fmp.uma.es/sequenceserver/) was translated into the six open reading frames with transeq tool (Madeira et al., 2019, Nucleic Acids Research, 47, 636). The output peptides chains were filtered by length, deleting those less than 50 amino acids (Romero-Rodríguez et al., 2014, Journal of Proteomics,105, 85). To reduce the redundancy of proteins in the database, CD-HIT-EST with a 99% identity filter was used (Fu et al., 2012, Bioinformatics, 28, 3150).  Protein identification and relative quantification The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3, Thermo Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched with SEQUEST engine against Pinus pinaster proteome reference database. In silico peptide lists were created using the followings settings: reagent used for protein digestion was trypsin, a maximum of two missed internal cleavage sites per peptide, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.75 Da per fragment ions. Only peptides with a high confidence (FDR ≤ 0.01) and minimum XCorr of 2 were selected. The identified proteins were filtered by a minimum of two different peptides. Minora algorithm was used to determine relative quantification. This algorithm detects and quantify isotopic clusters using LC/MS peaks in each data set, regardless of whether they are associated with a peptide spectral matches (PSMs). The protein identification with redundancy is considered by Proteome Discoverer software. Proteins sharing peptides were grouped and all those groups without a unique peptide were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Epitranscriptome constitutes a gene expression checkpoint in all living organisms. Nitrogen is an essential element for plant growth and development that influences gene expression at different levels such as epigenome, transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome. Therefore, our hypothesis is that changes in the epitranscriptome may regulate nitrogen metabolism. In this study, epitranscriptomic modifications caused by ammonium nutrition were monitored in maritime pine roots using Oxford Nanopore Technology. Transcriptomic responses mainly affected transcripts involved in nitrogen and carbon metabolism, defense, hormone synthesis/signaling, and translation. Global detection of epitranscriptomic marks was performed to evaluate this posttranscriptional mechanism in un/treated seedlings. Increased N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) deposition in the 3'-UTR was observed in response to ammonium, which seems to be correlated with poly(A) lengths and changes in the relative abundance of the corresponding proteins. The results showed that m<sup>6</sup>A deposition and its dynamics seem to be important regulators of translation under ammonium nutrition. These findings suggest that protein translation is finely regulated through epitranscriptomic marks likely by changes in mRNA poly(A) length, transcript abundance and ribosome protein composition. An integration of multiomics data suggests that the epitranscriptome modulates responses to nutritional, developmental and environmental changes through buffering, filtering, and focusing the final products of gene expression.

### Keywords
Pinus pinaster, Nitrogen nutrition, Ammonium, Roots

### Affiliations
University of Malaga
University of Malaga, Molecular Biology department, BIO-114

### Submitter
César Lobato

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael A. Cañas
University of Malaga, Molecular Biology department, BIO-114


