### Accession
PXD045169

### Title
Minimization of proteome reallocation explains metabolic shift in response to hierarchical utilization of mixed carbon sources

### Description
Protein expression levels were measured at different stages of the fermentation process

### Sample Protocol
Cells in the fermentation broth were collected and washed three times with phosphate buffer saline for subsequent protein extraction. Sample lysis and protein extraction were performed using SDT (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.6) buffer, and the protein was quantified using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). Protein digestion was performed with trypsin following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. The digested peptides from each sample were subsequently desalted (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma) and concentrated. The protein for each sample were quantified by SDS-PAGE. 100 μg peptide mixture for each sample was labeled using TMT reagent according to the instructions (Thermo Scientific). The labeled peptides were separated by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) to obtain 10 different fractions, the collected fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges and concentrated.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with the Easy nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper C18) and separated on the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin). The separation was achieved using buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS/MS analysis was performed using the data-dependent top10 method for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation by selecting the most abundant precursor ion (300-1800 m/z) in the measurement scan. The MS raw data was subjected to identification and quantitative analysis using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolic shift, Proteome allocation

### Affiliations
East China University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Zhihao Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhihao Liu
East China University of Science and Technology


