### Accession
PXD031266

### Title
Isolation and determination of PI(4,5)P2 proximal proteins

### Description
We screened proteins in close proximity to PI(4,5)P2 in epithelial cells. We established HaCaT cells stably expressing APEX2 N-terminally fused to the PH domain of PLCd1, which specifically binds to PI(4,5)P2. In the presence of hydrogen peroxide and biotin-phenol, proteins proximal to APEX2 are biotinylated by APEX2, allowing for their enrichment using streptavidin beads. APEX2-fused non-PI(4,5) P2-binding mutant of the PH domain of PLCd1 (R40L) was used as the negative control.

### Sample Protocol
HaCaT cells expressing APEX2-fused wild-type and mutated (R40L) PH domain of PLCd1 were labeled with light and heavy isotope amino acids, respectively, using the SILAC Protein Quantitation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were grown in DMEM containing either unlabeled l-arginine and l-lysine (Arg0, Lys0) (light) or l-[13C6,15N4]-arginine and l-[13C6,15N2]-lysine (Arg10 and Lys8) (heavy) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin, and 10% dialyzed FBS. Cells were grown in SILAC medium for at least seven cell doublings. Labeled cells were incubated with 0.5 mM biotin-phenol (Iris Biotech GmbH, Marktredewitz, Germany) in SILAC medium for 30 min at 37 °C. Then, H2O2 was added to the cells at a final concentration of 1 mM for 1 min at room temperature, after which the cells were washed twice with the quencher solution (10 mM sodium ascorbate, 10 mM sodium azide, and 5 mM Trolox in PBS), twice with PBS, and once more with the quencher solution. The cells were then collected and lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer. Three independent biotinylation experiments using APEX2-fused PH domain- and R40L mutant-expressing HaCaT cells were performed. Then, the same amount of three light samples and three heavy samples were mixed and used for the isolation of biotinylated proteins with streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The biotinylated proteins were then eluted by boiling the beads in a 3× protein loading buffer21 supplemented with 2 mM biotin and 20 mM dithiothreitol for 10 min. The biotinylated proteins were separated on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the MES buffer system. The gel was stained with Coomassie and excised into ten equally sized segments. Gel segments were processed using ProGest robot (DigiLab, Hopkinton, MA, USA) according to the following protocol. First, the gel segments were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C, followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature. Then, the segments were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C for 4 h and subsequently quenched with formic acid. The supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing using nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced with a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded onto a trapping column and eluted over a 75-mm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 and 17,500 full width at half maximum resolution, respectively. The 15 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant software 1.6.2.3 (www.maxquant.org), which served the following functions:. recalibration of the MS data, filtering of database search results at 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR), and calculation of SILAC heavy:light ratios. Data were searched using a local copy of Andromeda with the following parameters: enzyme, trypsin; database, Swissprot Human (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants); fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), 13C6/15N2 (K), and 13C6/15N4 (R); and fragment mass tolerance, 20 ppm. Pertinent MaxQuant settings were as follows: peptide FDR, 0.01; protein FDR, 0.01; minimum peptide length, 7; minimum unique peptides, 0; minimum ratio count, 2; re-quantify, TRUE; and second peptide, TRUE.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
5)p2 plcd1 ph, Silac pi(4

### Affiliations
Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba, Japan.
Tokyo University of Science

### Submitter
Yoshikazu Nakamura

### Lab Head
Dr Yoshikazu nakamura
Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba, Japan.


