### Accession
PXD007577

### Title
The Polycomb group protein CBX6 is an essential regulator of embryonic stem cell identity

### Description
Polycomb group proteins are transcriptional repressors that control cell identity and development. In mammals, at least five different CBX proteins are believed to associate with the core Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1). CBX6 and CBX7 are the most highly expressed CBX proteins in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), yet little is known about the function of CBX6 in these cells. Here we show that CBX6 is an essential regulator of ESC identity, since ablation of CBX6 function destabilizes the pluripotency network and triggers differentiation. At the molecular level, CBX6 is linked to the canonical PRC1 (cPRC1) complex; however, contrary to expectations, our results indicate that CBX6 also has a non-canonical PRC1 function. Taken together, our findings reveal that CBX6 is an essential component for ESC biology and contributes to the structural and functional complexity of the PRC1 complex.

### Sample Protocol
Cryomilled material from empty control cells or CBX6(3)FLAG cells was produced as described previously. Briefly, cells cultured as described above were harvested by scraping, washed in PBS, and the resulting wet cell pellet was dripped into liquid nitrogen producing frozen pellets. The pellets were then subjected to cryomilling in a Retsch PM-100: 3 milling cycles of 3 min each (reverse rotation, 1 min interval, no break time) at 400 RPM. The milling jar was cooled with liquid nitrogen between cycles. The resulting powder was collected and stored at -80°C. Cell powder (900 mg) was used for protein extraction in each replicate; experiments were performed in triplicate for both sample and control. Extraction was performed with 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 400 mM NaCl and 0.5% v/v Triton X-100. Samples were briefly sonicated to improve protein extraction from chromatin (25  2 sec, 1 Amp pulses, with 1 sec pause between pulses). After sonication, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 RCF at 4°C for 10 min. Supernatants were combined with 27 µl of anti-FLAG beads slurry for 30 min at 4°C. Beads were eluted with 20 µl of 1 LDS at 70°C for 5 min with mixing. Gel plugs were processed essentially as previously described. Briefly, prior to loading on the gel, samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide, gel plugs were cut into ~1 mm cubes for processing. Samples were destained with several washes of 50% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 ̊C with shaking. Destained gel pieces were dehydrated by washing with 100 μl ACN, and placed in a speed-vac for ~10’ at RT. Trypsin working solution was added and gel pieces were allowed to swell on ice and then were incubated at 37 ̊C to undergo tryptic proteolysis. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each tube (2% w/v final concentration), and incubated 5 min at RT.  The supernatant was recovered and transferred to a 0.5 ml microfuge tube (tryptic digest supernatant). 50 μl 0.1% w/v TFA was added to the gel pieces, which were extracted a further 45 min at RT with shaking. The supernatants were removed and pooled with the appropriate tryptic digest supernatant. Pooled extracted peptides were desalted using reversed-phase OMIX tips (Agilent P/N A57003100) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were eluted from the tips first with 100 µl of 40% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% HAc (E1) and then with 100 µl of 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% HAc (E2). E1 and E2 were combined, frozen in liquid nitrogen and dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  For MS analysis, dried peptide samples were resuspended in 10 µl of 5% methanol, 0.2% formic acid. Mass spectra were recorded on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database searching and label-free quantitation were performed by MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 using the UP000000589 mouse database30. The match between run feature was disabled, and intensities were based on maximum peak height. The ‘proteingroups.txt’ file was uploaded to Perseus 1.5.3.0, and protein identifications from the decoy database were removed. LFQ intensities were logarithmized. Control experiments were grouped together, as were CBX6-3FLAG pull-down experiments. Proteins were filtered, with the constraint that at least one group (CBX6 or control) should contain at least three valid values. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution. A two-sample Student’s t-test was performed with an arbitrary fold change of ≥2 required for significance and a permutation-based FDR = 0.05 used for truncation.

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb group proteins (PcG) are transcriptional repressors that control cell identity and development. In mammals, five different CBX proteins associate with the core Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1). In mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), CBX6 and CBX7 are the most highly expressed CBX family members. CBX7 has been recently characterized, but little is known regarding the function of CBX6. Here, we show that CBX6 is essential for ESC identity. Its depletion destabilizes the pluripotency network and triggers differentiation. Mechanistically, we find that CBX6 is physically and functionally associated to both canonical PRC1 (cPRC1) and non-canonical PRC1 (ncPRC1) complexes. Notably, in contrast to CBX7, CBX6 is recruited to chromatin independently of H3K27me3. Taken together, our findings reveal that CBX6 is an essential component of ESC biology that contributes to the structural and functional complexity of the PRC1 complex.

### Keywords
Cbx6, Mouse, Esc, Affinity capture followed by ms, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
CRG
Epigenetic Events in Cancer (L. Di Croce's lab) Gene Regulation, Stem Cells and Cancer Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) C/ Dr. Aiguader, 88 08003 Barcelona Spain

### Submitter
Enrique Blanco

### Lab Head
Dr Luciano Di Croce
Epigenetic Events in Cancer (L. Di Croce's lab) Gene Regulation, Stem Cells and Cancer Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) C/ Dr. Aiguader, 88 08003 Barcelona Spain


