### Accession
PXD033298

### Title
Human Matrix Kidney Stones Proteome

### Description
Protein composition of human kidney matrix stones by nano-LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation. Matrix kidney stones were mixed with dry ice and ground in a ceramic mortar with a marble pestle. 200 mg of the resulting stone powder were incubated in 4 mL of extraction buffer (4M guanidine HCl, 0.5 M EDTA, 65 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4), for 48h at 4 °C after sonicated three times for 10 secs. Insoluble material was subsequently removed by centrifugation at 15,000  g at 4°C for 15 min. Protein extract were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis using a modified version of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol1. Specifically, kidney stone extracts were concentrated using Vivaspin filter units (molecular weight cut-off: 10,000 Da; Sartorius) by centrifugation (14,000  g at 4°C) for 45 min. Retentates were washes with extraction buffer and resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide for alkylation of free thiols. After 20 min incubation, proteins were washed with ABC buffer and retentates reconstituted in 100 L of ABC buffer in new microcentrifuge tubes. Total protein concentrations were quantified using the Micro BCA Assay (Pierce). Equivalents of 80 g of protein were diluted in ABC buffer to a final volume of 80 L. Protein samples were digested overnight at 37°C with 1 g of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in ABC buffer with an additional bolus (1 g) of trypsin added in the morning. Samples were incubated for an additional 2 h to cleave remaining undigested proteins. Protein digests were transferred into new Vivaspin filter units and centrifuged for 30 min at 12,000  g. To release trapped peptides 100 L ABC buffer was added to filter units before centrifuging again for 30 min at 12,000  g. Filtrates from respective samples were combined and acidified to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Acidified digests were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction using 100 L C18 Tips (Pierce) according to specifications provided by the manufacturer. Peptides were released from the C18 resin with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, evaporated to dryness in a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf) and resuspended in 25 uL 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. To rigorously remove nonpeptide contaminants, samples were subjected to an additional purification using SDB-RPS StageTips combining isopropanol washes and basic pH elution (20% NH4OH, 40% acetonitrile)2. Eluates were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in MS loading buffer (0.3% TFA, 2% acetonitrile). Insoluble compounds were removed by centrifugation prior to analysis by nanoflow-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS).  LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS in data-dependent acquisitions mode was performed on an Easy-nLC system hyphenated to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer interacted with an EasySpray ESI source (all Thermo Scientific). For the analyses, 5L of tryptically digested protein extracts were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 mm x 2 cm) column and separated on an ES900 Easy-Spray C18 analytical column (75 mm x 150 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at 45°C and the ion source at 275°C with a voltage 1800 V in positive ionization mode. Mobile phase solution A was composed of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and mobile phase solution B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. After 2 min at 2% solvent B, analytes were sepa¬rated by a linear gradient up to 35% solvent B over 120 min. The column was subsequentially washed for 30 min at 2% and 98% solvent B using a saw-tooth gradient. Peptides were measured with a resolution of 120,000 in DDA mode in the scan range m/ z 350–1500 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3.0 × 105 ion counts and an injection time of 250 ms. The MS/MS analyses were carried out by selecting the 20 most abundant precursor ions (intensity ≥ 2.5 × 104 ions) in the quadrupole mass analyzer over a 1.6 Da m/z isolation window and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30. Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at 15,000 resolution with an AGC target setting of 5 × 104 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously analyzed pre¬ cursor ions and isotopes was 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification, quantitation. Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using the PEAKS Studio XPro software suite (Bioinformatics Solutions) using the Homo sapiens UniProt (Nov 2020) and HOMD3 (Jan 2022) databases. Raw data were processed using the following specifications: merge scans (retention time window: 10 ppm, precursor m/z tolerance: 10 ppm, pre- cursor mass and charge states z = 1-10). Other data pre-processing (centroiding, deisotoping, and deconvolution) was executed automatically. The following search parameters were used: precursor mass error tolerance 10 ppm; fragment ion mass error tolerance 0.02 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity with cleavage prior to proline permitted; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications: phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, pyro-glu (Q), HexNAcylation (N), deamidation (NQ); semi-specific cleavage, maximal two missed cleavages, maximal two variable posttranslational modifications per peptide. The false discovery rate for peptide identifications was controlled using the decoy-fusion method. FDR of 1% were applied at the peptide spectrum and protein match level and only protein hits with two identified peptides were retained for further analysis. For the relative quantitation of proteins, the peak areas of the top 3 most abundant unique peptides were employed.

### Publication Abstract
Matrix stones are a rare form of kidney stones. They feature a high percentage of hydrogel-like organic matter, and their formation is closely associated with urinary tract infections. Herein, comprehensive materials and biochemical approaches were taken to map the organic-inorganic interface and gather insights into the host-microbe interplay in pathological renal biomineralization. Surgically extracted soft and slimy matrix stones were examined using micro-X-ray computed tomography and various microspectroscopy techniques. Higher-mineral-density laminae were positive for calcium-bound Alizarin red. Lower-mineral-density laminae revealed periodic acid-Schiff-positive organic filamentous networks of varied thickness. These organic filamentous networks, which featured a high polysaccharide content, were enriched with zinc, carbon, and sulfur elements. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) along with immune response-related proteins, including calprotectin, myeloperoxidase, CD63, and CD86, also were identified in the filamentous networks. Expressions of NETs and upregulation of polysaccharide-rich mucin secretion are proposed as a part of the host immune defense to "trap" pathogens. These host-microbe derived organic matrices can facilitate heterogeneous nucleation and precipitation of inorganic particulates, resulting in macroscale aggregates known as "matrix stones". These insights into the plausible aggregation of constituents through host-microbe interplay underscore the unique "double-edged sword" effect of the host immune response to pathogens and the resulting renal biominerals.

### Keywords
Human, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Kidney stone

### Affiliations
The Forsyth Institute
FORSYTH INSTITUTE

### Submitter
Markus Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hardt
The Forsyth Institute


