### Accession
PXD013844

### Title
Identification of covalent SUMO1 aceptor lysines

### Description
SUMO1 modified proteins were identified in a site specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
HT1080 cells expressing or not HIS-SUMO1-AllKR-Q92R were treated as previously described (Hendriks et al., 2014). In Brief, cells were washed three times on the dish with ice-cold PBS before being scraped and collected. Subsequently, the cell pellets were lysed in ten pellet volumes of guanidine lysis buffer (6 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM sodium phosphate, and 10 mM Tris, buffered at pH 8.0) and sonicated. Next, lysates were supplemented by addition of imidazole to 50 mM and β-mercaptoethanol to 5 mM. 20 μL (dry volume) of pre-washed in lysis buffer Ni-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen) were added per 1 mL lysate and incubated overnight at 4°C under rotation. Next, beads were washed for at least 15 min with at least five bead volumes of the following wash buffers in order: wash buffer 1 (6 M guanidine-HCl, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 100 mM sodium phosphate, and 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0), wash buffer 2 (8 M urea, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, pH 8.0), wash buffer 3 (8 M urea, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, pH 6.3), wash buffer 4 (8 M urea, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 100 mM sodium phosphate, 10 mM Tris, pH 6.3), and wash buffer 5 (same as wash buffer 4). Subsequently, all wash buffer was removed from the beads, and proteins were eluted for 30 min with one bead volume of elution buffer (7 M urea, 500 mM imidazole, 100 mM sodium phosphate, and 10 mM Tris, buffered at pH 7.0). The elution procedure was repeated another two times, and all eluates were pooled and passed through 0.45-μM filters (Ultrafree, Millipore). Finally, samples were concentrated over 100 kDa–cutoff filters (Vivacon 500, Sartorius Stedim) at 20 °C and at 8,000 r.c.f. until <10–50 μL of sample remained.  After concentration, the proteins remaining on the filters were washed once with 250 μL of elution buffer minus imidazole and reconcentrated. Final concentrated SUMOylated proteins were removed from the filters and sequencing-grade endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) was added to the samples in a 1:25 enzyme/protein ratio and incubated for 4 h at room temperature, still and in the dark. Subsequently, another 10 mM of fresh β-mercaptoethanol was added to the samples, and this was followed by an additional amount of Lys-C equal to the first amount. The second incubation was performed overnight, at room temperature, still and in the dark. Next, digests were transferred to 15-mL tubes and diluted with an amount of guanidine lysis buffer equal to half the amount used to lyse the initial cell pellet. The samples were then supplemented with addition of imidazole to 50 mM and β-mercaptoethanol to 5 mM. Next, 40 μL (dry volume) Ni-NTA agarose beads (Qiagen) were prepared per 1 mL sample. The equilibrated beads were added to the lysates and allowed to tumble at 4 °C for 5 h and washes and elutions were repeated as in the first purification. Next, samples were concentrated on 10 kDa–cutoff spin filters (Vivacon 500, Sartorius Stedim) at 20 °C and at 14,000 r.c.f. Concentration was performed until <10–25 μL of sample remained. After concentration, the proteins remaining on the filters were washed twice with 250 μL of elution buffer minus imidazole and reconcentrated. Final concentrated SUMOylated peptides were removed from the filters. SUMO1ylated peptides were supplemented with ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to 50 mM from a 1M stock. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 1mM, and incubated 30 min at room temperature, followed by 5mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min at room temperature, and 5mM extra DTT 30 min room temperature. Next sample was diluted 4 fold with 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate and an amount of sequencing-grade modified trypsin (V5111, Promega) was added equal to 25% of the Lys-C initially used in a single digestion step. Digestion withwas performed overnight, at room temperature, still and in the dark.  Mass spectrometry chromatographythe gradient length was 125 min with a top-5 method and a scan range of 300-1750 m/z. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 × 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 × 105 and with a resolution of 17,500, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The minimum AGC target was 2x102. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20 and 250 ms, respectively. Technical triplicates were made.

### Data Protocol
All RAW data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) according to (Tyanova et al., 2016a). We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens canonical only. We used standard settings with the following modifications. , digestion with Trypsin/P, allowing 4 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term), EQTGG (K) and Phospho (ST) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 5. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was disabled. All peptides were used for protein quantification. All tables were written.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to our extensive knowledge on covalent small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) target proteins, we are limited in our understanding of non-covalent SUMO-binding proteins. We identify interactors of different SUMO isoforms-monomeric SUMO1, monomeric SUMO2, or linear trimeric SUMO2 chains-using a mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach. We identify 379 proteins that bind to different SUMO isoforms, mainly in a preferential manner. Interestingly, XRCC4 is the only DNA repair protein in our screen with a preference for SUMO2 trimers over mono-SUMO2, as well as the only protein in our screen that belongs to the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) DNA double-strand break repair pathway. A SUMO interaction motif (SIM) in XRCC4 regulates its recruitment to sites of DNA damage and phosphorylation of S320 by DNA-PKcs. Our data highlight the importance of non-covalent and covalent sumoylation for DNA double-strand break repair via the NHEJ pathway and provide a resource of SUMO isoform interactors.

### Keywords
Sumo, Sumo1, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands


