### Accession
PXD013809

### Title
Dynamic rewiring of the human interactome by interferon signalling

### Description
The type I interferon (IFN) response protects cells against viral pathogens by inducing the transcription of hundreds of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Transcriptomic and biochemical approaches have established comprehensive catalogues of ISGs across species and cell types, but their antiviral mechanisms remain incompletely characterized. Here, we apply a combination of quantitative proteomic approaches to map IFN-induced rearrangements in the human protein-protein interaction network. Specifically, we analyzed the IFN-induced changes to the HeLa cell proteome with shotgun mass spectrometry. As well, we assessed the IFN-induced interactome with protein correlation profiling coupled to size exclusion chromatography and SILAC. Finally, we utilized label-free quantitative mass spectrometry for affinity purification mass spectrometry of candidate proteins and to analyze the ribosomal protein composition.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun: 1E7 cells were harvested from control (light), 4 h IFNβ stimulation (medium), and 24 h IFNβ stimulation (heavy). Cells were lysed in Lysis Buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8) and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 16,000 x g. at 4°C and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentrations were then measured via BCA assay. 100 µg of protein from each sample (L, M, & H) were combined and subjected to acetone precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in a 6 M/2 M urea/thiourea mixture. Samples were reduced and alkylated by adding 6 µg of DTT and 15 µg of iodoacetamide and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 30 min and 20 min, respectively. 3 µg of LysC was added to each sample and incubated for 3 h at room temperature. Subsequently, samples were diluted with 4 volumes of Digestion Buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3) and 2 µg trypsin (Promega) was added. Samples were incubated shaking overnight at room temperature. The resulting peptide supernatant was acidified to pH < 2.5 and purified using C18 StageTips (ref). StageTips were conditioned with methanol and equilibrated with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; loading buffer). Peptide supernatants were loaded onto the columns and washed with 2 bed volumes of Buffer A (0.5% formic acid). Peptides were eluted with Buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.5% formic acid), dried down. Peptides from each biological replicate were then subjected to high pH reverse-phase (RP) fractionation on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system with an Agilent Zorbax Extend column (1.0×50 mm, 3.5 µm particles, flow rate of 50 µL/min). Dried peptides were resuspended in RP Buffer A (5 mM NH4HCO2, 2% MeCN, pH 10), injected, and eluted from the column over a 1 h gradient: 0-5 min 6% RP Buffer B (5 mM NH4HCO2, 90% MeCN); 5-7 min 8% RP Buffer B; 7-45 min 27% RP Buffer B; 45-49 min 31% RP Buffer B; 49-53 min 39% RP Buffer B; 53-60 min 60% RP Buffer B. The column was washed by running 100% RP Buffer B for 5 min. Fractions were collected every 40s for 60 min. Every 8th fraction was concatenated, dried, and resuspended in Buffer A for LC-MSMS. PCP-SEC-SILAC: Cell lysis and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) were performed as previously described ref), with minor modifications. Briefly, after 24 h treatment with IFNβ cells were harvested by centrifugation at 200 x g. for 5 min at 4°C and washed 3 times with ice-cold 1× PBS. Cells of the same SILAC label were pooled and resuspended in 3 mL of ice-cold SEC buffer [50 mM KCl, 50 mM NaCH3COO, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.2, containing 1× EDTA-free HALT protease & phosphatase inhibitor cocktail]. Cells were lysed via Dounce homogenization for 2.5 min and insoluble material was removed by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Subsequently, the supernatants were concentrated over a 100 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin column. Equal amounts of protein from heavy-labeled and medium-labeled lysates were combined and immediately injected into a chromatography systems with two 300 × 7.8 mm BioSep4000 Columns (Phenomenex) equilibrated with SEC buffer. Samples were collected into 80 fractions by an Agilent 1200 Series analytical HPLC at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min at 8°C. To avoid aggregated proteins and monomers, only fractions 6-65 were submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis and utilized for PCP. The light-labeled SILAC lysates consisted of unstimulated and IFN-stimulated cells to serve as an internal standard. These samples were independently separated by SEC from the medium/heavy samples. To generate the light reference mixture, fractions 6-65 were pooled and spiked equally into each of the corresponding medium/heavy fractions at a volume of 1:0.75 (medium:heavy to light). A urea/thiourea mix was added to protein fractions to create a final concentration of 6 M/2 M urea/thiourea. Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested, and STAGE tipped as done with the shotgun samples. IP-MS: Control and IFN-stimulated HeLa were harvested at 200 x g for 5 min at 4°C then washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS. Cells were then lysed via Dounce homogenization in SEC buffer followed by centrifugation at 100,000 x g. Supernatants were concentrated over a 100 kDa molecular weight cutoff spin column. Protein concentration was determined by NanoDrop. 250 µg of protein from control or IFN-stimulated samples was diluted to 500 µL in SEC buffer and incubated with the desired antibody or IgG as a control overnight at 4°C. Antibody concentrations were used as follows: mouse anti-IFI35 (1:50; Santa Cruz - sc-100769), rabbit anti-NMI (1:50; AbCam - ab183724), mouse anti-STAT1 (1:50; AbCam - ab3987), and mouse anti-PNPT1 (2 µg; Santa Cruz - ab-271479). Protein A/G Magnetic beads (25 µL; Thermo Fisher) pre-washed with SEC buffer were added to the samples and incubated 1 h at room temperature. Beads were washed 3 times with 20× bed volume of SEC buffer. Samples were then subjected to an on-bead in-solution trypsin digestion. Peptides were purified by STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2014; Tyanova et al., 2014). The data were searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt database (UniProt Consortium, 2018). For shotgun SILAC experiments, the following parameters were used: peptide mass accuracy, 20 parts per million (ppm) for first search, 10 ppm for second search; trypsin enzyme specificity, fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, deamidation (NQ), and N-acetylation (protein N-terminus); and all other parameters as preset. For SEC-PCP-SILAC experiments, the following parameters were used: peptide mass accuracy, 10 ppm; fragment mass accuracy, 0.05 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl; variable modifications, methionine oxidation, deamidation (NQ), and N-acetylation (protein N-terminus). For shotgun SILAC and SEC-PCP-SILAC experiments, both the requantify and match between runs options were enabled. For SEC-PCP-SILAC experiments, SILAC labels with a minimum ratio count of one were included. For immunoprecipitation experiments, label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled, with a minimum ratio count of two. For analysis of purified ribosome composition, LFQ was enabled with a minimum ratio count of one, due to the small size of ribosomal proteins. Only those peptides exceeding the individually calculated 99% confidence limit (as opposed to the average limit for the whole experiment) were considered as accurately identified. In all analyses, contaminants and reverse hits were removed using Perseus version 1.6.1.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein correlation profiling, Interferon stimulated gene, Interactome, Proteomics, Innate immunity, Interferon, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard J. Foster
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, Canada


