### Accession
PXD023430

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of virulent and   less virulent strains of Rhizoctonia solani

### Description
Comparative proteomics analysis of a virulent and  a less virulent strains of Rhizoctonia   solani was carried out using LC-MS/MS (Label free quantitation).

### Sample Protocol
Rhizoctonia solani strains were cultured in Potato dextrose Agar media. Mycelium were collected and proteins was extracted  using RSB buffer  in a 5 ml centrifuge tube. It was further diluted with 50mM Tris Buffer + PIC + PMSF and the samples were centrifuged at 14000rpm. The supernatant obtained was collected into a separate tube (Tris Buffer extract). Then the pellet was mixed with urea lysis buffer was added and centrifuged and the resultant supernatant was mixed with the tris buffer and used for proteomic profiling.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography was performed on a ACQUITY UPLC system (Waters, UK ). The separation of all samples was performed on ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column(Waters,UK)(150mm X 2.1mm X 1.7µm).A gradient elution program was run for the chromatographic separation with mobile phase A (0.1% Formic Acid in WATER), and mobile phase B(0.1% formic Acid in ACETONITRILE). A SYNAPT G2 QTOF (Waters, UK ) equipped with an electrospray ionization (ESI) source was used for mass spectrometric detection. Sample analysis were performed in positive mode. The raw data acquired from the instrument was processed using PLGS software 3.0.2 within which Data Processing and Database search was performed. The runs of the sample was processed using the following search parameters in the software: Peptide tolerance (ppm) : 50; Fragment Tolerance (ppm): 100; Min no. of Fragment matches for Peptides : 2; Min no. of Fragment matches for Proteins : 5; Min no. of Peptide matches for Proteins : 2; Missed Cleavages: 1; Modification: Carbamidomethyl_c, Oxidation_m

### Publication Abstract
Sheath blight of rice is a destructive disease that could be calamitous to rice cultivation. The significant objective of this study is to contemplate the proteomic analysis of the high virulent and less virulent isolate of <i>Rhizoctonia solani</i> using a quantitative LC-MS/MS-based proteomic approach to identify the differentially expressed proteins promoting higher virulence. Across several rice-growing regions in Odisha, Eastern India, 58 <i>Rhizoctonia</i> isolates were obtained. All the isolates varied in their pathogenicity. The isolate RS15 was found to be the most virulent and RS22 was identified as the least virulent. The PCR amplification confirmed that the RS15 and RS22 belonged to the <i>Rhizoctonia</i> subgroup of AG1-IA with a specific primer. The proteomic information generated has been deposited in the PRIDE database with PXD023430. The virulent isolate consisted of 48 differentially abundant proteins, out of which 27 proteins had higher abundance, while 21 proteins had lower abundance. The analyzed proteins acquired functionality in fungal development, sporulation, morphology, pathogenicity, detoxification, antifungal activity, essential metabolism and transcriptional activities, protein biosynthesis, glycolysis, phosphorylation and catalytic activities in fungi. A Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to validate changes in differentially expressed proteins at the mRNA level for selected genes. The abundances of proteins and transcripts were positively correlated. This study provides the role of the proteome in the pathogenicity of <i>R. solani</i> AG1-IA in rice and underpins the mechanism behind the pathogen's virulence in causing sheath blight disease.

### Keywords
Virulence, Rhizoctonia solani

### Affiliations
ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Crop Protection Division
ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack-753006

### Submitter
SR Prabhukarthikeyan

### Lab Head
Dr Prabhukarthikeyan SR
ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack-753006


