### Accession
PXD025626

### Title
Critical functions of FAM134 family members in endoplasmic reticulum remodeling, ER-phagy and collagen quality control

### Description
Degradation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) by selective autophagy (ER-phagy) is vital for cellular homeostasis. Here, we introduce FAM134A/RETREG2 and FAM134C/RETREG3 as new ER-phagy receptors. FAM134A and FAM134C exist in a relatively inactive state under basal conditions and require an activation signal to induce significant ER fragmentation. Molecular modeling and simulations implicate a single compact fold of FAM134A’s reticulon homology domain (RHD). In contrast, the RHDs of FAM134B and FAM134C are able to adopt at least three discrete conformations. These differences result in slower vesicle formation for FAM134A compared to FAM134C and mostly FAM134B. Global proteomic analyses of knockout MEFs indicate both distinct and overlapping roles for the Fam134s, with Fam134a being most distant from Fam134b and Fam134c. Fam134c appears to enhance and facilitate Fam134b’s role in maintaining pro-collagen-I levels and is therefore insufficient to compensate for its loss. By contrast, Fam134a has a particular mode of action in maintaining pro-collagen-I levels and is able to fully compensate loss of Fam134b or Fam134c upon over-expression in its wild-type or LIR mutant form.

### Sample Protocol
All the experiments have been performed in a labeling free setting. Proteins were precipitate in acetone and then reduced and alkylated in a solution of 6M Guanidine-HCl, 5mM TCEP, and 55mM chloroacetamide. Peptides were obtained digesting proteins with LysC (WAKO) for 3h at 37°C and with the endopeptidase sequencing-grade Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Collected peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique (Rappsilber, Ishihama et al., 2003). Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer (Michalski, Damoc et al., 2011). Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a PicoFrit column, 75m ID, 8Um tip, 250mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9m particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size (New Objective, Inc., cat. PF7508-250H363), using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Runs of 120 min after loading were used for proteome samples, with a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. After sample loading, run start at 5% buffer B for 5min, followed by a series of linear gradients, from 5% to 30% B in 90min, then a 10 min step to reach 50% and a 5 min step to reach 95%. This last step was maintained for 10 min. Q Exactive HF settings: MS spectra were acquired using 3E6 as an AGC target, a maximal injection time of 20ms and a 120,000 resolution at 200m/z. The mass spectrometer operated in a data dependent Top20 mode with sub sequent acquisition of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most intense peaks. Resolution, for MS/MS spectra, was set to 15,000 at 200m/z, AGC target to 1E5, max injection time to 20ms and the isolation window to 1.6Th. The intensity threshold was set at 2.0 E4 and Dynamic exclusion at 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt Human database (v. 2019) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while oxidations at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 1 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. The LFQ Ratios were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min. valid number (min. 3 in at least one group). Missing values have been replaced by random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. Significantly up-or-downregulated proteins between the three conditions were determined by ANOVA (FDR 0.05)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Retreg, Collagen, Er-phagy, U2os., Fam134, Endoplasmic reticulum, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy.
TIGEM

### Submitter
carmine cirillo

### Lab Head
Dr Paolo Grumati
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy.


