### Accession
PXD000795

### Title
Identification of full length Hsp90 from Giardia lamblia cell lysate

### Description
In the present study using mass-spectrometry we identify the sequence of the unique, junctional peptide contributed by the 5’ UTR of HspC ORF in the full length Hsp90 from Giardia lamblia. This peptide is critical for the catalytic function of Hsp90 as it harbours an essential “Arg” homolog in its sequence. We also show that full length GlHsp90 possesses all the functional hall marks of a canonical Hsp90 including its ability to bind and hydrolyze ATP.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digested peptide mixtures were dissolved in 25 µl of 98% water, 2% Acetonitrile and 0.5% Formic acid solution and injected into Nano-LC (C18 reverse phase column - Michrom C18 5 µ 300 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column using gradient of acetonitrile (2% - 95%) which was further connected to the Nano Spray ESI- QTOF system (Qstar Elite, Applied Biosystems). A gradient was set up for 60 minutes with a flow rate of 400 nL/minute. Eluted peptides were ionized using ESI source with ion spray voltage of 2250 V and temperature of 120°C. Ionized peptides were analyzed by one full MS scan and four consecutive product ion scans of the four most intense peaks, using rolling collision energy. An Information Dependant Acquisition (IDA) experiment was used to specify the criteria for selecting each parent ion for fragmentation which included selection of ions in m/z range: >400 and <1600, of charge state of +2 to +5, exclusion of former target ions for 30 seconds, accumulation time of 1 second for a full scan and 2 seconds for MS/MS. The data generated by the Analyst software was stored in a .wiff format. (adopted from Acharya P et al., 2011)

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Protein Pilot version 4.0 software against Giardia database (www.giadiadb.org). To identify junctional peptide the generated peak were searched against database in which we have manually incorporated the full length sequence (GeneBank ID:  BAJ33526.1). Search parameters: Two missed cleavages were permitted. Modification of cysteine by idoacetamide and biological modifications programmed in the software were allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor ion and fragment ions were set to 100 ppm and 0.2 Da respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Giardia lamblia, Molecular chaperones, Trans-splicing, Junctional peptide, Atpase activity

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560 012 India
Dept. of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Utpal  Tatu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Utpal Tatu
Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore - 560 012 India


