### Accession
PXD014055

### Title
Improving identification of in-organello protein-protein interactions using an affinity-enrichable, isotopically-coded, and mass spectrometry-cleavable chemical crosslinker

### Description
An experimental and computational approach for identification of protein-protein interactions by in-vivo chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry (CLMS) has been developed that takes advantage of the specific characteristics of cyanurbiotindipropionylsuccinimide (CBDPS), an affinity-tagged isotopically-coded mass spectrometry (MS)-cleavable crosslinking reagent.  Utilizing this reagent in combination with a crosslinker-specific data-dependent acquisition strategy based on MS2 scans, and a software pipeline designed for integrating crosslinker-specific mass spectral information led to demonstrated improvements in the application of the CLMS technique, in terms of the detection, acquisition, and identification of crosslinker-modified peptides.  This approach was evaluated on intact yeast mitochondria, and the results showed that hundreds of unique protein-protein interactions could be identified on a proteome-wide scale.  Both known and previously-unknown protein-protein interactions were able to be identified.

### Sample Protocol
Highly purified yeast mitochondria, strain YPH499, were prepared as described previously.  The mitochondrial sample was thawed on ice, and then diluted gently to 5 mg/mL in isotonic buffer (250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM MOPS-KOH, pH 7.2).  Mitochondria were crosslinked with an equimolar mixture of isotopically light and heavy cyanurbiotindipropionylsuccinimide (CBDPS-H8 and CBDPS-D8, respectively) (Creative Molecules, Inc.) at 2 mM as follows:  samples were pre-warmed at 21°C for 5 min; after addition of the crosslinker mixture.  The crosslinking reaction was quenched with the addition of ammonium bicarbonate.  Crosslinked mitochondria were collected by centrifugation at 18000 g for 20 min in the cold, and immediately proceeded with lysis.  The pellet of crosslinked mitochondria was resuspended in a hypotonic buffer and lysed by sonication.  The lysate was centrifuged and the resulting pellet (Pellet1) and supernatant were collected.  Pellet1 was used to prepare all of the samples, and is hereafter referred to as “membrane1” or “membrane low centrifugation”.  The supernatant was centrifuged  and the resulting pellet (Pellet2) and supernatant used to prepare all of the samples that are hereafter referred to as “membrane2” or “membrane high centrifugation” and “soluble”, respectively.  Proteins were solubilized from Pellet 1 and Pellet 2 with 2% SDS in 10 mM MOPS-KOH pH 7.2.  Proteolysis was performed with trypsin using the FASP protocol with modifications and ultrafiltration units with a nominal molecular weight cutoff of 30 kDa.  Samples were washed with 400 µL of urea buffer, treated with 200 µL DTT solution, 200 µL IAA solution, washed 3x with 200 µL urea solution, 3x with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.5. Digestion was performed overnight (18h) at 37°C.  Peptides were collected by washing the filter units with 100 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.5 and then 200 µL 0.5 M NaCl.  The resulting peptide mixture was acidified with formic acid, desalted using C18 SPE columns (BondElute SPEC C18AR, Agilent Technologies), eluted with 0.4% formic acid with 90% acetonitrile, and dried completely.  Samples were reconstituted and separated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using.  From each sample, 19 SCX fractions were collected at 37.5-250 mM KCl and dried.  Collected fractions were further enriched for CBDPS crosslinked peptides on monomeric avidin beads as described previously.  Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using a Dionex UltiMate3000 coupled to the ESI-source of an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Q Exactive HF.  Samples were loaded in 0.1% TFA onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 µm x2 cm, Thermo Scientific) for pre-concentration.  Peptides were separated on C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 500 mm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (FA); solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% ACN). For MS analysis on the Lumos, peptides were separated with a 120-min gradient (0–100 min: 3–35% solvent B (84% acetonitrile,  0.1% FA), 100–110 min: 35–42% B, 110-120 min : 42-80% B, 0.250 µL/min flowrate),  On the Q Exactive HF, peptides were separated with 180 min gradient: 0-160 min: 3-35% solvent B, 160-170 min: 35-42% B, 170-180 min 42-80% B.  MS data was acquired using data-dependent methods utilizing either TopSpeed (TopS) or TopN; targeted mass difference (MTag); or inclusion list (Incl) precursor selection modes.

### Data Protocol
Cross-linking data was searched using Kojak (v.1.5.5) against a concatenated target-decoy (randomized) sequence databases. Additional information was added to resulting PSMs with logic described in the corresponding publication and validation was accomplished using Percolator (v.2.08).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
1. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 2. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 3. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 4. Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
University of Victoria

### Submitter
Karl Makepeace

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph H. Borchers
1. Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 2. University of Victoria Genome BC Proteomics Centre, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada; 3. Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; 4. Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


