### Accession
PXD015443

### Title
Dynamic changes in the brain protein interaction network correlates with progression of Aβ42 pathology in Drosophila

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most prevalent form of dementia, is a progressive and devastating neurodegenerative condition for which there are no effective treatments. Understanding the molecular pathology of AD during disease progression may identify new ways to reduce neuronal damage. Here, we present a longitudinal study tracking dynamic proteomic alterations in the brains of an inducible Drosophila melanogastermodel of AD expressing the Arctic mutant Aβ42 gene. We identified 3093 proteins from flies that were induced to express Aβ42 and age-matched healthy controls using label-free quantitative ion-mobility data independent analysis mass spectrometry. Of these, 228 proteins were significantly altered by Aβ42 accumulation and were enriched for AD-associated processes. Network analyses further revealed that these proteins have distinct hub and bottleneck properties in the brain protein interaction network, suggesting that several may have significant effects on brain function. Our unbiased analysis provides useful insights into the key processes governing the progression of amyloid toxicity and forms a basis for further functional analyses in model organisms and translation to mammalian systems

### Sample Protocol
Brain proteins were extracted by homogenisation on ice into 50 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT and 0.25% RapiGest detergent. Proteins were solubilised and disulfide bonds were reduced by heating at 80°C for 20 minutes. Free cysteine thiols were alkylated by adding 20 mM IAA and incubating at room temperature for 20 minutes in darkness. Protein concentration was determined and samples were diluted to a final concentration of 0.1% RapiGest using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested with trypsin overnightat 37°C at a 50:1 protein:trypsin ratio. Additional trypsin was added at a 100:1 ratio the following morning and incubated for a further hour. Detergent was removed by incubating at 60°C for 1 hour in 0.1% formic acid. Insoluble debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 30 minutes. Supernatant was collected, lyophilised and stored at -80°C. Prior to lyophilisation peptide concentration was estimated by nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA. Peptideswere separated by nanoscale liquid chromatography (LC) by loading 300 ng of protein onto an analytical reversed phase column.Ion mobility separation assisted data-independent mass spectrometry (IM-DIA-MS)  analysis was performed using a Synapt G2-Si  mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK). The time-of-flight analyzer of the instrument was externally calibrated with a NaCsI mixture from m/z 50 to 1990. Spectra were acquired over a range of 50–2000 m/z. Each biological repeat was analysed atleast twice to account for technical variation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were peak detected and aligned by Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters Corporation). The principles of the embedded search algorithm for DIA data has been described previously. Proteins were identified by searching against the Drosophila melanogasterproteome in UniProt, appended with common contaminants, and revered sequence entries to estimate protein identification false discovery rate (FDR) values, using previously specified search criteria. Peptide intensities were normalised to control for variation in protein loading and relative quantification. Abundances were estimated by Hi3-based quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most prevalent form of dementia, is a progressive and devastating neurodegenerative condition for which there are no effective treatments. Understanding the molecular pathology of AD during disease progression may identify new ways to reduce neuronal damage. Here, we present a longitudinal study tracking dynamic proteomic alterations in the brains of an inducible Drosophila melanogaster model of AD expressing the Arctic mutant A&#x3b2;42 gene. We identified 3093 proteins from flies that were induced to express A&#x3b2;42 and age-matched healthy controls using label-free quantitative ion-mobility data independent analysis mass spectrometry. Of these, 228 proteins were significantly altered by A&#x3b2;42 accumulation and were enriched for AD-associated processes. Network analyses further revealed that these proteins have distinct hub and bottleneck properties in the brain protein interaction network, suggesting that several may have significant effects on brain function. Our unbiased analysis provides useful insights into the key processes governing the progression of amyloid toxicity and forms a basis for further functional analyses in model organisms and translation to mammalian systems.

### Keywords
Brain, Drosophila, Aβ42 pathology, Interaction network

### Affiliations
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology - UCL
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Thomas Menneteau

### Lab Head
Dr Konstantinos Thalassinos
Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom


