### Accession
PXD014692

### Title
Avian reproductive tissue proteome (zebra finch)

### Description
Protein extraction of zebra finch testes and ovaries samples

### Sample Protocol
Testes and ovary samples were dounced and extracted using RIPA buffer (Sigma Aldrich) and quantified with the BCA Protein Quantitation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 150 μg total protein extract were mixed with 4x LDS sample buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 0.1 M DTT and boiled for 10 min at 70 °C prior to separation on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min at 170 V in MOPS buffer. The gel was fixed using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and each sample was divided into 4 equal fractions of different molecular weights. For in-gel digestion prior to MS analysis, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% ethanol) and reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 56 °C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-QAQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40 °C. A 215-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant28 v1.6.2.10 using the LFQ quantification29 option on unique peptides with at least 2 ratio counts against a single proteomic reference database generated from translated RNA-seq data of 83 high-confidence GRC-linked genes plus napa (‘alt’ sequences, all with at least 1 GRC-linked amino acid variant; napa accession MH263723.1) and their autosomal copies (‘ref’ sequences, napa accession MH263724.1), which was used to generate peptide alignments in silico. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Second peptides, dependent peptides and match between runs parameters were enabled. Both unique and razor peptides were selected for quantification. Figures were generated from the LFQ intensity data using the ggplot2 package in R.

### Publication Abstract
In some eukaryotes, germline and somatic genomes differ dramatically in their composition. Here we characterise a major germline-soma dissimilarity caused by a germline-restricted chromosome (GRC) in songbirds. We show that the zebra finch&#xa0;GRC contains &gt;115 genes paralogous to single-copy genes on 18 autosomes and the Z chromosome, and is enriched in genes involved in female gonad development. Many genes are likely functional, evidenced by expression in testes and ovaries at the RNA and protein level. Using comparative genomics, we show that genes have been added to the GRC over millions of years of evolution, with embryonic development genes bicc1 and trim71 dating to the ancestor of songbirds and dozens of other genes added very recently. The somatic elimination of this evolutionarily dynamic chromosome in songbirds implies a unique mechanism to minimise genetic conflict between germline and soma, relevant to antagonistic pleiotropy, an evolutionary process underlying ageing and sexual traits.

### Keywords
Grc, Zebra finch, Ove

### Affiliations
NUS Singapore
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Toni Gossmann

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
NUS Singapore


