### Accession
PXD019208

### Title
Protein S-Nitrosylation of host and viral proteins upon fibroblast infection with Human Cytomegalovirus

### Description
Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a ubiquitous pathogen that has co-evolved with its host and in doing so, is highly efficient in undermining antiviral responses that limit successful infections. As a result, HCMV infections are highly problematic in individuals with weakened or underdeveloped immune systems including transplant recipients and newborns. Understanding how HCMV controls the microenvironment of an infected cell so as to favor productive replication is of critical importance. To this end, we took an unbiased proteomics approach to identify the highly reversible, stress induced, post-translational modification (PTM), protein S-nitrosylation, on viral proteins to determine the biological impact on viral replication. We identified protein S-nitrosylation of 13 viral proteins during infection of highly permissive fibroblasts. One of these proteins, pp71, is critical for efficient viral replication, as it undermines host antiviral responses, including STING activation. By exploiting site-directed mutagenesis of the specific amino acids we identified in pp71 as protein S-nitrosylated, we found this pp71 PTM diminishes its ability to undermine antiviral responses induced by the STING pathway. Our results suggest a model in which protein S-nitrosylation may function as a host response to viral infection that limits viral spread.

### Sample Protocol
Human fibroblast cells were infected with TB40/E-mCherry-UL99eGFP at a multiplicity of infection (moi) of 3. Infected cells were harvested 96 hours post-infection (hpi), and the biotin-switch assay was conducted using S153 Nitrosylated Protein Detection kit (Cayman), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were trypsinized, and biotinylated peptides were isolated by Avidin agarose resin (Pierce). The eluates were evaporated using a SpeedVac centrifuge concentrator. Dried samples were resuspended in 10 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid then purified by solid phase extraction (SPE) using C18 Ziptip (stage-tip; EMD Millipore) following the manufacture’s protocol. Next, 5 μL of the extract in 1% acetic acid was injected and the peptides eluted from the column (Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed phase capillary chromatography column) by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer (LTQ-Obitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer, Finnigan). The microelectrospray ion source was operated at 2.1 kV.

### Data Protocol
The digest was analyzed using the data-dependent multitask capability of the instrument, acquiring full-scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. The data were analyzed by using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search the human and HCMV/HHV5 reference sequence (NCBI: txid295027) with the search program, Sequest. The resulting search files were then uploaded into the program Scaffold for spectral count analysis Biological replicates from three independent infections of both HCMV-infected and mock samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Publication Abstract
Human <i>Cytomegalovirus</i> (HCMV) is a ubiquitous pathogen that has coevolved with its host and, in doing so, is highly efficient in undermining antiviral responses that limit successful infections. As a result, HCMV infections are highly problematic in individuals with weakened or underdeveloped immune systems, including transplant recipients and newborns. Understanding how HCMV controls the microenvironment of an infected cell so as to favor productive replication is of critical importance. To this end, we took an unbiased proteomics approach to identify the highly reversible, stress-induced, posttranslational modification (PTM) protein S-nitrosylation on viral proteins to determine the biological impact on viral replication. We identified protein S-nitrosylation of 13 viral proteins during infection of highly permissive fibroblasts. One of these proteins, pp71, is critical for efficient viral replication, as it undermines host antiviral responses, including stimulator of interferon genes (STING) activation. By exploiting site-directed mutagenesis of the specific amino acids we identified in pp71 as protein S-nitrosylated, we found this pp71 PTM diminishes its ability to undermine antiviral responses induced by the STING pathway. Our results suggest a model in which protein S-nitrosylation may function as a host response to viral infection that limits viral spread.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> In order for a pathogen to establish a successful infection, it must undermine the host cell responses inhibitory to the pathogen. As such, herpesviruses encode multiple viral proteins that antagonize each host antiviral response, thereby allowing for efficient viral replication. Human <i>Cytomegalovirus</i> encodes several factors that limit host countermeasures to infection, including pp71. Herein, we identified a previously unreported posttranslational modification of pp71, protein S-nitrosylation. Using site-directed mutagenesis, we mutated the specific sites of this modification thereby blocking this pp71 posttranslational modification. In contexts where pp71 is not protein S-nitrosylated, host antiviral response was inhibited. The net result of this posttranslational modification is to render a viral protein with diminished abilities to block host responses to infection. This novel work supports a model in which protein S-nitrosylation may be an additional mechanism in which a cell inhibits a pathogen during the course of infection.

### Keywords
Cytomegalovirus, Hcmv, Protein s-nitrosylation

### Affiliations
SUNY Upstate Medical University
Associate Professor Microbiology and Immunology Department Upstate Medical University Weiskotten Hall Rm. 2273 766 Irving Avenue Syracuse, NY 13210 Tel 315.464.5870

### Submitter
Ebbing de Jong

### Lab Head
Dr Eain Murphy
Associate Professor Microbiology and Immunology Department Upstate Medical University Weiskotten Hall Rm. 2273 766 Irving Avenue Syracuse, NY 13210 Tel 315.464.5870


