### Accession
PXD007875

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the promotive effect of plant-derived smoke on plant growth of chickpe

### Description
Plant-derived smoke plays a key role in seed germination and plant growth. To investigate the effect of plant-derived smoke on chickpea, a gel-free/label-free proteomic technique was used. Germination percentage, root/shoot length, and fresh biomass were increased in chickpea treated with 2000 ppm plant-derived smoke within 6 days. On treatment with 2000 ppm plant-derived smoke for 6 days, the abundance of 90 proteins including glycolysis-related proteins significantly changed in chickpea root. Proteins related to signaling and transport were increased; however, proteins related to protein metabolism, cell, and cell wall were decreased. The sucrose synthase for starch degradation was increased and total soluble sugar was induced in chickpea. Similarly, the proteins for nitrate pathway were increased and nitrate content was improved in chickpea. On the other hand, although secondary metabolism related proteins were decreased, flavonoid contents were increased in chickpea. Based on proteomic and immuno-blot analyses, proteins related to redox homeostasis were decreased and increased in root and shoot, relatively. Furthermore, fructose-bisphosphate aldolase was increased; while, phosphotransferase and phosphoglyceromutase were decreased in glycolysis. These results suggest that plant-derived smoke improves early stage of growth in chickpea with the balance of many cascades such as glycolysis, redox homeostasis, and secondary metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
A portion (300 mg) of roots was cut into small pieces and placed in the filter cartridge. It was ground with plastic rod for 60 times and 50 µL of cold detergent free lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM tributylphosphine was added to the filter cartridge and was ground for 30 times. Furthermore, 50 µL of lysis buffer was added and ground for 30 times. The resulting suspension was centrifuged at 15000 ×g for 2 min and the supernatant was collected as total proteins. Extracted proteins (100 µg) in lysis buffer were adjusted to a final volume of 100 µL. Methanol (400 µL) was added to each sample and mixed before addition of 100 µL of chloroform and 300 µL of water. After mixing and centrifugation at 20,000 ×g for 10 min to achieve phase separation, the upper phase was discarded and 300 µL of methanol was added to the lower phase, and then centrifuged at 20,000 ×g for 10 min. The pellet was collected as the soluble fraction. Proteins were re-suspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 C,and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37 C in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio for 16 h at 37 C. Peptides were acidified with formic acid (pH < 3) and the mixed solution was centrifuged at 20000×g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected as digested peptidesand analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. The peptides were loaded onto the LC system (EASY-nLC 1000) equipped with a trap column (EASY-Column, C18-A1 5µm, 100 µm ID ×20 mm) equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid and eluted with a linear acetonitrile gradient (0-50%) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The eluted peptides were loaded and separated on the column (C18capillary tip column, 75 µm ID × 120 mm) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV (capillary temperature: 200 C). The peptide ions were detected using MS (nanospray LTQ Orbitrap Elite MS) in the data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.2). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the MS over 400-1,500 m/z with resolution of 60,000. The ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 sec to prevent repetitive selection of peptides.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was performed using the NCBI database.  Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2) was used to process the acquired raw data files and differential analysis of the relative abundances of peptides and proteins between samples. Significant changes in the abundance of proteins between samples were determined (p < 0.05). The protein sequences of the differentially changed proteins were subjected to a BLAST query against the Ami gene ontology (GO) database. The corresponding GO terms were extracted from the most homologous proteins using a Perl program. The GO annotation results were plotted by the Web Gene Ontology Annotation Plot (WEGO) tool by uploading compiled WEGO native format files containing the obtained GO terms. Functional categorization of identified proteins was performed using MapMan bin codes. Visualization of protein abundance was performed using MapMan software (version 3.6.0RC1). The software and mapping files of Gmax_109_peptide were downloaded from the MapMan website. Pathway mapping of identified proteins was performed using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes against Gmax.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant-derived smoke, Proteomics, Chickpea

### Affiliations
Fukui Prefectural University
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
Takafumi Itoh

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
University of Tsukuba


