### Accession
PXD016731

### Title
Rhein, a novel Histone Deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor with antifibrotic potency in human myocardial fibrosis

### Description
Although fibrosis depicts a reparative mechanism, maladaptation of the heart due to excessive production of extracellular matrix accelerates cardiac dysfunction. The anthraquinone Rhein was examined for its anti-fibrotic potency to mitigate cardiac fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT). Primary human ventricular cardiac fibroblasts were subjected to hypoxia and characterized with proteomics, transcriptomics and cell functional techniques. Knowledge based analyses of the omics data revealed a modulation of fibrosis-associated pathways and cell cycle due to Rhein administration during hypoxia, whereas p53 and p21 were identified as upstream regulators involved in the manifestation of cardiac fibroblast phenotypes. Mechanistically, Rhein-mediated cellular effects were linked to the histone deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent acetylation status of p53 a posttranslational modification that acts protein stabilizing. Direct enzymatic testing revealed an inhibitory potency of Rhein for HDAC classes I/II. Functionally, Rhein inhibited collagen contraction in response to protein abundance of SMAD7, thus demonstrating its anti-fibrotic property in cardiac remodeling. In conclusion, this study identifies Rhein as a novel potent HDAC inhibitor and provides evidence that Rhein may contribute to the treatment of cardiac fibrosis as anti-fibrotic agent. As readily available drug with approved safety, repurposing of Rhein constitutes a promising potential therapeutic approach in the supplemental and protective intervention of cardiac fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
HCF-v culture and treatment with recombinant TGFβ1 Primary HCF-v of 5 different donors were purchased (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland; Promocell, Heidelberg, Germany) and cultured in FGMTM-3 medium (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) in 6-well plates (37°C, 5% CO2). Sub-confluent HCF-v were serum-starved and treated with 10ng/ml human recombinant TGFβ1 (Peprotech, Hamburg, Germany) alone or in combination with 15 or 35µM Rhein for 24h or 30min as indicated or left untreated for control.  Chronic hypoxia treatment HCF-v were seeded in 145mm dishes. After 16h, cells were subjected to the hypoxic workstation (Xvivo System (Biospherix, Parish, NY, USA) set to 0.5% O2, 5% CO2, 94.5% N2 and 37°C) with N2-pre-gassed DMEM (10% FCS, 1% glutamine, 1% antibiotic/antimycotic). After 60h, sub-confluent cells were washed (1x PBS) and serum-starved in pre-nitrogenated serum-free media (DMEM, 1% glutamine, 1% antibiotic/antimycotic) for 36h for secretome collection. For normoxic control, cells were treated in parallel in a second incubator of the hypoxic workstation (21% O2, 74% N2, 5% CO2 and 37°C). For Rhein treatment, 35µM Rhein was added during normoxic or hypoxic treatment for a total incubation time of 96h. Collected supernatants were filtered through a 0.8µM syringe filter and immediately stored at -80°C before subjected to secretome analysis. The cells pellets were washed twice (1x PBS) and either dry-frozen or directly processed for further measurements

### Data Protocol
Proteomic profiling of secretome Pre-filtered secretomes were centrifuged (45min, 85,000xg, 4°C) prior concentration processing by centrifugation in Amicon® Ultra-15 Ultracel column tubes (Merck Millipore, Burlington, USA) with an exclusion of proteins <3kDa. Protein profiling of the secretomes was performed using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Ultimate 3000 separation liquid chromatography system (Thermofisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) combined with an EASY-spray ion source and Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific) as previously described 49. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18-LC-column (ID: 75μm, 2cm length; Thermofisher Scientific) and separated via EASY-Spray C18 column (ES802; ID: 75μm, 25 cm length; Thermofisher Scientific). Each LC-MS run lasted 150min and MS data were acquired with both data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent (DIA, 34 windows) MS/MS scan approaches. DDA runs were analyzed using Proteome DiscovererTM 2.2 software (Thermofisher Scientific) and Sequest HT search (trypsin digestion, max. 2 miscleavages, 5-144 peptide length, max. 10 peptides per spectrum, carbamidomethylation as static and N-terminal acetylation/methionine oxidation as dynamic modifications) against the SwissProt FASTA database (Homo sapiens (TaxID=9606, version 2018-05-25)). Percolator node-based peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) analysis was restricted to q-values with 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed) false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were filtered using parsimony principle set to 0.01/0.05 (strict/relaxed) FDRs. For quantification, DIA runs were analyzed via SpectronautTM PulsarX 11.01 software (Biognosys, Zürich, Switzerland) set to standard parameter settings and using a self-performed spectral library based on DDA runs. For retention time alignment, the secretomes were spiked with indexed Retention Time (iRT) standard.

### Publication Abstract
Although fibrosis depicts a reparative mechanism, maladaptation of the heart due to excessive production of extracellular matrix accelerates cardiac dysfunction. The anthraquinone Rhein was examined for its anti-fibrotic potency to mitigate cardiac fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition (FMT). Primary human ventricular cardiac fibroblasts were subjected to hypoxia and characterized with proteomics, transcriptomics and cell functional techniques. Knowledge based analyses of the omics data revealed a modulation of fibrosis-associated pathways and cell cycle due to Rhein administration during hypoxia, whereas p53 and p21 were identified as upstream regulators involved in the manifestation of cardiac fibroblast phenotypes. Mechanistically, Rhein acts inhibitory on HDAC classes I/II as enzymatic inhibitor. Rhein-mediated cellular effects were linked to the histone deacetylase (HDAC)-dependent protein stabilization of p53 under normoxic but not hypoxic conditions. Functionally, Rhein inhibited collagen contraction, indicating anti-fibrotic property in cardiac remodeling. This was accompanied by increased abundance of SMAD7, but not SMAD2/3, and consistently SMAD-specific E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2. In conclusion, this study identifies Rhein as a novel potent direct HDAC inhibitor that may contribute to the treatment of cardiac fibrosis as anti-fibrotic agent. As readily available drug with approved safety, Rhein constitutes a promising potential therapeutic approach in the supplemental and protective intervention of cardiac fibrosis.

### Keywords
Fibrosis, Hypoxia, Secretome, Cardiac remodeling, Hdac inhibition, Dia, Lumos, Spectronaut

### Affiliations
Dr. rer. nat. Birgit Knebel Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research  at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
 Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry
German Diabetes Center (DDZ)
Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research 
at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf


### Submitter
Birgit Knebel

### Lab Head
Dr Birgit Knebel
Dr. rer. nat. Birgit Knebel Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research  at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany


