### Accession
PXD009092

### Title
Defining the cellular proteolytic landscape

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis of cellular targets of protein degradation

### Sample Protocol
Samples are reversibly cross-linked together with immunoprecipitation of cellular proteasomes prior to reverse-phase isolation and elution of captured peptides. The method inhibits proteases throughout sample processing to ensure retention of native peptide characteristics.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw spectra was analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) with the default parameters for the analysis of proteins and peptides (LFQ) minimum ratio count of 1, minimum peptide length for unspecific search of 6, maximum peptide length for unspecific search of 40, peptide FDR was set to 0.1 and match between runs enabled. Masses were searched against the human proteome database from UniprotKB

### Publication Abstract
Cellular function is critically regulated through degradation of substrates by the proteasome. To enable direct analysis of naturally cleaved proteasomal peptides under physiological conditions, we developed mass spectrometry analysis of proteolytic peptides (MAPP), a method for proteasomal footprinting that allows for capture, isolation and analysis of proteasome-cleaved peptides. Application of MAPP to cancer cell lines as well as primary immune cells revealed dynamic modulation of the cellular degradome in response to various stimuli, such as proinflammatory signals. Further, we performed analysis of minute amounts of clinical samples by studying cells from the peripheral blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We found increased degradation of histones in patient immune cells, thereby suggesting a role of aberrant proteasomal degradation in the pathophysiology of SLE. Thus, MAPP offers a broadly applicable method to facilitate the study of the cellular-degradation landscape in various cellular conditions and diseases involving changes in proteasomal degradation, including protein aggregation diseases, autoimmunity and cancer.

### Keywords
Degradation, Ubiquitin, Degradome

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Wiezmann institude of science

### Submitter
Assaf Kacen

### Lab Head
Dr Yifat Merbl
Wiezmann institude of science


