### Accession
PXD046110

### Title
Environmental Enrichment and Rat Liver Proteomics

### Description
We aimed to address the challenge of accommodating an increasing demand for aged laboratory animals in the context of rising elderly population and research on aging-related diseases. We developed a cost-effective environmental enrichment method and assessed its impact on metabolic changes in Sprague Dawley rats' livers as a proof-of-concept organ.  Twenty-four male rats were divided into four groups, with two kept in standard cages and two in modified rabbit cages. Half of each type of cage group received additional enrichment through weekly playtime in a larger cage. Over six months, the rats' weight gain was consistent across all groups, and corticosterone levels did not significantly differ. However, the control group had significantly lower DHEA and Testosterone levels at the study's end. Rats in enriched environments exhibited less distress during inspections and were more resistant to accepting treats. Animals accustomed to playpen time left their cages more easily. Overall, the study demonstrated that refining husbandry for aging rats is both simple and cost-effective, without detrimental effects on stress levels, development, or liver metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 5 mg of rat liver per tissue issue per experiment was homogenized using the mixer mill MM400 (Retsch GmBH, Haan, Germany) for 60 s at 25,000 rpm in an Eppendorf tube, lyophilized and stored at -80°C. Protein extraction, digest, and peptide desalting were performed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. For protein identification 2 µL eluate was injected into a NanoHPLC (Dionex UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an ESI-QTOF ultra high-resolution mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker Daltonic GmbH, 28359 Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Quantification of liver proteins: The search was performed in PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) with the following set of (i) parent mass error tolerance 20.0 ppm, (ii) fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 Da, (iii) precursor mass search type monoisotopic,  (iv) enzyme trypsin, (v) max missed cleavages 3, (vi) variable modifications: Oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and acetylation (N-term), max variable PTM per peptide 3. taxonomy Swiss-Prot database of rattus norvegicus. A peptide significance filter -lgP >20, a protein significance filter -lgP >15 and unique-peptide filter was set to 1. Label-free quantification with PEAKS Q was used and allowed to autodetect the reference sample and align the sample runs. The protein significance filter was set to 0 unique peptide filter to 1 and protein fold change filter to 1 in the export settings. Differentially abundant proteins were identified using ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Liver, Bile

### Affiliations
Experimental Surgery, Department of Surgery, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Surgery, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Simon Moosburner

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Igor M. Sauer
Experimental Surgery, Department of Surgery, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin


