### Accession
PXD027522

### Title
Auxin profiling in Arabidopsis endoplasmic reticulum.

### Description
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an intracellular extensive network of membranes. Among major ER functions belong proteosynthesis, protein folding, their post-transcriptional modification and sorting within the cell and last but not least lipid anabolism. Moreover, several recent studies have indicated involvement of plant ER in regulation of intracellular auxin homeostasis by modulation of its metabolism. Therefore, in order to study auxin metabolome in ER, it is necessary to obtain highly enriched and, if possible, pure ER fraction. The separation of ER is troublesome due to similar biochemical properties with other cellular endomembranes. The majority of published protocols for ER isolation utilise density gradient ultracentrifugation despite the suboptimal resolving power of this approach. This work aims to optimize the isolation of ER from Arabidopsis thaliana for the subsequent determination of ER-specific auxin metabolite profiles by mass spectrometry. Following auxin metabolite determination showed a high increase of active auxin form within ER compared to whole plant. Moreover, our optimized isolation of ER may be further followed by multiple “omics” technologies including analysis of macromolecular as well as low molecular-weight compound from same sample.

### Sample Protocol
10 days-old Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 seedlings were homogenized. ER-enriched fraction was obtained by density-gradient ultracentrifugation (Ding et al., 2012). Proteins in the retentate from sample partitioning on Amicon® Ultra centrifugal filter units (cut off 3 KDa) were precipitated by ice-cold acetone, recovered by centrifugation and in-solution digested with commercially available trypsin as previously described (León et al., 2013). These experiments were carried out in five biological experiments. As control samples, total protein extracts were prepared from 10-days old A. thaliana seedlings following the procedure by Basal et al., 2020 and digested in solution in the same way as the ER isolates (please, see above). The control experiments were done in six biological experiments. The tryptic peptides were purified on a home-made reversed-phase (C18) microcolumn according to Franc et al. (2012) and analysed by LC-MS/MS employing the settings adapted from Chamrad et al. (2014).

### Data Protocol
The collected MS data were processed and searched using MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 (Tyanova et al., 2016) with an instrument parameter setting “Bruker QTOF” (Beck et al., 2015) and Andromeda engine (Cox et al., 2011). The protein identification was achieved with the use of Arabidopsis thaliana (cv. Columbia) protein database (UniProt, reference proteome UP000006548, 39,345 protein sequences, downloaded 2021/03/08) supplemented with 247 common laboratory contaminans. The iBAQ (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) was utilized for the assessment of the relative abundances of the selected marker proteins. The localization of the identified proteins was investigated in-silico employing following predictors: BaCelLo (Pierleoni et al.,2006); iPSORT (Bannai et al., 2002); PProwler 1.2 (Bodén and Hawkins, 2005); PredSL (Petsalaki et al., 2006); SLPFA (Tamura and Akutsu, 2007); SLP-Local (Matsuda et al., 2005); and TargetP 1.1 (Emanuelsson et al., 2000). Consent of at least four predictors was required for a protein to be assigned as ER-located. The enriched clusters of functional annotation terms (GO terms) and KEGG pathways related to the identified proteins were determined with DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8 (Huang et al., 2009). The total protein content of the samples was calculated from the MS data by integration of the area under a curve of the corresponding chromatogram. To this end, a series of protein digests with pre-set protein content prepared from A. thaliana seedlings was employed as a calibration.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Density gradient centrifugation, Arabidopsis., Subcellular fractionation, Auxin, Mass spectrometry, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Institute of Experimental Botany of the Czech Academy of Sciences, and Faculty of Science, Palacký University, Šlechtitelů 27, Olomouc CZ-78371, Czech Republic
Palacky University in Olomouc, Department of protein biochemistry and proteomics

### Submitter
René Lenobel

### Lab Head
Dr Aleš Pěnčík
Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Institute of Experimental Botany of the Czech Academy of Sciences, and Faculty of Science, Palacký University, Šlechtitelů 27, Olomouc CZ-78371, Czech Republic


