### Accession
PXD009929

### Title
HCN regulates cellular processes through posttranslational modification of proteins by S-cyanylation

### Description
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is coproduced with ethylene in plant cells and primarily enzymatically detoxified by the mitochondrial ß-cyanoalanine synthase (CAS-C1). Permanent or transient depletion of CAS-C1 activity in Arabidopsis results in physiological alterations in the plant that suggest that the function of HCN is a gasotransmitter molecule. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of enriched mitochondrial samples isolated from the wild type and cas-c1 mutant revealed significant changes in protein content, identifying 451 proteins that are absent or less abundant in cas-c1 and 353 proteins that are only present or more abundant in the mutant background. Gene ontology classification of these proteins highlights proteomic changes that explains the root hairless phenotype and the altered immune response observed in the cas-c1 mutant. The mechanism of action of cyanide as a signaling molecule has been addressed using two proteomic approaches focused on identifying the S-cyanylation of cysteine as a posttranslational modification of proteins. Both the 2-imino-thiazolidine chemical method and the direct untargeted analysis of proteins using LC-MS/MS identified a set of 163 proteins susceptible to S-cyanylation that included sedoheptulose 1, 7-bisphosphatase (SBPase), the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (CYP20-3) and enolase 2 (ENO2). In vitro analysis of these proteins identified that this modification in the SBPase Cys74, CYP20-3 Cys259 and ENO2 Cys346 residues affected the enzymatic activity of the enzymes. GO classification and protein-protein interaction cluster analysis revealed the function of S-cyanylation in the regulation of primary metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis, and the Calvin and S-adenosylmethionine cycles.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) wild type ecotype Col-0 and the cas-c1 T-DNA insertion mutant (cas-c1; SALK_103855) (Garcia et al., 2010) were grown in hydroponic cultures in a photoperiod of 16 h of white light (120 µE m-2 s-1) at 20ºC/8 h dark at 18ºC in hydroponic culture in a photoperiod of 8 h of white light (120 E m-2 s-1) at 20 ºC and 16 h of dark at 18 ºC (Bermudez et al., 2010). For the hydroponic cultures, seeds were surface-sterilized, incubated for 4 days at 4º C and germinated for one week in rockwool. Seedlings were introduced in the wells of hydroponic boxes containing 5 L of nutrient solution. The composition of the nutrient solution was as follows: 1mM KH2PO4, 1mM MgSO4 · 7H2O, 15µM MnSO4 · H2O, 1µM CuSO4 · 5H2O, 1µM ZnSO4 · 7H2O, 30µM H3BO3, 28nM ‎(NH4)6Mo7O24 · 4 H2O, 100nM CoSO4 · 7H2O, 10mM Ca(NO3)2 · 4H2O and 40mg/L sequestrene 138 Fe. All nutrient solutions were changed twice per month. Mitochondria were isolated from Arabidopsis roots using differential and density-gradient centrifugation as described (Struglics et al., 1993).For relative quantitation using SWATH analysis, the same samples used to generate the spectral library were analyzed using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. Each sample (2 μL) was analyzed using the LC-MS equipment and LC gradient described above to build the spectral library but instead used the SWATH-MS acquisition method. The method consisted of repeating a cycle that consisted of the acquisition of 34 TOF MS/MS scans (230 to 1500 m/z, 100 ms acquisition time) of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows of 25 m/z width (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400 to 1250 m/z mass range with a previous TOF MS scan (400 to 1250 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle. The total cycle time was 3.5 s.

### Data Protocol
The targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView (version 2.1) with the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). This application processed the data using the spectral library created from the shotgun data. Up to ten peptides per protein and seven fragments per peptide were selected, based on signal intensity. Any shared and modified peptides were excluded from the processing. Twelve-minute windows and 20 ppm widths were used to extract the ion chromatograms. SWATH quantitation was attempted for all proteins in the ion library that were identified by ProteinPilot with an FDR below 1%. The extracted ion chromatograms were then generated for each selected fragment ion. The peak areas for the peptides were obtained by summing the peak areas from the corresponding fragment ions. PeakView computed an FDR and a score for each assigned peptide according to the chromatographic and spectra components. Only peptides with an FDR below 5% were used for protein quantitation. Protein quantitation was calculated by adding the peak areas of the corresponding peptides. To test for differential protein abundance between the two groups, MarkerView (version 1.2.1, Sciex) was used for signal normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is coproduced with ethylene in plant cells and is primarily enzymatically detoxified by the mitochondrial &#x3b2;-CYANOALANINE SYNTHASE (CAS-C1). Permanent or transient depletion of CAS-C1 activity in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) results in physiological alterations in the plant that suggest that HCN acts as a gasotransmitter molecule. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of mitochondrially enriched samples isolated from the wild type and <i>cas-c1</i> mutant revealed significant changes in protein content, identifying 451 proteins that are absent or less abundant in <i>cas-c1</i> and 353 proteins that are only present or more abundant in <i>cas-c1</i> Gene ontology classification of these proteins identified proteomic changes that explain the root hairless phenotype and the altered immune response observed in the <i>cas-c1</i> mutant. The mechanism of action of cyanide as a signaling molecule was addressed using two proteomic approaches aimed at identifying the <i>S-</i>cyanylation of Cys as a posttranslational modification of proteins. Both the 2-imino-thiazolidine chemical method and the direct untargeted analysis of proteins using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry identified a set of 163 proteins susceptible to <i>S-</i>cyanylation that included SEDOHEPTULOSE 1,7-BISPHOSPHATASE (SBPase), the PEPTIDYL-PROLYL CIS-TRANS ISOMERASE 20-3 (CYP20-3), and ENOLASE2 (ENO2). In vitro analysis of these enzymes showed that <i>S-</i>cyanylation of SBPase Cys<sup>74</sup>, CYP20-3 Cys<sup>259</sup>, and ENO2 Cys<sup>346</sup> residues affected their enzymatic activity. Gene Ontology classification and protein-protein interaction cluster analysis showed that <i>S-</i>cyanylation is involved in the regulation of primary metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis, and the Calvin and <i>S</i>-adenosyl-Met cycles.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis - root tissue - posttranslational modification - cyanylation

### Affiliations
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas Avda. Americo Vespucio, 49 Sevilla Spain
Instituto Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis-CSIC

### Submitter
Luis C. Romero

### Lab Head
Dr Luis C Romero
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas Avda. Americo Vespucio, 49 Sevilla Spain


