### Accession
PXD031412

### Title
Proteome dynamics during transition from exponential to stationary phase in yeast

### Description
Glycolysis is the central pathway for sugar metabolism in most living organisms. The single celled eukaryote yeast is a widely used model organism for higher eukaryotes in which the regulation of glycolysis is widely studied. S. cerevisiae is one of the few eukaryotic organisms that can efficiently grow under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Furthermore, this yeast switches from proliferation into a resting phase when nutrients are exhausted. However, little is known about the proteome dynamics that takes place during this transition, particularly under anaerobic conditions. Moreover, like many other organisms including humans, the genome of S. cerevisiae contains duplications which result in the expression of so called ‘isoenzymes’ in central metabolic pathways including glycolysis. Interestingly, the role of those ‘isoenzymes’ remains elusive to date. Here we describe a large-scale quantitative proteome study combining shotgun experiments using a nano-LC coupled to a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Germany), to capture the proteome dynamics during transition from proliferation into stationary phase, under both aerobic and anaerobic growth. Furthermore, we explore the proteome dynamics of a mutant yeast where the glycolytic isoenzymes are deleted.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets of the (an)aerobic cultures were resuspended in lysis buffer composed of 100 mM TEAB containing 1% SDS and phosphatase/protease inhibitors. Yeast cells were lysed by glass bead milling and thus shaken 10 times for 1 minute with a bead beater alternated with 1 min rest on ice. Proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated for 60 min at room temperature in the dark by addition of 50 mM acrylamide. Protein precipitation was performed by addition of four volumes of ice-cold acetone (-20°C) and proceeded for 1 hour at -20°C. The proteins were solubilized using 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteolytic digestion was performed by Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI), 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio, and incubated at 37°C overnight. Solid phase extraction was performed with an Oasis HLB 96-well μElution plate (Waters, Milford, USA) to desalt the mixture. Eluates were dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator at 50°C and frozen at -80°C. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and TMT10-plex reagents (Thermo) were added from stocks dissolved in 100% anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were mixed with labels in a 1:8 ratio (12.5 µg to 100 µg) and incubated for 1 hour at 25°C and 400 rpm and the labelling reaction was stopped by addition of 5% hydroxylamine to a final con-centration of 0.4%. Labelled peptides were then mixed in an equal manner. Solid phase extraction was performed to desalt the mixture. Desalted peptides were subsequently frozen at -80°C for 1 hour and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were finally re-suspended in 3% ACN/0.01% TFA prior to MS-analysis to give an approximate concentration of 500 ng per µl. An aliquot corresponding to approximately 1 µg protein digest was analysed using an one dimensional shot-gun proteomics approach. Briefly, the samples were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 μm x 150 mm, 2 μm, Cat. No. 164568), and a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nL·min-1 over a linear gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B over 180 min, then from 25% to 55% over 60 min, followed by back equilibration to starting conditions. Data were acquired from 5 to 120 min. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% FA, and solvent B consisted of 80% ACN in H2O and 0.1% FA. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode acquiring peptide signals from 385–1250 m/z at 70,000 resolution in full MS mode with a maximum ion injection time (IT) of 75 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6. The top 10 precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis and subjected to fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS/MS scans were acquired at 35,000 resolution with AGC target of 1E5 and IT of 100 ms, 1.2 m/z isolation width and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed against the proteome database from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Uniprot, strain ATCC 204508 / S288C, Tax ID: 559292, July 2020) using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada), allowing for 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 m/z fragment ion mass error, 3 missed cleavages, acrylamide and TMT10 label as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rates (FDR) and identifications with ≥ 2 unique peptides. Changes in protein abundances between different time points using the TMT quantification option provided by the PEAKS Q software tool. Auto normalization was used for quantitative analysis of the proteins, in which the global ratio was calculated from the total intensity of all labels in all quantifiable peptides. Quantitative analysis was performed using protein identifications containing at least 2 unique peptides, which peptide identifications were filtered against 1% FDR. The significance method for evaluating the observed abundance changes was set to ANOVA and the significance score is calculated as the -10log10 of the significance testing p-value. The p-value represents the likelihood that the observed change is caused by random chance. Results from PEAKS Q were exported to ‘proteins.csv’, containing the quantified proteins.  The pathway and functional analysis as well as data visualisation was supported by a Python data processing pipeline. The ‘proteins.csv’ files from PEAKS Q were loaded to Python and normalized by recalculating the protein ratios of PEAKS Q so that the bridging sample ratio was equal to 1 for each protein. A function was developed that links all possible yeast genes to their Uniprot accession number (‘Uniprot_2_Gene’).  The data were divided into their separate biological experiments, three per condition and strain. Furthermore, each biological replicate consisted of two technical replicates within each TMT10-plex experiment. To analyse the technical and biological replicates, clustermaps were made using a self-built Python function (‘make_clustermap’) based on the clustermap function from the ’Seaborn’ package in Python. For this, the Euclidean distances metric and the average linkage method were used.  The ratio/fold change of each protein in a specific condition was calculated relative to the bridging sample (bridging sample = 1). The average fold changes of the technical replicates were calculated and these averages were used to calculate the standard deviations of the biological replicates. The averages of the biological replicates were calculated, so that only four sub-datasets remained: for the MG/WT-strain aerobic and the MG/WT-strain anaerobic data.  To study how protein abundances changed in known cellular pathways, the yeast proteome data was overlaid onto the KEGG pathway database. All the up-to-date KEGG pathways can be retrieved with the manually constructed ‘KEGG_tool.py’ script. This script uses the Bio.KEGG.REST module from the ‘Biopython’ package in Python. The functions that are used from this module are ‘kegg_list’ to list all pathways for S. cerevisiae, and ‘kegg_get’ to retrieve all gene names that are annotated to a specific pathway.  The significance of a diﬀerence in biological-replicate-average fold changes between two datasets was assessed by performing a two-sided two-sample unpaired t-test (also known as Welch’s t-test) using the ‘ttest_ind_from_stats’ function from the ‘SciPy.stats’ module in Python.  Global proteome changes between two experiments or phases were visualised in ‘volcano plots’, where the -log10 of the p-value is plotted against the log2 of the fold change between the two conditions. These plots were generated using the ‘gene_exp.volcano’ a modified version of the GeneExpres-sion.volcano function from the ‘Bioinfokit.visuz’ module in Python.  To determine whether specific GO-terms or KEGG-pathways are enriched within the significantly up- or downregulated proteins under a particular condition compared to another, a functional enrichment analysis was done using the STRING data-base. A function was written in Python (‘STRING’) that can perform such an enrichment by programmatically accessing the STRING database via an API. This function requires a dictionary containing the up- and downregulated proteins, the species identifier (4932 for S. cerevisiae), the functional categories that should be assessed (’PMID’, ’Component’, ’Process’, ’Function’, ’KEGG’, and/or ’Interpro’), the FDR threshold (<0.05 in this study), and an optional set of ‘background genes’ with as alternative background the whole species proteome. A function named backgroundgene_2_string was written which retrieved the protein-specific string identifiers for the background genes/proteins, which were all the proteins that were detected in the experiments that were compared.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orbitrap qe plus, Yeast, Growth, Glycolysis, Tmt quantification

### Affiliations
TUD
Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Biotechnology, Applied Sciences, Delft University of Technology


