### Accession
PXD001175

### Title
Proteomic dissection of nanoparticle-containing vesicles reveals a major role for a macropinocytic-like uptake mechanism and multivesicular bodies during intracellular nanoparticle trafficking

### Description
Rational design of nanocarriers for drug delivery approaches requires an unbiased knowledge of uptake mechanisms and intracellular trafficking pathways. Here we dissected these processes using a quantitative proteomics approach. We isolated intracellular vesicles containing superparamagnetic iron oxide polystyrene nanoparticles and analyzed their protein composition by label free quantitative mass spectrometry. The proteomic snapshot of organelle marker proteins revealed that an atypical macropinocytic-like mechanism mediated the entry of nanoparticles. We show that the entry mechanism is controlled by actin reorganization, atypical macropinocytic signaling and ADP-ribosylation factor 1. Additionally, our proteomics data demonstrated a central role for multivesicular bodies and multilamellar lysosomes in trafficking and final nanoparticle storage. This was confirmed by confocal microscopy and cryo-TEM measurements. By quantitatively analyzing the protein composition of nanoparticle-containing vesicles, our study clearly defines the routes of nanoparticle entry, intracellular trafficking and the proteomic milieu of a nanoparticle-containing vesicle.

### Sample Protocol
We chose HeLa and human mesenchymal stem cells as model systems. Incubation of HeLa and human mesenchymal stem cells with fluorescently labeled superparamagnetic iron oxide polystyrene nanoparticles (SPIOPSN) showed a continuous internalization of nanoparticles over 20 h. Therefore, we chose 20 h as the time for analysis of the proteomic snapshot.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data have been processed by the PLGS database search engine using an updated version of the UniProt/SwissProt protein sequence database. The PLGS output files have been subsequently post-processed by IsoQuant, a software that performs retention time alignment, feature clustering, peptide to protein inference, intensity normalization, and protein quantification.  Cells have been lysated, and after protein extraction, proteins were enzimatically digested by using bovin trypsin. Cysteins of the peptides obtained after digestion have been carbamidomethilated, and then unfractionated samples have been analysed by LC-MS in a Nanodrop chromatography system coupled to a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer, using an HDMSE (MSE + ion mobility) Data Independent Acquisition method.

### Publication Abstract
Rational design of nanocarriers for drug delivery approaches requires an unbiased knowledge of uptake mechanisms and intracellular trafficking pathways. Here we dissected these processes using a quantitative proteomics approach. We isolated intracellular vesicles containing superparamagnetic iron oxide polystyrene nanoparticles and analyzed their protein composition by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. The proteomic snapshot of organelle marker proteins revealed that an atypical macropinocytic-like mechanism mediated the entry of nanoparticles. We show that the entry mechanism is controlled by actin reorganization, atypical macropinocytic signaling, and ADP-ribosylation factor 1. Additionally, our proteomics data demonstrated a central role for multivesicular bodies and multilamellar lysosomes in trafficking and final nanoparticle storage. This was confirmed by confocal microscopy and cryo-TEM measurements. By quantitatively analyzing the protein composition of nanoparticle-containing vesicles, our study clearly defines the routes of nanoparticle entry, intracellular trafficking, and the proteomic milieu of a nanoparticle-containing vesicle.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Nanoparticles, Synapt g2s, Vesicles, Hdmse, Intracellular trafficking, Dia, Endosomes

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Tenzer

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany


