### Accession
PXD034247

### Title
Affinity purification of in vivo assembled whirlin-associated protein complexes from the zebrafish retina - GST

### Description
Mutations in WHRN lead to Usher syndrome type 2d (USH2d) or to non-syndromic hearing impairment (DFNB31). The WHRN-encoded gene product whirlin directly interacts with the intracellular regions of the other two Usher syndrome type 2 (USH2)-associated proteins, usherin and  ADGRV1. Together with PDZD7, these proteins form the transiently present ankle link complex necessary for maturation of the inner ear hair bundle. In photoreceptors, usherin and ADGRV1 are also scaffolded by whirlin and constitute similar fibrous links between the periciliary membrane and the connecting cilium. However, the molecular mechanism of retinal degeneration as a consequence of compromised USH2-associated protein complex formation and function remains elusive. To better understand the function of the USH2-associated proteins in the photoreceptors, we aimed to isolate and characterize whirlin-associated protein complexes from zebrafish photoreceptor cells. We generated transgenic zebrafish that express Strep/FLAG-tagged Whrna, a zebrafish ortholog of human whirlin, under the control of a photoreceptor-specific promoter. Affinity purification of Strep/FLAG-tagged Whrna and associated proteins from adult transgenic zebrafish retinas followed by mass spectrometry analysis identified 19 novel candidate interaction partners. Pull down experiments and dedicated yeast two-hybrid assays confirmed the association of Whrna with 7 of the co-purified proteins. Several of the co-purified proteins are part of the synaptic proteome, which suggest a role for whirlin in the photoreceptor synapse. Future studies will elucidate which of the identified protein-protein interactions contribute to the development of the retinal phenotype observed in USH2d patients.

### Sample Protocol
For the generation of GST fusion proteins, the coding sequence of zebrafish whrna was cloned into a pDest15 expression vector using Gateway cloningTM technology (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subsequently used for the expression of GST-fused Whrna as previously described [11]. GST-fusion proteins were coupled to glutathion Sepharose 4B beads (#17-0756-01, GE Healthcare) for 2 hours on a rotating wheel at 4oC. Beads with bound fusion proteins were washed twice with STE-buffer (1% (v/v) Sarkosyl, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 5 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol (DTT), supplemented with cOmplete™ mini protease inhibitors (#11836153001, Sigma Aldrich)) and three times with TBS-TD (1x TBS supplemented with 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 2 mM DTT and cOmplete™ mini protease inhibitors (#11836153001, Sigma Aldrich)). Adult zebrafish (TL wild-type; 18-24 months of age) were euthanized by severing of the spinal cord after terminal sedation in 0.1% (v/v) 2-phenoxyethanol. Subsequently, the eyes were removed and the lens and vitreous humor were surgically dissected as described [26]. Per condition, fourteen retinas were individually homogenized with a pestle using 80µl lysis buffer (0.15M NaCl, 0.03M HEPES pH 7.8, 1% (v/v) NP40, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 1% (v/v) phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 (#P5726-5ML, Sigma-Aldrich), 1% (v/v) PhosphataseArrest™ III (#786-452, VWR) and a cOmplete™ mini protease cocktail tablet (#11836153001, Sigma Aldrich)). After homogenization, retinal extracts were incubated on ice for 15 minutes, pooled and centrifuged (10,000xG) at 4oC for 10 minutes. Next, the supernatant of the pooled pre-cleared zebrafish retinal extracts were incubated overnight at 4°C with equal amounts of blocked beads with GST or beads with GST-fusion proteins. GST fusion proteins were eluted from the glutathion sepharose 4B beads with 100 mM reduced Glutathione (#G4251, Sigma Aldrich), 5 mM NaCl and 1M TRIS-HCl (pH 8.0) overnight at 4oC. Proteins were precipitated using chloroform/methanol as previously described [23] and analysed by mass spectrometry. The experiment was performed in triplicate and proteins that were identified in at least two out of three GST-Whrna pull-down replicates, but not by GST pull down in the absence of the Whrna bait protein (GST-alone), were considered as potential Whrna interaction partners.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) was used to analyze the raw spectra against the translated Ensembl Danio rerio-specific database for identification of gene IDs.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in WHRN lead to Usher syndrome type 2d or to non-syndromic hearing impairment. The WHRN-encoded gene product whirlin directly interacts with the intracellular regions of the other two Usher syndrome type 2-associated proteins, usherin and ADGRV1. In photoreceptor cells, this protein complex constitutes fibrous links between the periciliary membrane and the connecting cilium. However, the molecular mechanism(s) of retinal degeneration due to compromised formation and function of the USH2-associated protein complex remains elusive. To unravel this pathogenic mechanism, we isolated and characterized whirlin-associated protein complexes from zebrafish photoreceptor cells. We generated transgenic zebrafish that express Strep/FLAG-tagged Whrna, a zebrafish ortholog of human whirlin, under the control of a photoreceptor-specific promoter. Affinity purification of Strep/FLAG-tagged Whrna and associated proteins from adult transgenic zebrafish retinas followed by mass spectrometry identified 19 novel candidate associated proteins. Pull down experiments and dedicated yeast two-hybrid assays confirmed the association of Whrna with 7 of the co-purified proteins. Several of the co-purified proteins are part of the synaptic proteome, which indicates a role for whirlin in the photoreceptor synapse. Future studies will elucidate which of the newly identified protein-protein interactions contribute to the development of the retinal phenotype observed in USH2d patients. SIGNIFICANCE: Since protein-protein interactions identified using targeted in vitro studies do not always recapitulate interactions that are functionally relevant in vivo, we established a transgenic zebrafish line that stably expresses a Strep/FLAG-tagged ortholog of human whirlin (SF-Whrna) in photoreceptor cells. Affinity purification of in vivo-assembled SF-Whrna-associated protein complexes from retinal lysates followed by mass spectrometry, identified 19 novel candidate interaction partners, many of which are enriched in the synaptic proteome. Two human orthologs of the identified candidate interaction partners, FRMPD4 and Kir2.3, were validated as direct interaction partners of human whirlin using a yeast two-hybrid assay. The strong connection of whirlin with postsynaptic density proteins was not identified in previous in vitro protein-protein interaction assays, presumably due to the absence of a biologically relevant context. Isolation and identification of in vivo-assembled whirlin-associated protein complexes from the tissue of interest is therefore a powerful methodology to obtain novel insight into tissue specific protein-protein interactions and has the potential to improve significantly our understanding of the function of whirlin and the molecular pathogenesis underlying Usher syndrome type 2.

### Keywords
Gst, Zebrafish, Complexes, Cilia

### Affiliations
Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Institute for Ophthalmic Research
Medical Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Institute for Ophthalmic Research


