### Accession
PXD014818

### Title
Salmonella Skp mutant proteomics

### Description
Global discovery proteomic investigation of Salmonella typhimurium (control strain, Antibiotic resistant, or AcrB mutant) was performed in order to identify cellular processes affected by AcrB.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation Bacteria were pelleted by centrifugation. Bacterial cell pellet was lysed in 5% SDS, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4 and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using the S-Trap method (Protifi, NY, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions, using S-TrapTM micro columns. Liquid chromatography  Each digested sample was loaded and analyzed using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 25%B in 155 min, 25% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions.  Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HFX, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon).  Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 400m/z), mass range of 375-1650m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 40sec  and maximum injection time of 60msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Salmonella typhimurium (strain 14028s) protein database as downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.com), and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, and deamidation of glutamines and asparagines. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1%. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between the experimental groups, across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the different experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a major concern worldwide, leading to an extensive search for alternative drugs. Promising candidates are antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), innate immunity molecules, shown to be highly efficient against multidrug resistant bacteria. Therefore, it is essential to study bacterial resistance mechanisms against them. For that purpose, we used experimental evolution, and isolated a <i>Salmonella enterica</i> serovar <i>typhimurium</i>-resistant line to the AMP 4DK5L7. This AMP displayed promising features including widespread activity against Gram-negative bacteria and protection from proteolytic degradation. However, the resistance that evolved in the isolated strain was particularly high. Whole genome sequencing revealed that five spontaneous mutations had evolved. Of these, three are novel in the context of acquired AMP resistance. Two mutations are related to the AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux pump. One occurred in AcrB, the substrate-binding domain of the system, and the second in RamR, a transcriptional regulator of the system. Together, the mutations increased the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) by twofold toward this AMP. Moreover, the mutation in AcrB induced hypersusceptibility toward ampicillin and colistin. The last mutation occurred in Skp, a periplasmic chaperone that participates in the biogenesis of outer membrane proteins (OMPs). This mutation increased the MIC by twofold to 4DK5L7 and by fourfold to another AMP, seg5D. Proteomic analysis revealed that the mutation abolished Skp expression, reduced OMP abundance, and increased DegP levels. DegP, a protease that was reported to have an additional chaperone activity, escorts OMPs through the periplasm along with Skp, but is also associated with AMP resistance. In conclusion, our data demonstrate that both loss of Skp and manipulation of the AcrAB-TolC system are alternative strategies of AMP acquired resistance in <i>Salmonella typhimurium</i> and might represent a common mechanism in other Gram-negative bacteria.

### Keywords
S-trap, Lc-ms/ms, Acrb, Salmonella typhimurium

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science Department of Biomolecular Sciences Faculty of Biochemistry
The Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Yechiel Shai
Weizmann Institute of Science Department of Biomolecular Sciences Faculty of Biochemistry


