### Accession
PXD032375

### Title
Identification of ubquitination sites in SH3P2

### Description
Identification of ubiquitination sites in SH3P2 upon ubiquitin reaction with bacterial E3 ligase XopL

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified by SDS-PAGE (short run) and Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin. Chloroacetamide was used instead of iodoacetamide for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. Desalted peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer using a 57min segmented gradient of 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data‐dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, 300-1750 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) set to standard and a maximum ion injection time set to automatic. In each scan cycle, the 12 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 15 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded with a resolution of 30,000, respectively, whereby AGC was set to standard and fill time was set to automatic.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Arabidopsis thaliana database obtained from Uniprot, and the sequences of GST-XopL from Xanthomonas campestris pv. Vesicatoria and MBP-SH3P2 from Arabidopsis thaliana. Full trypsin digestion specificity was required and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification; protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and GlyGly dipetide on lysine residues were set as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to five. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm at the MS/MS level. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. The iBAQ and LFQ algorithms were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Beyond its role in cellular homeostasis, autophagy plays anti- and promicrobial roles in host-microbe interactions, both in animals and plants. One prominent role of antimicrobial autophagy is to degrade intracellular pathogens or microbial molecules, in a process termed xenophagy. Consequently, microbes evolved mechanisms to hijack or modulate autophagy to escape elimination. Although well-described in animals, the extent to which xenophagy contributes to plant-bacteria interactions remains unknown. Here, we provide evidence that Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria (Xcv) suppresses host autophagy by utilizing type-III effector XopL. XopL interacts with and degrades the autophagy component SH3P2 via its E3 ligase activity to promote infection. Intriguingly, XopL is targeted for degradation by defense-related selective autophagy mediated by NBR1/Joka2, revealing a complex antagonistic interplay between XopL and the host autophagy machinery. Our results implicate plant antimicrobial autophagy in the depletion of a bacterial virulence factor and unravel an unprecedented pathogen strategy to counteract defense-related autophagy in plant-bacteria interactions.

### Keywords
Plant, Bacteria, Effector proteins

### Affiliations
Proteome Center Tuebingen
Faculty of Biology & Biotechnology Ruhr-University Bochum D-44780 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Mirita Franz-Wachtel

### Lab Head
Dr Suayb Üstün
Faculty of Biology & Biotechnology Ruhr-University Bochum D-44780 Bochum Germany


