### Accession
PXD015878

### Title
LGALS3BP modulates local gyrification in the human brain

### Description
Basal radial glial cells (bRGs) are neural progenitors enriched in primates and humans and were proposed to contribute to the expansion of neurons during cortical development in gyrencephalic species. Shortly after their generation, bRGs delaminate towards the outer subventricular zone, where they divide multiple times before differentiation. Thus, the regulation of bRGs generation could be essential for the establishment of correct gyrification within the human cortex. Here, we study the role of LGALS3BP, a secreted protein whose RNA expression is enriched in bRGs. By using cerebral organoids, human fetal tissues and mice, we show that manipulation of LGALS3BP regulated bRG generation. Additionally, individuals with unique de novo variants in LGALS3BP demonstrate abnormal gyrification and thickness at multiple sites over their cortex. Single-cell-RNA-sequencing and proteomics reveal the extracellular matrix involvement in the LGALS3BP mediated mechanisms. We find that LGALS3BP is required for bRGs delamination and influences corticogenesis and gyrification in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome analysis from COs. COs were washed twice with PBS and homogenized in ice-cold lysis buffer (1% (v/v) NP40, 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate and 1 tablet protease inhibitor (cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) in 10 mL PBS) using ultrasonication at 40 % intensity for 10 s. Lysis was done for 30 min at 4 °C while rotating. The insoluble fraction was pelletized (10 min, 14,000 g, 4 °C) and protein concentration was determined by bicinchoniic acid assay (BCA, Carl Roth GmbH + Co.). For the next analysis, 200 μg of the total protein was used. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 900 μL acetone and incubation overnight at -20 °C. The protein pellet was harvested by centrifugation at 9,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C and washed once with 0.5 mL of ice cold methanol. Proteins were reconstituted in 200 μL digestion buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea), reduced (0.2 μL 1 M DTT, 45 min, 25 °C) and alkylated (2 μL, 30 min, 25 °C, in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of 0.8 μL 1M DTT and incubation for 30 min at 25 °C. Proteins were pre-digested with 1 μL LysC (Wako) at 25 °C for 4 h. 600 μL 50 mM TEAB buffer was added and the proteins were digested overnight with 1.5 μL sequencing grade trypsin (0.5 mg/mL, Promega) at 37 °C. The following day the samples were acidified with 10 μL formic acid to a pH of 2 – 3. Peptides were desalted on 50 mg SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters Corp.) on a vacuum manifold. The cartridges were equilibrated with 1 mL acetonitrile, 1 mL 80% acetonitrile and 3 mL 0.5% formic acid. The samples were loaded on the cartridges and subsequently washed with 5 mL 0.5% formic acid. The peptides were eluted with two times 250 μL 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid. Samples were combined and dried by lyophilization. Peptides were reconstituted in 30 μL 1% (v/v) formic acid, prepared for mass spectrometry by filtering through a membrane filter (Ultrafree-MC and –LC, Durapore PVDF-0.22 μm, Merck Millipore) and transferred into mass vials. Interactome analysis from SH-SY5Y cells. For interactome analysis, SH-SY5Y cells were electroporated with HA, HA-wtLGALS3BP, HA-E370K-LGALS3BP or HA-E294K-LGALS3BP expression constructs. Two days later, cells were crosslinked with 2mM DSSO (disuccinimidyl sulfoxide) for 1 hour at 37 °C, the crosslink reaction was stopped with 50mM Tris pH 8.0 and then the cells were lysed. Protein concentration was determined using BCA assay. For immunoprecipitation, 1-2 mg of total proteins form the lysates was mixed with 7 ug of HA antibody; the mixture was incubated at 4 °C overnight with gentle agitation. Next, protein A/G agarose beads were added to the lysates-antibody mix and further incubated at 4 °C for 4 hours. Then, the beads were washed thrice with ice-cold wash buffer 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 1 mM EDTA, 75 mM KCl (each time spin down at 4 °C, 2,000 rpm for 2 min). After the last wash the beads were digested and processed for MS spectrometry. Mass Spectrometry.  MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and separated on a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) constantly heated at 50 °C. The gradient was run from 5-32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid during a 152 min method (7 min 5%, 105 min to 22%, 10 min to 32%, 10 min to 90%, 10 min wash at 90%, 10 min equilibration at 5%) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Instrument survey scans (m/z 300-1,500) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (target value 2e5). Most intense ions of charge states 2-7 were selected for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation at a collision energy of 30%. The instrument was operated in top speed mode and spectra acquired in the ion trap with the maximum injection time set to 50 ms (target value 1e4). The option to inject ions for all available parallelizable time was enabled. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 60 s. Real-time mass calibration was based on internally generated fluoranthene ions. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software version 3.0sp2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software (1.6.2.10). Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, 21st December 2018, including isoforms). At least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1 % FDR both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Basal radial glial cells, Human brain development, Cerebral organoids, Human cortical gyrification, Developmental disorders, Evolution, Extracellular matrix, Lgals3bp, Delamination

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry Kraepelinstrasse 2 80804 Munich  Germany

### Submitter
Pavel Kielkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Silvia Cappello
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry Kraepelinstrasse 2 80804 Munich  Germany


