### Accession
PXD021993

### Title
The Secretome of Liver X Receptor Agonist Treated Early Outgrowth Cells Decreases Atherosclerosis in Ldlr-/- Mice

### Description
Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) promote the maintenance of the endothelium by secreting vasoreparative factors. A population of EPCs known as early outgrowth cells (EOCs) are being investigated as novel cell-based therapies for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. We previously demonstrated that the absence of liver x receptors (LXRs) is detrimental to the formation and function of EOCs under hypercholesterolemic conditions. Here, we investigate whether LXR activation in EOCs is beneficial for the treatment of atherosclerosis. EOCs were differentiated from the bone marrow of wildtype (WT) and LXR-knockout (Lxrαβ-/-) mice in the presence of vehicle or LXR agonist (GW3965). This data set is a proteomic comparison of EPCs at day 1 after isolation and day 9 of GW39565 treatment compared to day 9 of vehicle treatment.

### Sample Protocol
EOCs were cultured from the bone marrow of the tibiae and femurs of WT and Lxrαβ-/- mice. The bone marrow cells were seeded on human-fibronectin coated (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, ON, Canada) tissue culture dishes and differentiated for 9 days to EOCs in endothelial basal media supplemented with growth factors/cytokines (EGM-2 Bullet Kit; Lonza, Walkersville, MD) at 37°C with 5% CO2. The media was changed every other day. EOCs were cultured in the presence of vehicle (ethanol) or LXR agonist (1 μM GW3965; Tocris, Minneapolis, MN) throughout the 7-day differentiation protocol. Cells were harvested at Day 1 and Day 9. The EOC cell pellets were lysed with RIPA buffer and 100 μg of protein was digested using the FASP method on 30 kDa spin filters (Millipore). The eluted peptides were acidified and desalted using in-house made C18 pipette tips (10 μg capacity). Analysis was performed on an Easy nLC-1200 coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in a top 20 mode. The mobile phase was composed of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile). Peptides were separated using a PepMap RSLC C18 2 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm column and a PepMap 100 C18 3 μm, 75 μm x 2 cm precolumn with a 2 hour gradient of 5% to 40% Buffer B.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software. Proteins were identified by searching the mouse (UP000000589) proteomes from UniProtKB (February 2020). Peptide spectral matches, and protein FDRs were set to 1%, and requiring a minimum of 1 unique peptide for identification. To increase the number of identified matches, “match between runs” was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes. Protein abundancies were calculated using the LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) promote the maintenance of the endothelium by secreting vasoreparative factors. A population of EPCs known as early outgrowth cells (EOCs) is being investigated as novel cell-based therapies for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. We previously demonstrated that the absence of liver X receptors (LXRs) is detrimental to the formation and function of EOCs under hypercholesterolemic conditions. Here, we investigate whether LXR activation in EOCs is beneficial for the treatment of atherosclerosis. EOCs were differentiated from the bone marrow of wild-type (WT) and LXR-knockout (Lxr&#x3b1;&#x3b2;-/-) mice in the presence of vehicle or LXR agonist (GW3965). WT EOCs treated with GW3965 throughout differentiation showed reduced mRNA expression of endothelial lineage markers (Cd144, Vegfr2) compared with WT vehicle and Lxr&#x3b1;&#x3b2;-/- EOCs. GW3965-treated EOCs produced secreted factors that reduced monocyte adhesion to activated endothelial cells in culture. When injected into atherosclerosis-prone Ldlr-/- mice, GW3965-treated EOCs, or their corresponding conditioned media (CM) were both able to reduce aortic sinus plaque burden compared with controls. Furthermore, when human EOCs (obtained from patients with established CAD) were treated with GW3965 and the CM applied to endothelial cells, monocyte adhesion was decreased, indicating that our results in mice could be translated to patients. Ex vivo LXR agonist treatment of EOCs therefore produces a secretome that decreases early atherosclerosis in Ldlr-/- mice, and additionally, CM from human EOCs significantly inhibits monocyte to endothelial adhesion. Thus, active factor(s) within the GW3965-treated EOC secretome may have the potential to be useful for the treatment of atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis, Lxr, Endothelial progenitor cells, Epc, Liver x receptor

### Affiliations
Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Michael Saikali

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Cummins
Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto


### SDRF

