### Accession
PXD028481

### Title
ZNF384 fusion oncoproteins drive lineage aberrancy in acute leukemia

### Description
ZNF384-rearranged fusion oncoproteins (FO) define a subset of lineage ambiguous leukemias, but the mechanistic role of ZNF384 FO in leukemogenesis and lineage ambiguity is poorly understood. Here, using viral expression in mouse and human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) and a Ep300-Zfp384 mouse model we show that ZNF384 FO promote hematopoietic expansion, myeloid lineage skewing, and self-renewal. In mouse HSPCs, concomitant lesions such as NRASG12D, were required for fully penetrant leukemia, whereas expression of ZNF384 FO drove development of B/myeloid leukemia in human HSPCs, with sensitivity of human ZNF384r leukemia to FLT3 inhibition in vivo. Mechanistically, ZNF384 FO occupy a subset of predominantly intragenic/enhancer regions with increased histone 3 lysine acetylation suggesting enhancer function. These data define a paradigm for FO-driven lineage ambiguous leukemia, in which expression in HSPCs results in deregulation of lineage-specific genes and hematopoietic skewing, progressing to full leukemic transformation in the presence of proliferative stress.

### Sample Protocol
The beads were subjected to overnight digestion at 37°C by adding trypsin at a final concentration of 15ng/ul (Pierce), as previously described (Glont et al., 2019; Papachristou et al., 2018). The next day, a second digestion step was performed by adding trypsin for 4h. Then, the tryptic peptides were acidified with 5% formic acid and were purified using the Ultra-Micro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried with vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 15ul 0.1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Purified peptides were analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The full scans were performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1600m/z at 70k resolution. For MS2, the top 10 most intense precursors were selected at resolution 17,5k. A 2.0Th isolation window was used for isolation and the HCD collision energy was set at 28%.

### Data Protocol
The collected HCD tandem mass spectra were processed with the SequestHT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against a human uniprot database containing over 20,000 entries along with custom databases containing the sequences of fusion proteins. The SequestHT for the HCD spectra included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02Da, number of maximum missed cleavages sites 2 and Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995Da) and Deamidation of N/Q (+0.984Da). The confidence level for peptide identifications was estimated with the Percolator node using decoy database search and peptides were filtered for q-value<0.01. Any proteins that appeared in any of the three empty vector control RIME experiments were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mixed phenotype, Fusion oncoprotein, Stem cell, Leukemia, Lineage ambiguous, Znf384

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105 USA
Senior Scientific Assistant

### Submitter
Evangelia Papachristou

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Mullighan
Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105 USA


