### Accession
PXD001923

### Title
Insights into the proteomic response of soybean to stress of Al2O3, ZnO, and Ag nanoparticles

### Description
The present study highlights the phytotoxicity of nanoparticles (NPs) to soybean roots and leaves at proteome level. The effect of three NPs Al2O3, ZnO, and Ag suspensions on soybean was evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
Seven-day-old soybeans were transferred to conical flasks containing 100 mL of respective NPs suspensions.  After 3 days of NPs treatments, roots and leaves proteins were extracted.  For proteomics, protein samples were cleaned with chloroform/metahnol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and were then separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D x 120 mm, NTTC-360/75-3 nanoLC capillary column; Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. The peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the complex mechanisms involved in plant response to nanoparticles is indispensable in assessing the impact of nano-pollutants on environment. The present study compares the phytotoxicity of three different metal-based nanoparticles (Al2O3, ZnO, and Ag) in soybean seedling at proteome level. Plant growth, rigidity of roots, and root cell viability were markedly affected by ZnO- and Ag-NPs stress; while, Al2O3-NPs challenged soybean maintained normal seedling growth like control. Moreover, severe oxidative burst was evident in ZnO-NPs and Ag-NPs treatments. Gel-free proteomic analysis of NPs stressed soybean roots revealed 104 commonly changed proteins primarily associated with secondary metabolism, cell organization, and hormone metabolism. Oxidation-reduction cascade related genes, such as GDSL motif lipase 5, SKU5 similar 4, galactose oxidase, and quinone reductase were up-regulated in Al2O3-NPs challenged roots and down-regulated in ZnO- and Ag-NPs treatments. In comparison to root, 16 common proteins were found to be significantly changed in leaves of NPs exposed soybean that were predominantly associated to photosystem and protein degradation. The proteomic findings suggest that high abundance of proteins involved in oxidation-reduction, stress signaling, hormonal pathways related to growth and development might be the principal key for optimum growth of soybean under Al2O3-NPs stress.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Oxidative stress, Ag-nps, Proteomics, Zno-nps, Al2o3-nps, Soybean

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


