### Accession
PXD009465

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum PfPK7-Dependent Phosphoproteome

### Description
In this project we use MS2-based 6-plex TMT quantitation to compare phosphorylation site abundances across several stages of the Plasmodium falciparum life cycle in wild-type Plasmodium and in a strain whose PK7 has been knocked out.  See Pease et al. (2018) J. Proteome Res. for details.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmodium falciparum cell extracts were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin prior to labeling with TMT reagents. Combined peptides were then fractionated via SCX and 10 fractions were subsequently subjected to IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment followed by LC-MS analysis on an LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.   TMT Label Assignments: strain and developmental stage 126 - Wildtype (3D7) Schizont 127 - Wildtype (3D7) Segmenter 128 - PK7 KO Ring 129 - PK7 KO Trophozoite 130 - PK7 KO Schizont 131 - PK7 KO Segmenter

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using an in-house pipeline and searched using Sequest. Peptides were filtered using the target-decoy method in combination with Linear Discriminant Analysis to control the FDR. Proteins were likewise filtered to a 1% FDR using probabilistic scoring.

### Publication Abstract
PfPK7 is an "orphan" kinase displaying regions of homology to multiple protein kinase families. PfPK7 functions in regulating parasite proliferation/development as evident from the phenotype analysis of knockout parasites. Despite this regulatory role, the functions of PfPK7 in signaling pathways are not known. To better understand PfPK7-regulated phosphorylation events, we performed isobaric tag-based quantitative comparative phosphoproteomics of the schizont and segmenter stages from wild-type and pfpk7 <sup>-</sup> parasite lines. This analysis identified 3,875 phosphorylation sites on 1,047 proteins. Among these phosphorylation events, 146 proteins with 239 phosphorylation sites displayed reduction in phosphorylation in the absence of PfPK7. Further analysis of the phosphopeptides revealed three motifs whose phosphorylation was down regulated in the pfpk7 <sup>-</sup> cell line in both schizonts and segmenters. Decreased phosphorylation following loss of PfPK7 indicates that these proteins may function as direct substrates of PfPK7. We demonstrated that PfPK7 is active toward three of these potential novel substrates; however, PfPK7 did not phosphorylate many of the other proteins, suggesting that decreased phosphorylation in these proteins is an indirect effect. Our phosphoproteomics analysis is the first study to identify direct substrates of PfPK7 and reveals potential downstream or compensatory signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Phosphorylation, Malaria, Tmt

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Edward Huttlin

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School


