### Accession
PXD038541

### Title
Modeling SILAC Data to Assess Protein Turnover in a Cellular Model of  Diabetic Nephropathy

### Description
Protein turnover rate is finely regulated through intracellular mechanisms and signals that are still incompletely understood but that are essential for the correct function of cellular processes. Indeed, a dysfunctional proteostasis often impacts on the ability of the cell to remove unfolded, misfolded, degraded, non-functional or damaged proteins. Thus, altered cellular mechanisms controlling protein turnover impinge on the pathophysiology of many diseases, making the study of protein synthesis and degradation rates an important step for a more comprehensive understanding of these pathologies. In this study we describe the application of a dynamic-SILAC approach to study the turnover rate and the abundance of proteins in a cellular model of diabetic nephropathy. We estimated protein half-lives and relative abundance for thousands of proteins, several of which are characterized by either an altered turnover rate or altered abundance between diabetic nephropathic subjects and diabetic controls. Many of these proteins were previously shown to be related to diabetic complications and represent therefore possible biomarkers or therapeutic targets.Beside the aspects strictly related to the pathological condition, our data represent alsoa consistent compendium of protein half-lives in human fibroblasts and a rich source of important information related to basic cell biology.

### Sample Protocol
For the dynamic SILAC experiment a custom-made Dulbecco’s Modified Eagles Medium (DMEM) without L-arginine, L-lysine, and L-glutamine (Athena Enzyme systems, Baltimore, MD, USA) was used after adding L-arginine, L-glutamine, and L-lysine (Sigma) or 13C6-Lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), and 10% dialyzed foetal bovine serum (FBS, Invitrogen, Paisley, U.K.). To determine protein half-lives, a dynamic-SILAC approach was used. The fibroblasts were cultured in standard, light (L) DMEM medium until they reached confluence. Thereafter the standard medium was removed, the cells were washed 3 times with 10 mL of phosphate saline buffer (PBS, pH=7.4 Sigma Aldrich), and the heavy medium (containing the13C6-Lysine) was added to the culture at time T=0. Cells were harvested at 4, 7.5 and 24 h, lysed by the addition of 70 L of Tris-HCl 62.5 mM, pH 7.2, 1% SDS, and of protease inhibitors (Protease Inhibitor Cocktails, Sigma Aldrich) and by repeated freeze-thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen. The samples were then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 15 min to remove cell debris, and protein concentration in the supernatant was quantified by the Lowry method. Thereafter, 70 g of total proteins for each time point and for each subject were loaded onto a 12% precast gel (NuPAGE, Invitrogen). The electrophoretic separation was performed by applying a constant voltage of 80 V for 30 min. Gel was then stained for 3 h with colloidal coomassie (SimplyBlue Safe Stain, Invitrogen) and then destained with water. Each gel lane was cut in 5 bands that were then subjected to in-gel enzymatic digestion with LysC protease (Promega).  Each fraction was analysed by LC-MS/MS with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 (Dionex – Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded into a 10 cm pico-frit capillary column (75 um I.D., 15 um tip, New Objective) packed in-house with C18 material (Aeris peptide 3.6 um XB-C18, Phenomenex) and peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid in 40 min. The instrument operated in a Top4 data dependent mode, with a full MS scan from 300 to 1700 Da acquired at high resolution (60000) in the Orbitrap, followed by 4 MS/MS spectra of the most intense ions acquired in the linear trap.  To increase the number of identifications and robustness of quantification, each sample was analysed twice. After the first round of analysis, all data files were searched against the human section of the Uniprot database. All peptides that were identified with high confidence were used to create a static exclusion list that was then inserted into the instrument method. All samples were analysed again under identical chromatographic and instrumental conditions, but with the application of the static exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
All raw files generated in the study were analysed with the software Proteome Discoverer (version 1.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to a Mascot server (version 2.2.4, Matrix Science). The search was performed against the human section of the Uniprot Database (www.uniprot.org, version 20130401) using a MudPIT protocol. LysC was selected as digesting enzyme, with up to 1 missed cleavage allowed. Precursor and fragment tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was selected as static modification while methionine oxidation and 13C6-lysine were set as variable modifications. Data were filtered based on the search against a corresponding randomized database and false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by the software. Only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides with high confidence (>99%) were considered as positive hits. SILAC ratios were calculated by the software for each identified peptide, and peptides were grouped into protein families according to the principle of maximum parsimony. Protein quantification was calculated as the median value of the quantification of all peptides belonging to the same protein family. For each cell line, all data obtained from the 5 gel bands with and without the application of the excluding list were merged into a single msf output file. Msf files relative to the 3 time points for each cell line were finally merged into a single multi-report file.

### Publication Abstract
Protein turnover rate is finely regulated through intracellular mechanisms and signals that are still incompletely understood but that are essential for the correct function of cellular processes. Indeed, a dysfunctional proteostasis often impacts the cell's ability to remove unfolded, misfolded, degraded, non-functional, or damaged proteins. Thus, altered cellular mechanisms controlling protein turnover impinge on the pathophysiology of many diseases, making the study of protein synthesis and degradation rates an important step for a more comprehensive understanding of these pathologies. In this manuscript, we describe the application of a dynamic-SILAC approach to study the turnover rate and the abundance of proteins in a cellular model of diabetic nephropathy. We estimated protein half-lives and relative abundance for thousands of proteins, several of which are characterized by either an altered turnover rate or altered abundance between diabetic nephropathic subjects and diabetic controls. Many of these proteins were previously shown to be related to diabetic complications and represent therefore, possible biomarkers or therapeutic targets. Beside the aspects strictly related to the pathological condition, our data also represent a consistent compendium of protein half-lives in human fibroblasts and a rich source of important information related to basic cell biology.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms; protein turnover rate; protein half-life; silac; diabetes; nephropathy; fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Depatment of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
Depatment of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy


