### Accession
PXD045052

### Title
Regulation of eDHFR-tagged proteins with trimethoprim PROTACs

### Description
Temporal control of proteins in cells and living animals is crucial to improving the understanding of protein function in the post-genomic era. In addition, technologies that offer such control for engineered proteins could be used in therapeutic applications. Since regulation of proteins at a genomic or transcriptional level can be irreversible or a slow process, these tools may not be useful in settings where rapid temporal control is required to achieve immediate knockdown effects. PRoteolysis-TArgeting Chimeras (PROTACs) have emerged as a strategy to achieve rapid, post-translational control of protein abundance via recruitment of an E3 ligase to the target protein of interest. Here, we developed several PROTAC molecules by covalently linking the antibiotic trimethoprim (TMP) to pomalidomide, a small molecule ligand of the E3 ligase Cereblon. These molecules induce degradation of various proteins of interest (POIs) genetically fused to E. coli dihydrofolate reductase (eDHFR), the molecular target of TMP. We demonstrate that various eDHFR-tagged proteins, from fluorescent proteins to transcription factors and membrane-associated proteins, can be downregulated to 95% of maximum expression with our lead PROTAC molecule 7c. The data suggest that TMP-based PROTACs induce maximal degradation of POIs at drug concentrations that minimally affect the expression of immunomodulatory imide drug (IMiD)-sensitive neosubstrates. Finally, we show the ability to achieve multiplexed regulation with another known degron-PROTAC pair, and the formidable strength of our system for reversible protein regulation in a rodent model of metastatic cancer. Altogether, TMP PROTACs are a robust approach for selective and reversible degradation of eDHFR-tagged protein and have a strong potential for translation to in vivo models as well as dual degradation strategies with existing technologies.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T-eDHFR-YFP and primary human eDHFR-FLAG T cells were plated in 6 well plates and were treated with 100 nM 7c or vehicle. After 24 hours, harvested cells were solubilized in 8 M urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate lysis buffer then sonicated using a Diagenode sonicator at medium setting for 0.5 min on and 0.5 minutes off for 5 minutes. Lysates were then treated with 1000 U of benzonase (PierceTM Universal Nuclease for Cell Lysis, 88700) for 30 minutes on ice. Lysates were then centrifuged at 17,000 xg for 10 minutes and the supernatant transferred to a separate tube. Lysates were treated with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at RT followed by 10 mM IAM for 45 minutes at RT in the dark. Samples were then digested to peptides with sequencing grade modified typsin (Promega V5111). Peptides were cleaned for LC-MS/MS analysis using a Hamiliton C18 stage tip columns and apparatus. Peptides were loaded onto the column and washed three times with 0.1% formic acid and eluted using 60% LC-MS grade acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were then dried via speed vacuum. Cleaned peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and normalized to 0.33 μg/μL by  34 A214/A280 Scopes method. Samples were loaded onto a Dionex UltimateTM 3000 LC and injected at 3 μL per sample onto a Thermo Pepmax C18 trap column and separated on a 35 cm x 75 μm I.D. laser pulled silica column containing a 2.4 μm C18 resin packed under pressure. Separation of peptides occurred over a two-hour gradient consisting of standard proteomics mobile phase buffers (Mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid, Mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) from 5% to 25% mobile phase B over 90 minutes, followed by 25% to 45% from 90-120 minutes, followed by a column wash. Peptides were ionized at 2.8 kV to a Themo Fisher QE-HFTM mass spectrometer and data was acquired using resolutions of 60k for both MS1 and MS2 and an AGC target of 1 E6 and 5 E5 for MS1 and MS2 respectively. MS2 windows were designed in a 25x24 m/z staggered window scheme for the same length as the gradient and fragmented with 28% HCD energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using DIA-NN with standard settings and MS1 and MS2 tolerance settings at 10ppm. All other settings were kept as default. FASTA files were accessed and downloaded from Uniprot on 5/3/2020 for both the H. sapiens proteome and DHFR E. coli. Data files were imported and wrangled using RStudio. Statistical significance was determined using a two-sided Students T-test with the target protein being present in all four conditions for either the HEK293T or T cell, treated and untreated samples with comparisons being limited to only within cell lines. Data was visualized via R package ggplot2. Statistical significance thresholds were considered changes greater than two-fold and a p-value less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Degradation, Protacs, Edhfr

### Affiliations
Universtiy of Pennsylvania
Department of Radiology Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Richard Lauman

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Lauman
Department of Radiology Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania


