### Accession
PXD000313

### Title
Quantitative proteomics study on rice embryo during embryogenesis by using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ)

### Description
Sample Info.: There are five embryogenesis stages, 6, 12, 18, 24 and 30 days after pollination (DAP). We collect the rice embryos from above five stages.  Protein extraction and analysis: Embryos of the five sampling time points were used for protein extraction and One hundred micro gram extracted proteins of each sampling time point was tryptic digested and then labeled with iTRAQ 113, 115, 117, 119 and 121 for 6, 12, 18, 24 and 30 DAP resceptively. The labeled peptides were mixed together and then fractionated via SCX column to 10 fraction (named from 1 to 10). Two microgram peptides of each fraction was loaded onto a nano HPLC mounted with C 18 column and tandermed with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. For each fraction, three technical analysis were conducted (e.g., for fraction 5, the three injection raw files were named as 5_1, 5_2 and 5_3).   Protein search: Each group of raw files (e.g., 1_1, 2_1, ... , 10_1)  were combined and used for Mascot search and the search results were also uploaded in this system. F009646, F009647 and F009648 represent the mascot search result of replication 1, 2 and 3 respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Embryogenesis is the initial step in a plant's life, and the molecular changes that occur during embryonic development are largely unknown. To explore the relevant molecular events, we used the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) coupled with the shotgun proteomics technique (iTRAQ/Shotgun) to study the proteomic changes of rice embryos during embryogenesis. For the first time, a total of 2 165 unique proteins were identified in rice embryos, and the abundances of 867 proteins were actively changed based on the statistical evaluation of the quantitative MS/MS signals. The quantitative data were then confirmed using multiple reactions monitoring (MRM) and were also supported by our previous study based on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2 DE). Using the proteome at 6 days after pollination (DAP) as a reference, cluster analysis of these differential proteins throughout rice embryogenesis revealed that 25% were up-regulated and 75% were down-regulated. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis implicated that most of the up-regulated proteins were functionally categorized as stress responsive, mainly including heat shock-, lipid transfer-, and reactive oxygen species-related proteins. The stress-responsive proteins were thus postulated to play an important role during seed maturation.

### Keywords
Embryogenesis, Itraq, Rice

### Affiliations
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jin Zi

### Lab Head


