### Accession
PXD040668

### Title
ITK Degradation to Block T-cell Receptor Signaling and Overcome Therapeutic Resistance in T-Cell Lymphomas

### Description
IL-2-inducible T cell kinase (ITK) is essential for T cell receptor (TCR) signaling and plays an integral role in T-cell proliferation and differentiation. Unlike the ITK homolog BTK, no inhibitors of ITK are currently FDA approved. In addition, recent studies have identified mutations within BTK that confer resistance to both covalent and non-covalent inhibitors.  Here, as an alternative strategy, we report the development of BSJ-05-037, a potent and selective heterobifunctional degrader of ITK. BSJ-05-037 displayed enhanced anti-proliferative effects relative to its parent catalytic inhibitor, blocked the activation of NF-kB/GATA-3 signaling and increased the sensitivity of T cell lymphoma cells to cytotoxic chemotherapy both in vitro and in vivo.  In summary, targeted degradation of ITK is a novel approach to modulate TCR signal strength that could have broad application for the investigation and treatment of T cell-mediated diseases.

### Sample Protocol
MOLT4 cells were treated with DMSO (biological duplicate) or BSJ-05-037 compound at 100 nM for 5 h and cells were harvested by centrifugation. Cell lysis and Tandem Mass Tagged (TMT) tryptic peptides were prepared for LC-MS analysis following procedures published (Donovan et al., 2018).     Data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~50 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 mM, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 190 min gradient of 6 - 27% acetonitrile in 1.0% formic acid with a flow rate of 350 nL/min.     Each analysis used a MS3-based TMT method as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). The data were acquired using a mass range of m/z 340 – 1350, resolution 120,000, AGC target 5 × 105, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 120 s for the peptide measurements in the Orbitrap. Data dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 35%, AGC target set to 1.8 × 104 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. MS3 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD collision energy set to 55%, AGC target set to 2 × 105, maximum injection time of 150 ms, resolution at 50,000 and with a maximum synchronous precursor selection (SPS) precursor set to 10.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot human database (February 2020) with both the forward and reverse sequences as well as known contaminants such as human keratins. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. The peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (summed signal-to-noise across channels < 100 and precursor isolation specificity < 0.5), and the resulting data was filtered to only include proteins with a minimum of 2 unique peptides quantified. Reporter ion intensities were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework. Statistical analysis was carried out using the limma package within the R framework.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin (IL)-2-inducible T&#xa0;cell kinase (ITK) is essential for T&#xa0;cell receptor (TCR) signaling and plays an integral role in T&#xa0;cell proliferation and differentiation. Unlike the ITK homolog BTK, no inhibitors of ITK are currently US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved. In addition, recent studies have identified mutations within BTK that confer resistance to both covalent and non-covalent inhibitors. Here, as an alternative strategy, we report the development of BSJ-05-037, a potent and selective heterobifunctional degrader of ITK. BSJ-05-037 displayed enhanced anti-proliferative effects relative to its parent inhibitor BMS-509744, blocked the activation of NF-kB/GATA-3 signaling, and increased the sensitivity of T&#xa0;cell lymphoma cells to cytotoxic chemotherapy both in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo. In summary, targeted degradation of ITK is a novel approach to modulate TCR signal strength that could have broad application for the investigation and treatment of T&#xa0;cell-mediated diseases.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Degrader, Itk, Cereblon, Kinase, Protac, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


