### Accession
PXD027589

### Title
Prochlorococcus marinus MED4 shotgun proteome dataset from “Protein cycling in the eastern tropical North Pacific oxygen deficient zone: a de novo-discovery peptidomic approach”

### Description
For this manuscript, the Prochlorococcus MED4 strain shotgun proteome dataset was used for benchmarking a de novo-directed sequencing approach. De novo peptide sequencing, where the sequence of amino acids is determined directly from mass spectra rather than by comparison (or peptide spectrum matching) to a selected database. We perform a benchmarking experiment using Prochlorococcus culture data, demonstrating de novo peptides are sufficiently accurate and taxonomically specific to be useful in environmental studies. The MED4 dataset herein represents the output from peptide spectrum matching using COMET within the transproteomic pipeline (TPP). Additional MED4 data outside this manuscript are included for both trypsin and Glu-C protease digestions as well as TPP output for post-translational modification searches. De novo output data derived from Peaks Studio can be found by referencing the manuscript publication.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from axenic cultures of Prochlorococcus marinus high-light (HL) adapted strain MED4 (subsp. Pastoris str. CCMP1986; PROMP) were used as received from Chisholm lab July 2015. Axenic cultures grown in Pro99 media (0.2 µm filtered, autoclaved coastal seawater from Vineyard Sound, MA; supplemented with 50 µM PO4, 800 µM NH4, 10 mM sodium bicarbonate, and trace metals) in acid washed polycarbonate carboys under constant light conditions at 24°C. Cells were harvested in mid/late exponential phase. Cell biomass was collected by centrifuging 4L of culture (10,000 × g; 15 minutes at 10 °C) to pellet the cell biomass.  Cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC) buffer containing 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt dihydrate (EDTA) in a microcentrifuge tube containing glass beads. In addition, samples containing only AMBIC/EDTA were processed alongside samples to serve as processing blank controls for protease digestions. MED4 cell suspension was subjected to bead-beating for 30 seconds at 6 m/s, frozen at -20 °C for 45 minutes, and thawed. The bead-beating and freeze-thaw cycles were repeated three times followed by an overnight freeze at -20°C. Frozen samples were then thawed, cells further disrupted by vortexing with beads, and then microcentrifuged at 8,000 rpm (6,010 rcf) for 3 minutes. For MED4 cell pellets, approximately 2 × 109 cells were extracted and used for downstream proteomics processing by either trypsin or Glu-C proteolytic digestion (see below). Bulk protein concentration for lysed cell extracts were estimated from cell density measurements.  Lysed cells were subjected to in-solution proteolytic digestion. Disulfide bonds were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP HCl, Thermo Scientific; to a final concentration of 10 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Reduced samples were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma; to a final concentration of 30 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Excess IAM was quenched by the addition of dithiolthreitol (DTT, Sigma; to final concentration of 5 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Protein extracts were proteolytically digested with mass spectrometry-grade (Promega) trypsin or Glu-C at an estimated substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 25 (w/w; based on cell density conversion to protein concentration) overnight at 37 °C. Following protease digestion, samples were dried to near-dryness using a centrivap concentrator (Thermo Savant SPD2010 SpeedVac). Digested samples were desalted using a MacroSpin C18 column (NestGroup) following an established manufacturer protocol. Samples were eluted from the MacroSpin columns using two times 200 µL of 80% LCMS-grade acetonitrile with 20% LCMS-grade water containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. Desalted samples were concentrated using the centrivap to near dryness and were immediately resuspended in 95% LCMS-grade water with 5% LCMS-grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. The resuspension solution also contained an internal standard of synthetic peptides (Hi3 Escherichia coli Standard, Waters) at 50 fmol/µL. Samples were immediately analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LCMS) or stored at -80 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were injected onto the column of a Waters ACQUITY M-class UPLC with an injection volume of 2 µL. For MED4, 2 µL injection volume corresponded to an estimated 0.6 × 108 cells on-column and samples were only injected in duplicates. Peptide separation was performed by reversed-phase chromatography using a nanoACQUITY HSS T3 C18 column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; 45 °C) with an ACQUITY UPLC M-class Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20 mm). The peptides were trapped at a flow rate of 5 µL/min at 99% A for 3 minutes. A flow rate of 0.3 µL/min was used over a gradient between LCMS-grade water (A) and LCMS-grade acetonitrile (B), both modified with 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. The total 145 minute gradient method for the separation of the peptides started at 95% A and ramped to 60% A over the course of 120 minutes. The gradient then switched to 15% A at 122-127 minutes followed by a ramp back to starting conditions 95% A at 128-145 minutes.  The ACQUITY M-class was coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS) equipped with a nano-electrospray (NSI) source made in-house following the University of Washington Proteomic Resource (UWPR) design. Using a MicroTee (PEEK, 0.025” OD), the commercial analytical column was connected to a commercial emitter (PicoTip, Waters) and the liquid path was applied a high voltage through a platinum wire (adapted from UWPR design). All analyses were carried out in positive mode and a NSI spray voltage of 2.0 kV. Data was collected using data dependent acquisition (DDA) using Xcalibur 4.0 data acquisition software (Thermo Fisher). The MS1 scan range was 400-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolution with a maximum injection time of 30 ms and automated gain control of 1e6.  Following each MS1 scan, data-dependent MS2 (dd-MS2) was set to perform on the top 10 ions in a data-dependent manner at 15,000 resolution with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. Additional selection criteria for dd-MS2 were as follows: maximum injection time of 50 ms with an automated gain control of 5e4, the isolation window was 1.5 Da and dynamic exclusion was set at 20 sec.  Data processing was conducted using the software from the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP v.5.1.0). Raw data was converted to mzML and searched using COMET against a FASTA protein database of MED4. COMET searches for data within the manuscript included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification (+57.0215 Da), and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), deamidation of glutamine or asparagine residues (+0.984016), methylation of lysine or arginine (+14.015650), and clipping of N-terminal methionine as variable modifications.  Additional COMET parameters included tryptic enzyme specificity, 2 max. missed cleavages, 8 max modifications per peptide, 15 ppm peptide mass tolerance, and a 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance. Additional COMET searches for trypsin and Glu-C datasets were performed using no enzyme specificity with only carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification (+57.0215 Da), and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and clipping of N-terminal methionine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prochlorococcus, Shotgun proteomics, Med4, Marine cyanobacteria, De novo

### Affiliations
University of Washington

### Submitter
Rachel Lundeen

### Lab Head
Dr Anitra Ingalls
University of Washington


