### Accession
PXD029341

### Title
The IPF fibroblastic focus is an active collagen biosynthesis factory embedded in a distinct extracellular matrix

### Description
The Fibroblastic Focus (FF) is a lesion typical of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF).  It is the site of myofibroblast accumulation and extracellular matrix (ECM) production. The molecular composition and function of the FF and surrounding tissue remain undefined. Utilizing laser capture microdissection coupled mass spectrometry (LCM-MS), we interrogate the FF, adjacent mature scar tissue, and adjacent alveoli in 6 IPF specimens. To serve as a control, we perform LCM-MS on alveoli from 6 non-fibrotic controls.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using a multi-step method as previously described in our detailed technical report with minor modifications [15]. Firstly, after samples are trypsin digested, instead of eluting in 50% acetonitrile with 0.2 % formic acid, we now elute in 30% acetonitrile with 0.2% formic acid. In addition, after those samples are dried down by speedvac, we now resuspend in 3% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (instead of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). Lastly, our final elutions after de-salting our samples now uses 30% acetonitrile (instead of 50% acetonitrile). These were important as we began experiencing downstream contamination that we speculated was due to high acetonitrile concentrations; a problem that was resolved by lowering acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (v1.6.17.0) [17] against the human proteome obtained from Uniprot (May 2021) [18]. Variable modifications were set as methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, with a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. The protein and PSM false discovery rates (FDR) were set at 0.01 and “Match between runs” was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) is a histological pattern characteristic of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). The UIP pattern is patchy with histologically normal lung adjacent to dense fibrotic tissue. At this interface, fibroblastic foci (FF) are present and are sites where myofibroblasts and extracellular matrix (ECM) accumulate. Utilizing laser capture microdissection-coupled mass spectrometry, we interrogated the FF, adjacent mature scar, and adjacent alveoli in 6 fibrotic (UIP/IPF) specimens plus 6 nonfibrotic alveolar specimens as controls. The data were subjected to qualitative and quantitative analysis and histologically validated. We found that the fibrotic alveoli protein signature is defined by immune deregulation as the strongest category. The fibrotic mature scar classified as end-stage fibrosis whereas the FF contained an overabundance of a distinctive ECM compared with the nonfibrotic control. Furthermore, FF were positive for both TGFB1 and TGFB3, whereas the aberrant basaloid cell lining of FF was predominantly positive for TGFB2. In conclusion, spatial proteomics demonstrated distinct protein compositions in the histologically defined regions of UIP/IPF tissue. These data revealed that FF are the main site of collagen biosynthesis and that the adjacent alveoli are abnormal. This essential information will inform future mechanistic studies on fibrosis progression.

### Keywords
Human, Collagen, Fibroblastic focus, Ipf

### Affiliations
The Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Craig Lawless

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Herrera
The Wellcome Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: lung
- cell type: alveoli, fibroblastic focus, mature scar
- disease: normal, IPF
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive HF
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Acetyl

