### Accession
PXD014164

### Title
Composition and processing activity of a semi-recombinant holo U7 snRNP

### Description
In animal cells, replication-dependent histone pre-mRNAs are cleaved at the 3’ end by U7 snRNP consisting of two core components: a ~60-nucleotide U7 snRNA and a ring of seven proteins, with Lsm10 and Lsm11 replacing the spliceosomal SmD1 and SmD2. Lsm11 interacts with FLASH and together they recruit the endonuclease CPSF73 and other polyadenylation factors, forming catalytically active holo U7 snRNP. Here, we assembled core U7 snRNP bound to FLASH from recombinant components and analyzed its appearance by electron microscopy and ability to support histone pre-mRNA processing in the presence of polyadenylation factors from nuclear extracts. We demonstrate that semi-recombinant holo U7 snRNP reconstituted in this manner has the same composition and functional properties as endogenous U7 snRNP, being capable of accurately cleaving histone pre-mRNAs in a reconstituted in vitro processing reaction. We also demonstrate that the U7-specific Sm ring assembles efficiently in vitro on a spliceosomal Sm site but the resultant semi-recombinant holo U7 snRNP fails to accurately cleave histone pre-mRNAs. This approach offers a unique opportunity to create engineered U7 snRNPs to study the role of various regions in the Sm proteins and U7 snRNA in the biogenesis of a functional holo U7 snRNP.

### Sample Protocol
A complex (approximately 200 pmol) of core U7 snRNP assembled on U7-5’pcB snRNA and bound to FLASH was added to 1 ml of processing buffer ((75 mM KCl, 15 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 15% glycerol and 20 mM EDTA pH 8) and directly immobilized on 30-40 µl of streptavidin beads and extensively washed with the same buffer, as described above. The beads were rotated with 1 ml of a pre-cleared mouse nuclear extract containing 20 mM EDTA to reconstitute holo U7 snRNP. Following a 1 hour rotation with the extract at 4 °C, the beads were collected by a gentle spin in a microcentrifuge (3 min at 30 x g) and extensively washed with processing buffer, as described above. Semi-recombinant holo U7 snRNP was released to solution by irradiating a suspension of the beads in processing buffer (75 µl) with long wave UV. To determine the composition of semi-recombinant holo U7 snRNP, a fraction of the UV eluted solution (10%) was analyzed by Western blotting, silver staining and/or mass spectrometry.  For mass spectrometry analysis, a fraction of the UV eluted sample was loaded on 4-12% SDS/polyacrylamide gel for a brief electrophoresis allowing the samples to enter 10 mm into the gel. A small section of the gel containing the sample was excised and in gel-treated with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were applied to C-18 trap column (20mm × 100μm, particle size 5 μm, pore size 100Å, Waters) followed by C-18 analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm, particle size 1.7μm, pore size 130Å) and eluted with an acetonitrile gradient (5%-35% AcN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.05% formic acid with the flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode working with a resolution of 30000 for MS scans and 15000 for MS/MS scans. A higher-collision energy device was utilized for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed with Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science, London, UK) against the Swiss-Prot database restricted to Mus musculus. The following search parameters were used: (i) mass tolerance for precursor, 30 ppm, (ii) product ions mass tolerance, 0.1 Da, (iii) trypsin enzyme specificity, one missed cleavage site allowed, (iv) fixed and variable modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and methionine by oxidation, respectively. Data were imported into MScan software (Tymon Rubel, proteom.ibb.waw.pl) for their ﬁltration and presentation. A false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.05 was applied for peptide identification and threshold score of 50 was applied for protein identification (MudPIT score in Mascot, described in detail at http://www.matrixscience.com).

### Publication Abstract
In animal cells, replication-dependent histone pre-mRNAs are cleaved at the 3' end by U7 snRNP consisting of two core components: a &#x223c;60-nucleotide U7 snRNA and a ring of seven proteins, with Lsm10 and Lsm11 replacing the spliceosomal SmD1 and SmD2. Lsm11 interacts with FLASH and together they recruit the endonuclease CPSF73 and other polyadenylation factors, forming catalytically active holo U7 snRNP. Here, we assembled core U7 snRNP bound to FLASH from recombinant components and analyzed its appearance by electron microscopy and ability to support histone pre-mRNA processing in the presence of polyadenylation factors from nuclear extracts. We demonstrate that semi-recombinant holo U7 snRNP reconstituted in this manner has the same composition and functional properties as endogenous U7 snRNP, and accurately cleaves histone pre-mRNAs in a reconstituted in vitro processing reaction. We also demonstrate that the U7-specific Sm ring assembles efficiently in vitro on a spliceosomal Sm site but the engineered U7 snRNP is functionally impaired. This approach offers a unique opportunity to study the importance of various regions in the Sm proteins and U7 snRNA in 3' end processing of histone pre-mRNAs.

### Keywords
Lsm11, 3’ end processing, U7 snrnp, Histone pre-mrna, Cpsf73, Sm proteins, Flash

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Warsaw

### Submitter
Katarzyna Bucholc

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS


