### Accession
PXD027581

### Title
Neuroprotective properties of Mesenchymal Stromal Cell–Derived Extracellular Vesicles in Models of Acute Brain Pathology

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) of multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) in various studies have shown a wide range of cytoprotective effects, including neuroprotective ones. It is important to note that the therapeutic effect of EVs is observed regardless of the tissue from which MSCs were isolated. However, the mechanisms of the neuroprotective action of extracellular vesicles remain elusive. It is assumed that the proteins contained in EVs could make the main contribution to the therapeutic effects of EVs. The aim of this work was to study protein composition of EV obtained from MSCs in conjunction with the experiments on neuroprotective properties and mechanisms of the neuroprotective effects of EVs-MSC in in vitro and in vivo models of acute neurological diseases.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were obtained by differential centrifugation from human postnatal placenta MSCs condition medium.  Conditioned medium (50 mL) from confluent cultures was collected and processed using serial centrifugations to remove cells and debris (400× g for 10 min followed by 10,000× g at 4 °C for 30 min). Supernatant was used for EV isolation by ultracentrifugation at 108,000× g for 1.5 h at 4 °C by an Avanti JXN-30 high-speed centrifuge (Beckman Coulter Inc., Fullerton, CA, USA) with further pellet washing with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) followed by another spin at 108,000× g for 1.5 h to minimize protein contamination. EVs were characterized by Western blot, electron microscopy, multiplex analysis, and NTA, as recommended by MISEV 2018. Samples were lysed in a lysis buffer containing 1% SDC, 100 mM TRIS, pH 8.5 with MS-SAFE protease inhibitor cocktail (SigmaAldrich) by ultrasonication with a QSonica probe sonicator at 4oC. Protein concentration was estimated by microBCA (ThermoScientific). Aliquots containing 50 mg of protein material were diluted to 1 mg/ml with the lysis buffer and TCEP and CAA were added to the final concentrations of 10 and 20 mM respectively. Cys reduction and alkylation was achieved by 10 min heating of the sample at 80oC. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 4x volume of acetone and incubation at -20oC overnight. Protein pellet was washed twice with acetone. Then the pellet was resuspended in 50 l of the lysis buffer in a sonication bath. Trypsin (Promega, USA) was added at the ratio 1/100 w/w to protein amount and incubated for 2 h at 37oC. Then the second trypsin portion 1/100 w/w was added and the sample was incubated at 37oC overnight. Proteolysis was stopped by adding TFA to 1%. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation.The samples were loaded to LC-MS directly without SPE.  LC-MS analysis LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system connected to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20*0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 m sorbent (GLSciences), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed fused-silica column 500*0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into the emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA) [PMID: 30373789]. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (solvent A) from 4 to 36% of solvent B in 1 h at 0.44 l/min flow at RT.  MS data was collected in DDA mode. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-2000 scan range, max injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window and 0.2 m/z offset targeting 10 highest intensity peaks of +2 to +6 charge, 8x103 minimum AGC, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with 27% NCE. Ions were accumulated for max 45 ms with target AGC 1x105.  Each sample was analyzed in 2 technical repeats.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Raw spectra were processed using in MaxQuant 1.6.6.0 (MQ) [PMID: 27809316] and Perseus [PMID: 27348712]. The data was searched against Human Uniprot SwissProt database, containing canonical proteins, version from 2019 10 03. MaxQuant search was performed with the default parameter set, including Trypsin/p protease specificity, max 2 missed cleavages, Met oxidation, Protein N-term acetylation and NQ deamidation as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification, max 5 modifications per peptide, 1% PSM and protein FDR. The following options were turned on: second peptide, maxLFQ, match between runs. All runs were analyzed as independent experiments and processed in Perseus.  In Perseus the protein group results were filtered for contaminants, reverse and “identified only by site” proteins. Only the proteins with maxLFQ values in at least 3 out of 7 LC-MS runs were used. For them, missing values were imputed from normal distribution with 0.3 intensity distribution sigma width and 1.8 intensity distribution center downshift. Two-sample t-test with Permutation based FDR 5% was applied to search for significantly changing proteins.  GO analysis was performed in DAVID [PMID: 19131956, PMID: 19033363].

### Publication Abstract
Mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) are widely recognized as potential effectors in neuroprotective therapy. The protective properties of MSC were considered to be associated with the secretion of extracellular vesicles (MSC-EV). We explored the effects of MSC-EV <i>in vivo</i> on models of traumatic and hypoxia-ischemia (HI) brain injury. Neuroprotective mechanisms triggered by MSC-EV were also studied <i>in vitro</i> using a primary neuroglial culture. Intranasal administration of MSC-EV reduced the volume of traumatic brain damage, correlating with a recovery of sensorimotor functions. Neonatal HI-induced brain damage was mitigated by the MSC-EV administration. This therapy also promoted the recovery of sensorimotor functions, implying enhanced neuroplasticity, and MSC-EV-induced growth of neurites <i>in vitro</i> supports this. In the <i>in vitro</i> ischemic model, MSC-EV prevented cell calcium (Ca<sup>2+</sup>) overload and subsequent cell death. In mixed neuroglial culture, MSC-EV induced inositol trisphosphate (IP3) receptor-related Ca<sup>2+</sup> oscillations in astrocytes were associated with resistance to calcium overload not only in astrocytes but also in co-cultured neurons, demonstrating intercellular positive crosstalk between neural cells. This implies that phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase/AKT signaling is one of the main pathways in MSC-EV-mediated protection of neural cells exposed to ischemic challenge. Components of this pathway were identified among the most enriched categories in the MSC-EV proteome.

### Keywords
Neuroprotection, Extracellular vesicles, Msc

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute   of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, RAS

### Submitter
Sergey Kovalchuk

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey I. Kovalchuk
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia


