### Accession
PXD027407

### Title
Rat cell supernatant and the separation of supernatant LC-MSMS

### Description
We find one organ of body is special useful for skeletal muscle recovery from indury. To identify the active substance in TCM(special organ cell culturing supernatant which can activate satellite cell proliferation), we prepared serum-free TCM and also separate several fractions, subjected them to LC-MS/MS analysis. To our surprise, most proteins extracted belong to metabolite interconversion enzymes, nucleic acid binding proteins, cytoskeletal proteins, protein modifying enzymes, membrane traffic proteins and so on, but no cytokine was detected.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction. The proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE following the MS-compatiblecoomassiebrilliantblue staining.  In gel digestion. Briefly, the protein bands of interest were excised from the gel and cut into almost 1mm3slices. The gel slices were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate:acetonitrile (1:1) for 3 times, vacuum-dried and subjected to trypsin digestion at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for overnight at 37 °C. The resultant peptides were extracted from the gel by three times of vortex in 10% formicacid:acetonitrile (1:1)for 15 min, then dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 15 μL of 3% acetonitrile, 2% FA before being subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoLC.2D (EksigentTechnologies) coupled with a TripleTOF® 5600+System(AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Firstly, Samples were chromatographed using a 90 min gradient from 5-80% (mobile phase A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 5% (v/v) acetonitrile; mobile phase B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) after direct injection onto a nanoLC Column, 3C18-CL, 75 μm*15 cm (EksigentTechnologies). MS1 spectra were collected in the range 350–1,500 m/z for 250 ms. The 50most intense precursors with charge state 2–5 were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 50–2,000 m/z for 100 ms; precursor ions were excluded from reselection for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data were submitted to ProteinPilot Software (version 4.5, AB Sciex) for data analysis. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Rattus norvegicusUniProt database (April 9, 2018, containing 29,940 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002494) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 3 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 2-5 charges. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for first search, 5 ppm for main search and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in ProteinPilot were set to default values. In addition, ProteinProspector (v 5.20.0) was used for search compare and protein quantification as described previously.

### Publication Abstract
The thymus is the central immune organ, but it is known to progressively degenerate with age. As thymus degeneration is paralleled by the wasting of aging skeletal muscle, we speculated that the thymus may play a role in muscle wasting. Here, using thymectomized mice, we show that the thymus is necessary for skeletal muscle regeneration, a process tightly associated with muscle aging. Compared to control mice, the thymectomized mice displayed comparable growth of muscle mass, but decreased muscle regeneration in response to injury, as evidenced by small and sparse regenerative myofibers along with inhibited expression of regeneration-associated genes myh3, myod, and myogenin. Using paired box 7 (Pax7)-immunofluorescence staining and 5-Bromo-2'-deoxyuridine-incorporation assay, we determined that the decreased regeneration capacity was caused by a limited satellite cell pool. Interestingly, the conditioned culture medium of isolated thymocytes had a potent capacity to directly stimulate satellite cell expansion in&#xa0;vitro. These expanded cells were enriched in subpopulations of quiescent satellite cells (Pax7<sup>high</sup>MyoD<sup>low</sup>EdU<sup>pos</sup>) and activated satellite cells (Pax7<sup>high</sup>MyoD<sup>high</sup>EdU<sup>pos</sup>), which were efficiently incorporated into the regenerative myofibers. We thus propose that the thymus plays an essential role in muscle regeneration by directly promoting satellite cell expansion and may function profoundly in the muscle aging process.

### Keywords
Cell supernatant, Lc-msms, Rat

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Model Animal Research Center of Medical School and Gulou Hospital affiliated Medical School, Nanjing University
Nanjing University

### Submitter
zhang xuena

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Xuena
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Model Animal Research Center of Medical School and Gulou Hospital affiliated Medical School, Nanjing University


