### Accession
PXD011457

### Title
Protein turnover rate along the gastrointestinal tract is coordinated by the spatial location and the microbiota

### Description
The gastrointestinal tract is covered by a single layer of epithelial cells that, together with the mucus layers, protect the underlying tissue from bacterial invasion. The epithelium has one of the highest turnover rates in the body, renewing every 4-5 days. Using stable isotope labelling, high-resolution mass spectrometry and computational analysis, we report here a comprehensive dataset of the turnover rate of 3041 and the expression of 5012 intestinal epithelial cell proteins, analyzed under conventional and germ-free conditions across five different segments in mouse intestine. The median protein half-life was shorter in small intestine compared to colon, ranging from 3.5 to 4.2 days. Differences in protein turnover rates along the intestinal tract can be explained by distinct physiological functions and site-specific immune responses between the small and large intestine. Absence of microflora resulted in increased protein half-life by approximately one day.

### Sample Protocol
Epithelial cells were lysed by boiling in SDS buffer and digested with LysC according to FASP protocol. Overnight digestion was followed with SAX fractionation protocol. Mucus samples were prepared according to modified FASP protocol where urea is substituted with GuCl. Released peptides were analyzed with nanoLC−MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5. Protein abundances were calculated by dividing for each protein the summed peptide intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides. Protein turnover rates were calculated with Wolfram Mathematica. Enrichment analysis was performed with DAVID version 6.7

### Publication Abstract
The gastrointestinal tract is covered by a single layer of epithelial cells that, together with the mucus layers, protect the underlying tissue from microbial invasion. The epithelium has one of the highest turnover rates in the body. Using stable isotope labeling, high-resolution mass spectrometry, and computational analysis, we report a comprehensive dataset of the turnover of more than 3,000 and the expression of more than 5,000 intestinal epithelial cell proteins, analyzed under conventional and germ-free conditions across five different segments in mouse intestine. The median protein half-life is shorter in the small intestine than in the colon. Differences in protein turnover rates along the intestinal tract can&#xa0;be explained by distinct physiological and immune-related functions between the small and large intestine. An absence of microbiota results in an approximately 1&#xa0;day longer protein half-life in germ-free animals.

### Keywords
Germ-free, Commensals, Proteomics, Bacteria, Colon, Lipid metabolism, Mass spectrometry, Small intestine, Protein turnover, Colonization

### Affiliations
Mucin Biology Group, Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg
PhD

### Submitter
Liisa Arike

### Lab Head
Dr Liisa Arike
Mucin Biology Group, Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg


