### Accession
PXD009880

### Title
LC-MS/MS proteomics of ETHE1 deficient patient fibroblasts_Study-1

### Description
The mitochondrial enzyme ETHE1 is a persulfide dioxygenase essential for cellular sulfide detoxification, and its deficiency causes the severe and complex inherited metabolic disorder ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EE). In spite of well-described clinical symptoms of the disease, detailed cellular and molecular characterization is still ambiguous. TMT-based large-scale proteomics was performed to broadly elucidate cellular consequences of the ETHE1 deficiency in the patient fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
The fibroblasts were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Media (DMEM).  Cells were lysed, proteins were trypsin digested and peptides TMT labelled - all according to instructions of the TMT Mass Tagging Kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). TMT labelled pooled peptide samples were fractionated by isoelectric focussing, followed by extraction, C18-purification and LC-MS/MS analyses.  The peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-liquid Chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) (EASY nanoLC-1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT labelled peptide samples were trapped on a pre-column (PepMap 100, 2 cm, 75 µm i.d., 3µm C18 particles, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) followed by reverse phase separation on a C18 column with integrated emitter (EASY-Spray column,  PepMap 25 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated in a 90 minutes linear gradient, from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. The MS was operated in a positive data dependent mode, automatically switching between precursor scanning (MS1) and fragmentation (MS2) acquisition. Resolution of MS1 was set to 70,000 and MS2 to 35,000. In MS1, automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 1x106 ions and scan range between 380-1800 m/z. In MS2, AGC target was set at 2×105 ions, with fixed first mass set to 120 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s for all analyses. Up to ten of the most intense ions were fragmented per every full MS scan, by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). Ions with single charge or unassigned charge states were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The generated peak lists from the same study were merged and analyzed by Mascot version (2.5.1) (Matrix Science,  UK) in proteome discover 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SwissProt database released 2014_10 containing 20,194 review protein sequences and Mascot was used for protein identification as well as TMT reporter quantification. Full scan tolerance was 8 ppm, MS/MS tolerance was 30 mmu, minimum peak count was 20, maximum precursor co-isolation was 40%, and maximum of missed trypsin cleavages was 2. Oxidation on methionine was set as dynamic modification while TMT-6plex on lysine and N-terminal, and carbamidomethyl on cysteine were chosen as static modification. Two separate TMT studies were performed for each cell line, and the proteins common for both studies were selected for further bioinformatics analyses. Both datasets are in this PX submission. See publication, Sahebekhtiari et al 2018 for biological data.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial enzyme ETHE1 is a persulfide dioxygenase essential for cellular sulfide detoxification, and its deficiency causes the severe and complex inherited metabolic disorder ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EE). In spite of well-described clinical symptoms of the disease, detailed cellular and molecular characterization is still ambiguous. Cellular redox regulation has been described to be influenced in ETHE1 deficient cells, and to clarify this further we applied image cytometry and detected decreased levels of reduced glutathione (GSH) in cultivated EE patient fibroblast cells. Cell growth initiation of the EE patient cells was impaired, whereas cell cycle regulation was not. Furthermore, Seahorse metabolic analyzes revealed decreased extracellular acidification, i. e. decreased lactate formation from glycolysis, in the EE patient cells. TMT-based large-scale proteomics was subsequently performed to broadly elucidate cellular consequences of the ETHE1 deficiency. More than 130 proteins were differentially regulated, of which the majority were non-mitochondrial. The proteomics data revealed a link between ETHE1-deficiency and down-regulation of several ribosomal proteins and LIM domain proteins important for cellular maintenance, and up-regulation of cell surface glycoproteins. Furthermore, several proteins of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) were perturbed including proteins influencing disulfide bond formation (e.g. protein disulfide isomerases and peroxiredoxin 4) and calcium-regulated proteins. The results indicate that decreased level of reduced GSH and alterations in proteins of ribosomes, ER and of cell adhesion lie behind the disrupted cell growth of the EE patient cells.

### Keywords
Patient fibroblasts, Tmt labeling, Ethe1 deficiency, Lc-ms/ms ethylmalonic acid encephalopathy

### Affiliations
Aarhus University Hospital
Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University and University Hospital Denmark

### Submitter
Johan  Palmfeldt

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Palmfeldt
Research Unit for Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University and University Hospital Denmark


