### Accession
PXD032714

### Title
Proteomics and Metabolomics unveils Codonopsis Radix ameliorates Gastric Precancerous Lesions via regulating energy metabolism

### Description
Modern pharmacology has proved that Codonopsis Radix and its active ingredients can treat stomach diseases by ameliorating gastrointestinal motility and regulating oxidase levels. However, the detailed molecular mechanism is still unclear. In this study, we systematically evaluated the pharmacodynamic effects of Codonopsis Radix in Gastric Precancerous Lesions animal models. Considering the combination of proteomics and metabolomics, we found that CR could significantly reversed the biological pathways related to energy metabolism which were disturbed by GPL model. Furthermore, the results of serum pharmacology indicated that the Codonopsis Radix contained serum could ameliorate gastritis injury, and selectively inhibit the proliferation of gastric cancer cells rather than normal cells, which was closely related to ATP production in above cells.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digestion: The rat gastric tissue was rinsed in ice cold saline to remove the blood, then weighed 200mg. The tissue was grinded for 90s with a tissue grinder, and the supernatant was collected after centrifuging (21500g, 4°C, 5min). The protein was diluted to 3mg/mL after quantification. 10μL of protein diluent was reacted with 30μL urea (8M, TEAB) and 2μL DTT (200mM, H2O) for 15min incubating at 65°C in darkness. After the tube cooled to 35°C, 2μL IAA (400mM, H2O) was added for 30min at 35°C. Then 2μL DTT (200mM, H2O) was added for 15min incubating at 65°C in darkness. In the end, 100μL TEAB and 2μL trypsin (0.2μg/μL) were added to incubate overnight at 37°C. Isotope dimethyl labeling: For the health (“light”) group, the peptides were reacted with 6μL 4% CH2O and 6μL 0.6M NaBH3CN, for the model (“middle”) group, the peptides were reacted with 6μL 4% 13CD2O (596388, Sigma, USA) and 6μL 0.6M NaBH3CN, and for the CR-treated (“heavy”) group, the peptides were reacted with 6μL 4% 13CD2O and 6μL 0.6M NaBD3CN (800rpm, 22℃,1h). It was stopped by adding 24μL ammonia solution (1%, v/v) and 12μL formic acid. Finally, the light, middle, heavy group were mixed. Desalting: Operating according to the instructions of PierceTM C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific, 87782).

### Data Protocol
The isotope-labeled quantitative proteomics biological mass spectrometry detection and analysis was based on the published technical scheme36, and was carried out by the Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to the Ultimate 3000 LC system. In short, the flow rate was set to 0.3 μL/min, and the applied remote spray voltage was set to 2.8 kV. A full scan (350-1,800MW) was used, followed by data-dependent MS2 scans that enabled dynamic exclusion of the 20 most abundant ions for MS2 data collection. ProLuCID software was used to analyze the LC-MS/MS data. The parameter settings included static modification of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) and variable oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da). The data was further filtered through DTASelect 2.0.4769, and the peptides were restricted to those that were completely digested by trypsin, with a false discovery rate of 1%. According to the published technical scheme, the internal software CIMAGE is used to quantify the ratio of quantitative whole proteomics experiments. Proteins with an average ratio of greater than 1.5 or less than 0.66 in all samples were selected for KEGG pathway analysis and GO analysis by DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). The selected proteins were imported into the STRING (http://stringdb.org/) database to construct the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objective:</b> This study aimed to systematically evaluate the efficacy of <i>Codonopsis pilosula</i> (Franch.) Nannf. (<i>Codonopsis Radix</i>, CR) and reveal the mechanism of its effects on suppressing Gastric Precancerous Lesions. <b>Methods:</b> First, we established the GPL rat model which was induced by N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine, a disordered diet, and 40% ethanol. The CR's anti-Gastric Precancerous Lesions effect was comprehensively evaluated by body weight, pathological section, and serum biochemical indexes. Then, quantitative proteomics and metabolomics were conducted to unveil the disturbed protein-network and pharmacodynamic mechanism. Furthermore, serum pharmacology was employed to confirm that CR's anti-gastritis and anti-cancer phenotype in cell models. <b>Results:</b> In animal models, CR had been shown to control inflammation and ameliorate Gastric Precancerous Lesions. Considering the combination of proteomics and metabolomics, we found that CR could significantly reverse the biological pathways related to energy metabolism which were disturbed by the Gastric Precancerous Lesions model. Furthermore, the results of serum pharmacology indicated that the <i>Codonopsis Radix</i> containing serum could ameliorate gastritis injury and selectively inhibit the proliferation of gastric cancer cells rather than normal cells, which was closely related to ATP production in the above mentioned cells. <b>Conclusion:</b> In summary, CR exerted anti-Gastric Precancerous Lesions effects by ameliorating gastritis injury and selectively inhibiting the proliferation of gastric cancer cells rather than normal cells. Proteomics and metabolomics unveiled that its efficacy was closely related to its regulation of the energy-metabolism pathway. This research not only provided new ideas for exploring the mechanism of complex systems such as Chinese herbals but also benefited the treatment strategy of Gastric Precancerous Lesions via regulating energy metabolism.

### Keywords
Serum pharmacology, Metabolomics, Gastric precancerous lesions, Energy metabolism, Proteomics, Codonopsis radix

### Affiliations
LanZhou University
School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China

### Submitter
茹芸 马

### Lab Head
Dr Jianye Dai
School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China


