### Accession
PXD016400

### Title
Human hela cells mitochondrial LC-MS

### Description
We extracted mitochondria from Hela cells which were treated with CCCP or DMSO for 2 h. The samples were digested by FAST and peptides were used DIA to analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria Isolation Kit for Cultured Cells was from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The purified mitochondria were dissolved in 2% SDS lysis buffer and tryptic digested through filteraided sample preparation (FASP) method.

### Data Protocol
We use the protein discover to search the library and spectronaut to analysis the DIA datas.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are involved in many crucial cellular processes. Maintaining healthy mitochondria is essential for cellular homeostasis. Parkin-dependent mitophagy plays an important role in selectively eliminating damaged mitochondria in mammalian cells. However, mechanisms of Parkin-dependent mitophagy remain elusive. In this research, we performed data-independent acquisition-based quantitative mitochondrial proteomics to study the proteomic alterations of carbonyl cyanide <i>m</i>-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP)-induced Parkin-mediated mitophagy. We identified 222 differentially expressed proteins, with 76 upregulations and 146 downregulations, which were potentially involved in mitophagy. We then demonstrated that annexin A7 (ANXA7), a calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding protein, can translocate to impaired mitochondria upon CCCP treatment, where it played a pivotal part in the process of Parkin-dependent mitophagy via interacting with BASP1. As a mitochondrial uncoupling agent, CCCP indirectly regulated ANXA7 and BASP1 to induce Parkin-dependent mitophagy.

### Keywords
Mitophagy

### Affiliations
Jinan University
Jinan University,China

### Submitter
Kun Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Kun Meng
Jinan University,China


