### Accession
PXD013149

### Title
Disclosing the venom peptidome of the Amazonian spider Acanthoscurria juruenicola

### Description
Acanthoscurria juruenicola is an Amazonian tarantula spider described for the first time a century ago. Specimens of both genders are similar in size and in most morphological aspects, but ecological behavior and their venom composition remained unknown to date. Here we present the peptidomics characterization of the spider venom by a combination of mass spectrometric analysis of both native and digested peptides, venom gland transcriptomics and bioinformatics. A total of 367 native features were observed in the venom peptidome. Seventeen cysteine-rich peptides were simultaneously observed in the transcriptome and in the mass spectrometric experiments, from which fourteen were completely sequenced in the mature forms. The mature peptides have 3-5 disulfide bonds and cover the 3.7-8.6 kDa mass range. Moreover, in vivo paralytic activities of the whole venom were observed in crickets. In silico analysis indicated that all mature peptides are potentially antimicrobial and two may be potential anticancer agents. The antimicrobial activity was experimentally confirmed for the peptide Ap1a against Micrococcus luteus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida albicans.

### Sample Protocol
Multiple Enzyme Digestion
Dried venom fractions were dissolved in the buffer solutions of pH ranging from 7.4-8.0 and separately digested with five enzymes under the following conditions [7,27]: NH4HCO3 (concentration: 50 mM) for digestion with trypsin, and this same buffer with the Asp-N enzyme; Tris-HCl (100 mM) containing CaCl2 (10 mM) was used for the digestion with chymotrypsin; in the digestion with Glu-C the buffer was sodium phosphate (50 mM); and for thermolysin the buffer was Tris-HCl (50 mM) with CaCl2 (0.5 mM). All the enzyme:protein ratios were 1:100 unless for the thermolysin, which was 1:250. Samples were incubated with 0.2% of the surfactant Rapigest (Waters) at 80 ˚C for 15 min, followed by centrifugation at 2000 g for 3 min. All samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60 ˚C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Incubation with the enzymes were conducted for 30 minutes at 37 ˚C, except for thermolysin, conducted at 75 ˚C for 15 min. TFA at final concentration of 0.5% was added to the samples to stop the digestion and to cleave the surfactant Rapigest. Samples were filtered to glass vials in 0.22 µm PVDF filters (Millipore) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

Data Independent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry
The LC-MS/MS experiments of native and digested toxins were performed on a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). The peptide mixture was loaded online for 5 min at a flow rate of 8 µL/min of phase A (0.1% formic acid) using a Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 µm particles, 180 µm x 20 mm length; Waters). The mixture of trapped peptides was subsequently separated by elution with a gradient of 7-35% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through a BEH 130 C18 column (1.7 µm particles, 75 mm x 150 mm; Waters) in 90 min, at 275 nL/min. Data were acquired in the data-independent mode HDMSE with ion mobility separation in the m/z range of 50-2000 and resolution mode. Peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) and energies were alternated between 4 eV and a ramp of 15-65 eV for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively, using scan times of 1.25 s [7,34,35]. The ESI source was operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, block temperature of 100 °C, and cone voltage of 40 V. For lock mass correction, Glu-Fibrinopeptide B (500 fmol/mL in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1 formic acid; Peptide 2.0) was infused through the reference sprayer at 500 nL/min and sampled for 0.5 s every 60 s. Native venom peptidomic samples were analyzed in technical duplicates. Analysis of the multiple enzyme digestion samples were performed at least in technical duplicates, totalizing 34 LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
Native Peptidome
Mass spectrometry raw data of native peptides were analyzed in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics) as previously described. Briefly, the LC-MS/MS files were loaded in the software and a reference run for the replicates was automatically selected. Precursor ion retention times were processed for alignment, peak picking and normalized to the reference run with default parameters. Relative quantification was performed by the comparison of peptide ion abundances. Peptide ion abundances were calculated as the sum of the areas below the isotope boundaries. Abundance values were then normalized by a gain factor to correct systematic experimental variations. Only features detected above the normalized intensity threshold of 1000 counts in the 2 replicates of the native pool were considered for further analysis. All ions above the intensity threshold were manually validated to check ion charge, monoisotopic peak assignment and deconvoluted masses. The native masses and number of disulfide bonds were compared to the theoretical masses and sequences of identified toxins. N-terminus of mature toxins were inferred from convergent amino acidsoriginated from peptides of different enzymes. The peptidome mass map was constructed in Origin Pro 2016 (Originlab).

Identification of Mature Toxins
The LC-MS/MS data from the digested samples were processed in ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3 (PLGS, Waters) by the Apex3D module using low energy threshold of 750 counts and high energy threshold of 50 counts. The MS/MS spectra were exported as mzML files and imported into PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.) for de novo analysis and multi-round database search. De novo analysis was carried out with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.025 Da. The enzyme specificity was defined for each sample and up to one non-specific and three missed cleavages were allowed per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification and Met oxidation, N-terminus acetylation and Asn/Gln deamidation were set as variable modifications. De novo sequenced peptides with average local confidence (ALC) scores ≥50% were selected for multi-round database search against the A. juruenicola venom gland transcriptome database (93,979 sequences) in the first round and against the Araneae database from UniprotKB (63,197 sequences, downloaded in February 23rd, 2017 from www.uniprot.org) in the second round with the same parameters of de novo analysis. Database search was also performed with the A. geniculata genomic database (66,804 sequences). Databases were combined with a list of common contaminants available from the The Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry (http://bit.ly/37yFApg). Post-translational modifications and homology searches were performed by PEAKS PTM and SPIDER modules, respectively. The peptide false discovery rate was estimated by the decoy fusion method and was set to a maximum of 1%. All peptide spectra were manually verified and validated if a minimum of 5 fragments matching the b+ or y+ ion series were found. Additional database searches were performed with smaller databases composed of the protein identifications from the A. juruenicola and A. geniculata databases or single proteins from A. juruenicola. These searches were performed aiming at finding additional mutations and post-translational modifications in a limited search space. The searches with the single proteins were performed with wider mass tolerance windows of 0.2 Da for the precursor and fragment ions. These additional peptides were selected with the same criteria of 1% FDR. Nomenclatures for the new peptides followed the system suggested by King et al. Briefly, in the format UX-TRTX-AjYz, the first U stands for unknown activity, the second X stands for a distinct gene product, TRTX stands for theraphotoxin, Aj is the acronym for A. juruenicola, the following Y is the number to distinguish toxins with similar pharmacology and the last z, the letter to distinguish possible proteoforms.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acanthoscurria juruenicola</i> is an Amazonian spider described for the first time almost a century ago. However, little is known about their venom composition. Here, we present a multiomics characterization of <i>A. juruenicola</i> venom by a combination of transcriptomics, proteomics, and peptidomics approaches. Transcriptomics of female venom glands resulted in 93,979 unique assembled mRNA transcript encoding proteins. A total of 92 proteins were identified in the venom by mass spectrometry, including 14 mature cysteine-rich peptides (CRPs). Quantitative analysis showed that CRPs, cysteine-rich secretory proteins, metalloproteases, carbonic anhydrases, and hyaluronidase comprise &gt;90% of the venom proteome. Relative quantification of venom toxins was performed by DIA and DDA, revealing converging profiles of female and male specimens by both methods. Biochemical assays confirmed the presence of active hyaluronidases, phospholipases, and proteases in the venom. Moreover, the venom promoted <i>in vivo</i> paralytic activities in crickets, consistent with the high concentration of CRPs. Overall, we report a comprehensive analysis of the arsenal of toxins of <i>A. juruenicola</i> and highlight their potential biotechnological and pharmacological applications. Mass spectrometry data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE repository with the dataset identifier PXD013149 and via the MassIVE repository with the dataset identifier MSV000087777.

### Keywords
Acanthoscurria juruenicola, Mass spectrometry., Peptidomics, Sexual dimorphism

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo
Departamento de Bioquímica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, 04023-901, Brazil;  Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, 05503-900, Brazil

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keij Tashima
Departamento de Bioquímica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, 04023-901, Brazil;  Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, 05503-900, Brazil


