### Accession
PXD035778

### Title
In situ structure and dynamics of an alphacoronavirus spike protein by cryo-ET and cryo-EM

### Description
The spike protein of the porcine epidemic diarrhea virus from various strains was generated from different mammalian expression systems. The integration of cryo-EM and MS delineated the glycosylation patterns on Spike proteins and also helped understand how individual glycans contribute to biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
The secreted form recombinant protein samples were generated in the mammalian expression systems. The recombinant protein samples were purified using Immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) followed by Size exclusion chromatography to remove the soluble aggregation and impurity. All fractions that contained target protein were checked by SDS-PAGE. Then, target proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and digested with trypsin and chymotrypsin. The glycopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the HCDpdEThcD acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed by Byonic, Byos, and pGlyco3. Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, while oxidation, deamidation, and N-glycosylation were set as variable modifications. The identified glycopeptides were quantified by Byologic and pGlyco3.

### Publication Abstract
Porcine epidemic diarrhea (PED) is a highly contagious swine disease caused by porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV). PED causes enteric disorders with an exceptionally high fatality in neonates, bringing substantial economic losses in the pork industry. The trimeric spike (S) glycoprotein of PEDV is responsible for virus-host recognition, membrane fusion, and is the main target for vaccine development and antigenic analysis. The atomic structures of the recombinant PEDV S proteins of two different strains have been reported, but they reveal distinct N-terminal domain 0 (D0) architectures that may correspond to different functional states. The existence of the D0 is a unique feature of alphacoronavirus. Here we combined cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to demonstrate in situ the asynchronous S protein D0 motions on intact viral particles of a highly virulent PEDV Pintung 52 strain. We further determined the cryo-EM structure of the recombinant S protein derived from a porcine cell line, which revealed additional domain motions likely associated with receptor binding. By integrating mass spectrometry and cryo-EM, we delineated the complex compositions and spatial distribution of the PEDV S protein N-glycans, and demonstrated the functional role of a key N-glycan in modulating the D0 conformation.

### Keywords
Pedv, Spike protein, Alphacoronavirus

### Affiliations
Academia sinica
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yu-Chun Chien

### Lab Head
Dr Kay-Hooi Khoo
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica


