### Accession
PXD008432

### Title
Strong cation exchange-reversed phase liquid chromatography-capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry platform with high peak capacity for deep bottom-up proteomics

### Description
Two-dimensional (2D) liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) are typically employed for deep bottom-up proteomics, and the state-of-the-art 2D-LC-MS/MS has approached over 8,000 protein identifications (IDs) from mammalian cell lines or tissues in 1-3 days of mass spectrometer time. Capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS has been suggested as an alternative to LC-MS/MS for bottom-up proteomics. CZE-MS/MS and LC-MS/MS are complementary in protein/peptide ID from complex proteome digests because CZE and LC are orthogonal for peptide separation. In addition, the migration time of peptides from CZE-MS can be predicted accurately, which is invaluable for evaluating the confidence of peptide ID from the database search and even guiding the database search. However, the number of protein IDs from complex proteomes using CZE-MS/MS is still much lower than the state of the art using 2D-LC-MS/MS. In this work, for the first time, we established a strong cation exchange (SCX)-reversed phase LC (RPLC)-CZE-MS/MS platform for deep bottom-up proteomics. The platform identified around 8,200 protein groups and 65,000 unique peptides from a mouse brain proteome digest in 70 hours. The data represents the largest bottom-up proteomics dataset using CZE-MS/MS and provides a valuable resource for further improving the tool for prediction of peptide migration time in CZE. The peak capacity of the orthogonal SCX-RPLC-CZE platform was estimated to be around 7,000. SCX-RPLC-CZE-MS/MS produced comparable numbers of protein and peptide IDs with 2D-LC-MS/MS (8,200 vs. 8,900 protein groups, 65,000 vs. 70,000 unique peptides) from the mouse brain proteome digest using comparable instrument time. This is the first time that CZE-MS/MS showed its capability to approach comparable performance to the state-of-the-art 2D-LC-MS/MS for deep proteomic sequencing. SCX-RPLC-CZE-MS/MS and 2D-LC-MS/MS showed good complementarity in protein and peptide IDs and combining those two methods improved the number of protein group and unique peptide IDs by nearly 10% and over 40%, respectively, compared with 2D-LC-MS/MS alone.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used for protein digestion.[1] ~500 µg of mouse brain proteins were dissolved in 125 µL of 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (w/v) and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (pH 8). The solution was heated at 90 oC for 10 min for protein denaturation. Then, 1 µL of dithiothreitol (DTT) solution (1 M in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the sample solution and the mixture was heated at 80 oC for 20 min for protein reduction. After that, 2.5 µL of 1 M iodoacetamide (IAA) solution in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the sample solution and the mixture was kept at room temperature for 10 min (in dark) for protein alkylation. Then 1 µL of 1 M DTT solution was added to the sample solution in order to react with the excess IAA. The sample was then mixed with 375 µL of 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next, the mixture (~500 µL) was added onto two 30-kDa centrifugal filter units (250 µL/unit), followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 15 min. The proteins on the membrane were washed with 250 µL of 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for three times. Next, the proteins were washed with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for three times to remove urea. Finally, 150 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) was loaded on each membrane and 8 µL of trypsin solution (1 µg/µL) was added to each unit. The filter units were gently vortexed for 5 min to mix the trypsin and proteins. After that, the filter units were kept in a 37 oC water bath for 12 h for tryptic digestion. After digestion, the units were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 min, and the flow-through containing the peptides was collected. To increase peptide recovery from the membrane, the membrane was further washed with 150 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The flow-through from those two steps were combined and the peptide solution was acidified with FA, followed by peptide desalting with C18 SPE columns (Waters, Milford, MA). The eluates from the C18 SPE columns were lyophilized with a vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at -80 oC until use. In total, we performed the FASP workflow described above three times, and prepared ~1.5 mg of mouse brain proteome digests for the following online SCX-RPLC and high pH RPLC fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for analyses of RAW files. Sequest HT database search engine was used for database search. The mouse proteome database (UP000000589) downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/) was used as the database. Both the forward and reversed databases were used for database search in order to evaluate the false discovery rates (FDRs). [28,29] The enzyme was set as trypsin. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set as 2. The mass tolerance of precursor ions and fragment ions were set as 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation (methionine) and deamination (Asparagine or Glutamine) were chosen as the dynamic modifications. The carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as the static modification. The peptide IDs were filtered with peptide confidence as high, corresponding to less than 1% FDR. Protein grouping was enabled, and the strict parsimony principle was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Two-dimensional (2D) liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) are typically employed for deep bottom-up proteomics, and the state-of-the-art 2D-LC-MS/MS has approached over 8000 protein identifications (IDs) from mammalian cell lines or tissues in 1-3 days of mass spectrometer time. Capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS has been suggested as an alternative to LC-MS/MS for bottom-up proteomics. CZE-MS/MS and LC-MS/MS are complementary in protein/peptide ID from complex proteome digests because CZE and LC are orthogonal for peptide separation. In addition, the migration time of peptides from CZE-MS can be predicted accurately, which is invaluable for evaluating the confidence of peptide ID from the database search and even guiding the database search. However, the number of protein IDs from complex proteomes using CZE-MS/MS is still much lower than the state of the art using 2D-LC-MS/MS. In this work, for the first time, we established a strong cation exchange (SCX)-reversed phase LC (RPLC)-CZE-MS/MS platform for deep bottom-up proteomics. The platform identified around 8200 protein groups and 65,000 unique peptides from a mouse brain proteome digest in 70&#x202f;h. The data represents the largest bottom-up proteomics dataset using CZE-MS/MS and provides a valuable resource for further improving the tool for prediction of peptide migration time in CZE. The peak capacity of the orthogonal SCX-RPLC-CZE platform was estimated to be around 7000. SCX-RPLC-CZE-MS/MS produced comparable numbers of protein and peptide IDs with 2D-LC-MS/MS (8200 vs. 8900 protein groups, 65,000 vs. 70,000 unique peptides) from the mouse brain proteome digest using comparable instrument time. This is the first time that CZE-MS/MS showed its capability to approach comparable performance to the state-of-the-art 2D-LC-MS/MS for deep proteomic sequencing. SCX-RPLC-CZE-MS/MS and 2D-LC-MS/MS showed good complementarity in protein and peptide IDs and combining those two methods improved the number of protein group and unique peptide IDs by nearly 10% and over 40%, respectively, compared with 2D-LC-MS/MS alone.

### Keywords
Strong cation exchange; reversed-phase liquid chromatography; capillary zone electrophoresis; tandem mass spectrometry; bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University


