### Accession
PXD025383

### Title
The chimeric GaaR::XlnR transcription factor induces pectinolytic activities in the presence of D-xylose in Aspergillus niger

### Description
Aspergillus niger is a filamentous fungus well known for its ability to produce a wide variety of pectinolytic enzymes, which have many applications in the industry. The transcriptional activator GaaR is induced by 2-keto-3-deoxy-L-galactonate, a compound derived from D-galacturonic acid, and plays a major role in the regulation of pectinolytic genes. The requirement for inducer molecules can be a limiting factor for the production of enzymes. Therefore, the generation of chimeric transcription factors able to activate the expression of pectinolytic genes by using underutilized agricultural residues would be highly valuable for industrial applications. In this study, we used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to generate three chimeric GaaR::XlnR transcription factors by swapping the N-terminal region of the xylanolytic regulator XlnR to that of the GaaR in A. niger. As a test case, we constructed a PpgaX:hph reporter strain to evaluate the alteration of transcription factor specificity in the chimeric mutants. Additionally, we generated a constitutively active GaaR::XlnR V756F version of the most efficient chimeric transcription factor to better assess its activity. Our results showed that the chimeric GaaR::XlnR transcription factor was no longer induced in the presence of D-galacturonic acid, but in the presence of D-xylose instead. Moreover, proteomics analysis and saccharification assays confirmed the production of enzymes involved in the release of L-arabinose from pectin, while the constitutive version of this chimeric transcription factor showed consistently improved D-galacturonic acid release from pectin in a gaaR deletion background.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from 600 μl cell-free liquid culture filtrates were precipitated by mixing them with two volumes of -20°C methanol, followed by overnight incubation at -20°C. The precipitated protein solution was centrifuged at 20800 × g, 4°C for 20 min., the supernatant was aspirated and the pellet washed once with 60% cold methanol in water.  The pellet was resuspended in 6M Urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH8 solution.  An aliquot was subsequently taken for protein quantification  performed colorimetrically using the RCDC kit assay (BioRad, Mississauga, Ontario). In total, 7.5 µg of protein samples of biological duplicates were immobilized in acrylamide and processed for in-gel digestion with trypsin as previously described (Balliau et al. 2018, Evaluation of optimized tube-gel methods of sample preparation for large-scale plant proteomics. Proteomes 6:6). Dried gel-digest peptide extracts were solubilized in a solution of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 4 fmol µL-1 of trypsin-digested Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) (Michrom, Auburn, CA) used as internal standard. Five µl were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy-LC II Nano-HPLC system connected in-line with a Velos LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA). Peptide separation was done using a 75 µm. x 12 cm. C18 reversed-phase column and a gradient starting at 5% acetonitrile(ACN):95% water:0.1% formic acid (FA) and ending at 90% ACN:5% water:0.1% FA in 35 min.  LC-MS/MS data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method. The top ten precursors from each full MS scan from 300-1600 m/z were selected for CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap analyzer.  Previously selected precursor were placed in a dynamic exclusion list for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data peptide and protein identification were done using the A. niger NRRL3 protein sequence database (11862 proteins). Protein identification and quantification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo-Fisher) precursor ion quantitation workflow.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was used as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine and peptide N-terminal Carbamidomethylation was used as variable modification.  Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da.  Normalized individual protein area values were expressed as a fold value of the protein area value determined for the BSA internal standard. Data analysis was performed based on the percentage values of the total exoproteome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aspergillus niger, D-xylose, Crispr/cas9, Pectinases, Chimeric transcription factor

### Affiliations
Concordia University
Westerdijik Fungal Biodiversity Institute Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Marcos Di Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald P. deVries
Westerdijik Fungal Biodiversity Institute Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands


