### Accession
PXD002269

### Title
ER stress response in hepatocytes upon Plasmodium infection

### Description
Upon infection of a mammalian host, Plasmodium parasites first replicate inside hepato-cytes, generating thousands of new parasites. Although Plasmodium intra-hepatic devel-opment represents a substantial metabolic challenge to the host hepatocyte, how infected cells respond to and integrate this stress remains poorly understood. Here, we present proteomic and transcriptomic analysis revealing that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated in host hepatocytes upon Plasmo-dium berghei infection. The expression of XBP1s -the active form of the UPR mediator XBP1- and the liver-specific UPR mediator CREBH is induced by P. berghei infection in vivo. Furthermore, this UPR induction increases parasite liver burden. Altogether, our data suggests that ER stress is a central feature of P. berghei intra-hepatic development, contributing to the success of infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed with FASP protocol. The digested peptides were then desalted and concentrated in StageTips and fractionated via a 15 cm reversed phased column directly coupled to LTQ Orbitrap XL.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant computational platform with match betweeen the runs feature and label free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Upon infection of a mammalian host, Plasmodium parasites first replicate inside hepatocytes, generating thousands of new parasites. Although Plasmodium intra-hepatic development represents a substantial metabolic challenge to the host hepatocyte, how infected cells respond to and integrate this stress remains poorly understood. Here, we present proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, revealing that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident unfolded protein response (UPR) is activated in host hepatocytes upon Plasmodium berghei infection. The expression of XBP1s--the active form of the UPR mediator XBP1--and the liver-specific UPR mediator CREBH is induced by P. berghei infection in vivo. Furthermore, this UPR induction increases parasite liver burden. Altogether, our data suggest that ER stress is a central feature of P. berghei intra-hepatic development, contributing to the success of infection.

### Keywords
Huh7 plasmodium infection

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility 
Executive Director Instituto de Medicina Molecular Av. Prof. Egas Moniz 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal Tel: (+351) 217 999 511

### Submitter
Nagarjuna  Nagaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Manuel Dias Mota
Executive Director Instituto de Medicina Molecular Av. Prof. Egas Moniz 1649-028 Lisboa, Portugal Tel: (+351) 217 999 511


