### Accession
PXD005598

### Title
A fatty acid oxidation-dependent metabolic shift regulates adult neural stem cell quiescence

### Description
Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is important for certain forms of cognition and failing neurogenesis has been implicated in neuropsychiatric diseases. The neurogenic capacity of hippocampal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) depends on a balance between quiescent and proliferative states. However, how this balance is regulated remains poorly understood. Here we show that the rate of fatty acid oxidation (FAO) defines quiescence vs. proliferation in NSPCs. Quiescent NSPCs show high levels of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1a (Cpt1a)-dependent FAO, which is downregulated in proliferating NSPCs. Pharmacological inhibition and conditional deletion of Cpt1a in vitro and in vivo leads to altered NSPC behavior, showing that Cpt1a-dependent FAO is required for stem cell maintenance and proper neurogenesis. Strikingly, experimental manipulation of malonyl-CoA, the metabolite that regulates levels of FAO, is sufficient to induce exit from quiescence and to enhance NSPC proliferation. Thus, the data presented here identify a shift in FAO metabolism that governs NSPC behavior and suggest an instructive role for fatty acid metabolism in regulating NSPC activity.

### Sample Protocol
Proliferating and quiescent NSPCs were cultured as described above on coated 10cm plates. Prior to protein extraction cells were washed twice using 4°C cold PBS (Life Technology).  Cells were lysed using 300µl lysis buffer (150mM NaCL, 50mM Tris, 5mM EDTA, 20mM N-Ethylmaleimide, 2mM PMSF, 1x Complete EDTA-free proteinase Inhibitor tablets, ROCHE). Lysates were collected in precooled screw cap tubes (Saarstedt). Lysates were supplemented with 1.7% Triton (Sigma) and 1% Chaps (Sigma) and incubated for 1h with end over end rotation at 4°C.  Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 17000g for 10min and protein concentration was determined using Protein DC assay (Biorad) following the Manufacturer’s instructions. 100µg protein was precipitated twice by methanol/chloroform precipitation and protein pellets were resuspended in SDS lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT) and stored at -80°C. Protein samples were processed using a modified protocol by filter aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009). In brief, samples were incubated for 5 min at 95°C with 700 rpm shaking on a head block (Eppendorf), followed by 10min sonication. Protein concentration was measured using a Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the Manufacturer’s instructions and 20µg protein per sample was used for further processing. Samples were mixed with 200µl 8 M urea in 100mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2 (UA) and loaded to Microcon-30 centrifugal filter units (Millipore), washed once with 200µl UA, alkylated with 100µl 50mM Iodoacetamide and incubated for 1min at 600rpm in a Thermo mixer (Eppendorf). Filter units were washed 3x with 100µl UA and 2x with 100µl 0.5M NaCl. Filter units were then transferred to new collection tubes and incubated with 120µl TEAB with trypsin (1:50 (w/w) ratio of trypsin to protein) (Promega) overnight in a wet-chamber. If not otherwise stated, all centrifugation steps were performed for 20 min at RT. Samples were collected and acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA followed by Solid Phase Extraction (SPE) C18 clean up. Finistrerre SPE columns (100mg/1ml; WICOM International) were pre-wetted with 1ml 100% MeOH and cleaned with 1ml of 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA before equilibration with 3%ACN, 0.1% TFA. The volume of peptide containing samples was adjusted to 500µl with 3% ACN 0.1% TFA and loaded onto SPE columns and washed twice with 1ml of 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA, completely dried (Centrivap, Labconco) and dissolved in 3% ACN; 0.1% FA). Prior to measurements, peptide samples were supplemented 1:40 with Retention Time Normalization Peptides (BIOGNOSYS).  LC MS/MS analysis All data was acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, Ca), which was connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). 4µl of the peptide samples were loaded onto a frit column (inner diameter 75µm, length 15 cm) packed with reverse phase material (C18-AQ, particle size 1.9µm, pore size 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany), and separated at a flow rate of 250nl per min. Solvent composition of buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The following LC gradient was applied: 0 min: 3% buffer B, 50 min: 25% B, 60 min: 32% B, 70 min: 97% B, 80 min: 97% B. Survey scans were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the range of m/z 300-1500, with a resolution of 60000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra were acquired in the ion trap, using a maximum injection time of 35 ms. The precursor ion isolation width was set to m/z 2.0, and a normalized collision energy of 30% was used. Charge state screening was enabled, and charge states 2-6 were included. No threshold for signal intensities was applied, and precursor masses already selected for MS/MS acquisition were excluded for further selection during 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics). In brief, runs were aligned to a reference sample containing the most comprehensive number of peptide ions to compensate for between run differences in the retention time.  Only peptide ions with a charge state of two, three and four were included into the analysis, default normalization was performed. For peptide identification, up to three tandem mass spectra per peptide ion were exported to a Mascot generic file (mgf) with fragment ion count limited to 200 and deisotoping as well as charge deconvolution was applied. Mascot (2.4.1) was used for searching a target-decoy mouse database downloaded from uniprot (03/01/2015), as decoys protein sequences were reversed and concatenated to the forward database. Parameters were set as following: peptide tolerance +-10ppm, MS/MS tolerance +-0.7DA, variable modifications: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Gln → pyro Glu (N-term), N-Ethylmaleimide, N-Ethylmaleimide + water, oxidation (M). Resulting Mascot dat-files were imported into Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software) and the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides was set to 0.01, for proteins to 0.05 respectively. The Scaffold Spectrum Report was re-imported into Progenesis and relative quantitation using non-conflicting peptides was performed. Decoy hits were excluded and protein quantitation and statistics were exported as .csv files.

### Publication Abstract
Hippocampal neurogenesis is important for certain forms of cognition, and failing neurogenesis has been implicated in neuropsychiatric diseases. The neurogenic capacity of hippocampal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) depends on a balance between quiescent and proliferative states. Here, we show that the rate of fatty acid oxidation (FAO) regulates the activity of NSPCs. Quiescent NSPCs show high levels of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1a (Cpt1a)-dependent FAO, which is downregulated in proliferating NSPCs. Pharmacological inhibition and conditional deletion of Cpt1a in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo leads to altered NSPC behavior, showing that Cpt1a-dependent FAO is required for stem cell maintenance and proper neurogenesis. Strikingly, manipulation of malonyl-CoA, the metabolite that regulates levels of FAO, is sufficient to induce exit from quiescence and to enhance NSPC proliferation. Thus, the data presented here identify a shift in FAO metabolism that governs NSPC behavior and suggest an instructive role for fatty acid metabolism in regulating NSPC activity.

### Keywords
Fatty acid oxidation, Neural stem cell, Quiescence

### Affiliations
University of Zurich
Laboratory of Neural Plasticity, Faculty of Medicine and Science, Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Thomas Wegleiter

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Jessberger
Laboratory of Neural Plasticity, Faculty of Medicine and Science, Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


