### Accession
PXD007799

### Title
A multi-omic analysis to characterize cigarette smoke induced molecular alterations in esophageal cells

### Description
Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the most common cancers with high mortality rate. Smoking is one of the established risk factors of ESCC. However, there is limited data on molecular alterations associated with cigarette smoke exposure in esophageal cells. Understanding the effects of cigarette smoke on esophageal squamous epithelial cells at a molecular level would lead to a better understanding of the pathobiology of ESCC which has implications for identification of early biomarkers and therapeutic targets. To investigate the effect of cigarette smoke exposure, we developed a cell line model where Het1A cells (non-neoplastic human esophageal epithelial cells) were chronically treated with cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) for 2 months, 4 months, 6 months and 8 months. We carried out comparative proteomic, phosphoproteomic and whole exome sequencing analyses on CSC treated and untreated cells. Increased cell proliferation and invasion of Het1A cells was observed after chronic exposure to cigarette smoke. Using quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses, we identified 56 proteins and 296 phosphoproteins that showed differential expression. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed proteins and phosphoproteins showed enrichment of molecules involved in DNA damage response pathway. Whole exome sequencing (WES) of CSC treated and untreated cells also revealed mutations and copy number alterations in genes associated with DNA damage response. By correlating WES, proteomic and phosphoproteomic results, we observed potential loss of function in HMGN2 and MED1 that were reported as potential tumor suppressors and are known to play important role in DNA damage response. We also observed decreased expression of HMGN2 in tissue section of ESCC. Overexpression of HMGN2 and MED1 lead to decreased proliferative and invasive ability of CSC treated cells. These findings suggest that cigarette smoke affects genes and proteins associated with DNA damage response pathways which might play a vital role in development of ESCC.

### Sample Protocol
TMT labeling: Het1A cells were treated with 0.1% of cigarette smoke condensate for 2 months, 4 months, 6 months and 8 months and protein was extracted using 2% SDS. Briefly, 800ug of protein from each time point were reduced and alkylated by using Dithiothreitol and Iodocetamide, respectively. The samples were digested overnight with trypsin (promega) (1:20) at 37°C. Peptides from each group were labelled using 10plex tandem mass tags with technical replicates as per manufacturer’s protocol (Catalogue # 90110 Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides derived from control were labelled by 126 and 127N, 2 months CSC treated were labelled by 127C and 128N, 4 months CSC treated were labelled by 128C and 129N, 6 months CSC treated were labelled by 129C and 130N and 8 months CSC treated labelled with 130C and 131 labels. For total proteomic study, 100 ug from each sample was isolated and rest 700ug from each sample was used for phosphoproteomic study.  All samples for proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis were pooled and dried using speed vac. Basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) The labelled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation. Briefly, 1 mL of bRPLC solvent A (10 mMTEABC pH 8.4, Sigma Aldrich) was used to resuspend of lyophilized peptides mixture. This mixture was fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) on an Agilent 1100 LC system with a flow rate of 1 mL/min by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (10 mMTEABC in 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.4). A total of 96 fractions were initially collected in 96- well plates with 0.1% formic acid added to each well. The fractions were then concatenated to 10 fractions.  LC-MS/MS analysis Each fraction was analysed in duplicate were analysed using on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy NanoLC system. The peptide samples were enriched on a trap column (75μm x 2 cm) at a flow rate of 3μL/min and resolved on an analytical column (75μm x 15 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted in a linear gradient of 10-30% of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 100 mins. Data dependent acquisition with full scans in 400-1600 m/z range was carried out at a mass resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z. Fifteen most intense precursor ions from a survey scan were selected for MS/MS fragmented using HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and database searches were carried out using Mascot and Sequest human protein database NCBI Ref Seq (Version 65, containing 36211 protein entries along with common contaminants). Search parameters included maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine were set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine as variable modification. For MS2 data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.05 Da. False discovery rate of 1% was set at the PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Though smoking remains one of the established risk factors of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, there is limited data on molecular alterations associated with cigarette smoke exposure in esophageal cells. To investigate molecular alterations associated with chronic exposure to cigarette smoke, non-neoplastic human esophageal epithelial cells were treated with cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) for up to 8 months. Chronic treatment with CSC increased cell proliferation and invasive ability of non-neoplastic esophageal cells. Whole exome sequence analysis of CSC treated cells revealed several mutations and copy number variations. This included loss of high mobility group nucleosomal binding domain 2 (HMGN2) and a missense variant in mediator complex subunit 1 (MED1). Both these genes play an important role in DNA repair. Global proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of CSC treated cells lead to the identification of 38 differentially expressed and 171 differentially phosphorylated proteins. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed proteins and phosphoproteins revealed that most of these proteins are associated with DNA damage response pathway. Proteomics data revealed decreased expression of HMGN2 and hypophosphorylation of MED1. Exogenous expression of HMGN2 and MED1 lead to decreased proliferative and invasive ability of smoke exposed cells. Immunohistochemical labeling of HMGN2 in primary ESCC tumor tissue sections (from smokers) showed no detectable expression while strong to moderate staining of HMGN2 was observed in normal esophageal tissues. Our data suggests that cigarette smoke perturbs expression of proteins associated with DNA damage response pathways which might play a vital role in development of ESCC.

### Keywords
Dna damage response, Esophageal cancer, Cigarette smoke

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India


