### Accession
PXD003092

### Title
Phosphoproteomics analysis of anti-cancer effects of ginsenoside Rg3 in human breast cancer cells

### Description
The breast cancer incidence has been increasing in China, with the earlier age of onset compared with Western countries. Traditional Chinese medicine has been provided as one of the major source of anti-cancer drugs. Ginseng is one of the most common traditional medicines in China. Ginsenosides, the saponins in the plant Panax (ginseng) are the major active components responsible for their chemopreventive effects from cancer. However, the mechanisms by which ginsenosides exert their anti-cancer effect remain elusive. By combining TMT-based quantitation with TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment, we performed a quantitative analysis of the changes of the phosphoproteomes in ginsenoside Rg3-treated breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells. We were able to quantitate 5,140 phosphorylation sites on 2,041 phosphoproteins. Our data show that the phosphorylation status of 13 sites was changed in MDA-MB-231 cells upon Rg3 treatment. The perturbed phosphoproteins are CPSF7, EEF2, HIRIP3, MAGED2, MPRIP, MYCBP2, PAWR, PPP1R12A, RANBP2, SEPT9, TMPO, and UFL1. These proteins are involved in various biological processes, including protein synthesis, cell division, and inhibition of NF-κB signaling. Our study revealed that Rg3 exerts its anti-cancer effects through a combination of different signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially-growing MDA-MB-231 cells were plated at 3 million cells per 150 mm plate for overnight. Three populations of cells were subjected to treatments with 40 µM ginsenoside Rg3 for 0, 3 or 24 h, separately. The experiments were carried out in two biological replicates. After treatment, cells were washed with PBS, collected, and lysed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC), 10 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate) by sonication. After the centrifugation at 16,000 × g at 20°C for 15 minutes, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined using PierceTM Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). An equal amount of protein (400 µg) from each condition was reduced by DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM at 60 ˚C for 20 min and alkylated using 10mM iodoacetamide for 10 min at 25 ˚C in the dark. The samples were then subjected to the filter-assisted sample preparation protocol with minor modifications. The processed samples were transferred to a fresh tube and subjected to tryptic digestion for overnight. The resulting peptides were dried completely in a vacuum concentrator and kept at -80 ºC. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was carried out according to the manufacture instructions. Briefly, tryptic peptides from each sample was reconstituted in 100 µL of 50 mM TEABC buffer and mixed with the TMT reagent reconstituted in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated at 25 ˚C for 1 hr. All the labeled peptides from each sample were mixed, dried completely in a vacuum concentrator and kept at -80 ºC. TMT-labeled peptide mixture were resuspended in 10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0 and loaded on a XBridge BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm (Waters, Milford, MA), and fractionated on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC system by basic reversed-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 400 uL/min. Mobile phase consisted of 10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0 (buffer A) and 10 mM TEABC, 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.0 (buffer B). After loading the sample onto the column, the peptides were separated using the following gradient: 2 min isocratic hold at 0% B, 0 to 15% solvent B in 8 min; 15 to 28.5% solvent B in 33 min; 28.5 to 34% solvent B in 5.5 min; 34 to 60% solvent B in 13 min, for a total gradient time of 64.5 min. Fractions were collected on a 96 well plate through the elution profile of the separation. 5% of collection from each well were merged into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation for proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS. The rest of collection from each well were merged into 12 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation for TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. TiO2 nanobeads were incubated with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) solution (80% v/v ACN, 3% v/v TFA, 5% w/v DHB) for 20 min at 25 ˚C. Each fraction was resuspended in DHB solution and incubated with DHB-bound TiO2 nanobeads (Peptides:TiO2 = 1:1). Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 nanobeads were washed twice with 400 µL of washing solution ((80% v/v ACN, 3% v/v TFA). Phosphopeptides were eluted thrice with 20 µl of 4% v/v ammonia into 20 µl of 20% v/v TFA and dried completely by vacuum centrifugation. The dried phosphopeptides were resuspended in 50 µL 0.15% TFA, and desalted using C18 Stage-Tips prior to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched using Andromeda algorithm against a human UniProt database (released in February, 2014) through the MaxQuant platform (version 1.4.1.2). The search parameters included: 6-plex TMT; a maximum of two missed cleavages; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues; variable modification: protein N-term acetylation, oxidation of methionine residues, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. The monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 50 ppm and the first search and main search for MS/MS were set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The maximum modifications per peptide was set to 5 and the maximum charge was set at 7. The reward type of the target-decoy analysis was chosen. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR), protein FDR and the site decoy fraction were set to 0.01. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimal scores for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 40, respectively. The minimal delta score for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 17, respectively. The minimum of unique and razor peptides for identification was set to 1. The reporter ion intensities for each PSM with PIF (precursor ion fraction) > 0.75 were calculated using MaxQuant. The quantitation of identified proteins was determined by normalized reporter ion intensities using at least 1 razor/unique non-phosphopeptide. The quantitation of each identified phosphosites were determined by normalized reporter ion intensities using the least modified peptide and normalized. The probability of phosphorylation for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated using Andromeda (MaxQuant).

### Publication Abstract
The incidence of breast cancer has been increasing in China and the age of breast cancer onset is earlier compared with Western countries. Compounds commonly used in Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) are an important source of anticancer drugs. Ginseng is one of the most common medicines used in TCM. Ginsenosides, which are saponins found in the ginseng plant, are the major active components responsible for the chemopreventive effects of ginseng in cancer. However, the mechanisms by which ginsenosides exert their anticancer effects remain elusive. The current study combined tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantification with titanium dioxide-based phosphopeptide enrichment to quantitatively analyze the changes in phosphoproteomes in breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells that occur following treatment with the ginsenoside Rg3. A total of 5,140 phosphorylation sites on 2,041 phosphoproteins were quantified and it was demonstrated that the phosphorylation status of 13 sites were altered in MDA-MB-231 cells following treatment with Rg3. The perturbed phosphoproteins were: Cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor subunit 7, elongation factor 2 (EEF2), HIRA-interacting protein 3, melanoma-associated antigen D2, myosin phosphatase Rho-interacting protein, probable E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase MYCBP2, PRKC apoptosis WT1 regulator protein, protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 12A, E3 SUMO-protein ligase RanBP2, Septin-9, thymopoietin, and E3 UFM1-protein ligase 1. Western blotting confirmed that Rg3 increased the phosphorylation of EEF2 on Thr57 but did not alter the protein expression of EEF2 in MDA-MB-231 and HCC1143 cells. These ginsenoside Rg3-regulated proteins are involved in various biological processes, including protein synthesis, cell division and the inhibition of nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B signaling. The results of the present study revealed that Rg3 exerts its anticancer effects via a combination of different signaling pathways.

### Keywords
Sept9, Hirip3, Phosphorylation, Mprip, Pawr, Maged2, Mda-mb-231, Eef2, 6-plex tmt, Ginsenoside rg3, Mycbp2, Ranbp2, Ppp1r12a, Cpsf7, Lc-ms/ms, Triple negative breast cancer, Ufl1, Tmpo

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Control, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, People’s Republic of China
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Yi Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Han
Department of Infection Control, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, People’s Republic of China


