### Accession
PXD023817

### Title
Reverse-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) in Combination with Tip-Based Strong Cation Exchange (SCX-Tip) Fractionation, ReST, an Alternative Approach for Cross-linked Peptides analysis

### Description
Chemical cross-linking in combination with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has emerged as a useful method for structural elucidation of proteins and protein complexes. Efficient enrichment procedures are necessary to analyze cross-linked products due to their relatively low abundance. Currently, strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX), size exclusion chromatography (SEC), and affinity tag-based enrichment are among the widely used enrichment strategies. Herein, we present a two-dimensional enrichment strategy combining basic RPLC (bRPLC) fractionation and tip-based SCX (SCX-Tip) enrichment, termed ReST method, for the characterization of cross-linked peptides. We revealed the unbiased separation effects of the bRPLC in the cross-linked peptide fractionation. We optimized the enrichment conditions of SCX-Tip for cross-linked peptides using well-designed cross-linked peptides. Taking advantage of the high resolution of bRPLC fractionation and the high enrichment efficiency of SCX-Tip, we were able to identify 43.6% more cross-links than the conventional SCX approach. The presented ReST approach is an effective fractionation method for XL-MS analysis, and could be beneficial for protoeme-scale protein-protein interaction studies. Moreover, more stringent data filtering was proposed in order to achieve the high confidence of cross-linked peptide identification.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cell culture, protein extraction, cross-linking and digestion HeLa (Human epithelial carcinoma) Cells (ATCC) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum in humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C and were grown as monolayer cultures in 10 cm tissue culture plate. HeLa cells were harvested by 2,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min. The harvested cells were washed three times with PBS buffer and then resuspended in cross-linking buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, pH 7.8) containing 1× EDTA-free protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following preparation procedures of cross-linked peptides were the same as previously reported by Liu et al.18, 19 Briefly, the slurry solution was sonicated for 3 min (30 s sonication with 30 s intervals) in ice incubation, and the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 13,800 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. Subsequently, the protein solution was diluted to 1 mg/mL with cross-linking buffer, incubated with 1 mM DSSO (dissolved in DMSO) for 1 h at room temperature, and quenched by adding 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Then the cross-linked samples were denatured with 8 M urea, reduced with 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 15 mM IAM at 25 °C for 45 min in the dark. The excess DTT was removed by adding additional 5 mM DTT. Proteins were digestion by Lys-C (the ratio of enzyme to proteins as 1:50) for 4 h at 37 °C, after which the samples were diluted four times and followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (1:50) at 37 °C. The digestion was quenched with 1% FA. The digests were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C, desalted using WondaSep C18 SPE columns (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan), and vacuum-dried for further application.  Strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation Similarly, 1 mg of the desalted peptides were loaded onto the BioBasic SCX column (5 μm, 300 Å, 2.1 mm i.d. × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). SCX solvent A was consisted of 0.1% TFA in 30% ACN, solvent B was 0.1% TFA, 0.5 M NH4Cl in 30% ACN. The flow rate was set as 0.2 mL/min. The gradient was set as follows: 0-2% B in 0.01 min, 2-3% B in 8 min, 3-8% B in 6 min, 8-20% B in 13.99 min, 20-40% B in 10 min, 40-90% B in 10min, 90% B for 6 min, and 90-0% B for 6min. For each sample, a total of 34 fractions were collected and mixed into 10 fractions, desalted using home-made Poros R3 micro-columns, dried and stored at -20 °C for further use.  Reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) fractionation RPLC fractionation was carried out on a Kinetex EVO C18 column (2.6 μm, 100 Å, 3 mm i.d. × 100 mm, Phenomenex, USA) using Dionex UltiMate-3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The RPLC solvent A was 10 mM NH4HCO3, solvent B was 80% ACN containing 10 mM NH4HCO3. 1 mg of the generated peptides were loaded onto the column using mobile phase A, and the flow rate was set as 0.4 mL/min. The separation gradient was set as follows: 0% B for 5 min, 0-40% B in 25min, 40-100% B in 5 min, 100% B for 2 min, 100-0% B in 1 min, and 0% B for 7 min. Fractions were collected from the sixth minute with 1-min intervals in the next 30-min gradient, and finally the 30 fractions were mixed into 10 fractions for further use. Tip-based SCX fractionation Tip-based SCX fractionation of peptides with different charge states was performed according to Shema et al’s research28 with slight changes. A frit of C8 Empore Disc (3M) was added into a 200 μL pipet tip (Axygen). 10 mg of SCX particles (PolySULFOETHYL A, 5 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size, PolyLC, USA) were loaded onto the tip for each sample. The micro-column was conditioned with 100 μL of SCX buffer A (0.1% TFA, 30% ACN). The buffer was removed by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 8 min and discarded. Samples with 50 μg starting amount were re-solubilized in 100 μL of SCX buffer A, loaded onto the tip by centrifugation at 600 g for 15 min, and repeated once. For BSA peptides containing cross-linked peptides, SCX buffers with different salt concentrations were successively used to elute peptides with different charge states. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 1000 g for 8 min. Eluted fractions were collected individually for further MALDI-MS analysis. For HeLa cross-linked peptides, after loading, the microcolumn was washed once with 0.1% TFA, 100 mM NH4Cl in 30% ACN, and followed by elution with 0.5 M NH4HCO3 in 50% ACN. The elution was vaccum-dried to remove ACN, and then desalted using home-made Poros R3 microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). One thirds of peptides from SCX-Tip fractionation were applied for the follwing analyses. Samples were loaded and analyzed on Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 50 μm i.d. × 15 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). The mobile phases were consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 5-8% B in 3 min, 8-44% B in 45 min, 44-100% B in 2 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data acquisition mode was set to obtain one MS scan followed by sequential CID-MS/MS and EThcD-MS/MS acquisitions with a cycle time of 5s. All spectral data were detected by Orbitrap mass analyzer. For the MS scans, the mass range was set as 350-1,800 at a resolution of 60,000, the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set as standard, and the maximum ion injection time was set as 50 ms. For the MS/MS scans, the resolution was set as 30,000, the precursor isolation window was 1.6 m/z, the dynamic exclusion was 60 s with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The CID collision energy was set as 25% and the AGC target was set as auto. The usage of charge-dependent ETD parameters was enabled, and the Supplemental activation was set as HCD with an energy of 15%.   Data Analysis The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with XlinkX nodes (version 2.2).19, 35 The processing and consensus workflow was set up according to the incorporated cross-linking analysis templates. For “Xlinkx Detect” node, the acquisition strategy was set as MS2_MS2, the crosslink modification was set to DSSO on lysine. For “Xlinkx search” node, the cross-linked peptide searching parameters were set as follows: Human swissprot database was downloaded from UniProt (20160213) containing 20,186 protein sequences, trypsin/P as enzymes, maximum missed cleavages of two, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, carbamidomethylation on cysteine as static modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. For “Xlinkx Validator” node, the FDR threshold was set to 1% with Percolator strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking in combination with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has emerged as a useful method for structural elucidation of proteins and protein complexes. Due to the low stoichiometry of cross-linked peptides, a specific enrichment method is always necessary prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, especially for complex samples. Currently, strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX), size exclusion chromatography (SEC), and affinity tag-based enrichment are among the widely used enrichment strategies. Herein, we present a two-dimensional strategy combining basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) fractionation and tip-based SCX (SCX-Tip) enrichment, termed ReST, for the characterization of cross-linked peptides. We revealed the unbiased separation effects of the bRPLC in the cross-linked peptide fractionation. We optimized the enrichment conditions of SCX-Tip using well-designed cross-linked peptides. Taking advantage of the high resolution of bRPLC separation and the high enrichment efficiency of SCX-Tip, we were able to identify 43.6% more cross-linked peptides than the conventional SCX approach. The presented ReST is a simple and efficient approach for proteome-scale protein-protein interaction studies.

### Keywords
Scx-tip, Chemical cross-linking, Fractionation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Zhen Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


