### Accession
PXD006992

### Title
PROTEOLYTIC SIGNATURES OF THROMBIN-DERIVED PEPTIDES by LC-MS/MS

### Description
We hypothesized that the peptide profile could reflect the action of different proteases present in wounds. However, the complexity of such peptide systems, and lack of efficient analytic tools, until recently has hampered their clinical exploitation and use. In this project, we set out to define cleaved thrombin fragments generated by both endogenous and bacterial proteases.

### Sample Protocol
After in vitro enzymatic digestion of thrombin, the reaction was stopped by acidifying the samples. The peptides were then dried and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid (FA). Peptides were separated and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive instrument  (Thermo Fisher, MA). Five μl of sample was injected into an acclaim peptide trap column via the auto-sampler of the Dionex RSLC nanoLC system.

### Data Protocol
The concatenated target-decoy UniProt human database was used for data searches. Unbiased database search was performed using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) maximum two missed cleavage sites per peptide were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and deamidation (N and Q) were variable modifications. A total of three samples with two technical replicates (3 x 2) for each in vitro digest wereas analysed by LC-MS/MS. The identified peptides were then sorted on the peptide score and hits with <30 were omitted from analyses. Peptide hits consistently identified in all experimental and technical replicates were considered for qualitative comparison between in vitro and in vivo samples.

### Publication Abstract
The disease burden of failing skin repair and non-healing ulcers is extensive. There is an unmet need for new diagnostic approaches to better predict healing activity and wound infection. Uncontrolled and excessive protease activity, of endogenous or bacterial origin, has been described as a major contributor to wound healing impairments. Proteolytic peptide patterns could therefore correlate and "report" healing activity and infection. This work describes a proof of principle delineating a strategy by which peptides from a selected protein, human thrombin, are detected and attributed to proteolytic actions. With a particular focus on thrombin-derived C-terminal peptides (TCP), we show that distinct peptide patterns are generated in vitro by the human S1 peptidases human neutrophil elastase and cathepsin G, and the bacterial M4 peptidases Pseudomonas aeruginosa elastase and Staphylococcus aureus aureolysin, respectively. Corresponding peptide sequences were identified in wound fluids from acute and non-healing ulcers, and notably, one peptide, FYT21 (FYTHVFRLKKWIQKVIDQFGE), was only present in wound fluid from non-healing ulcers colonized by P. aeruginosa and S. aureus. Our result is a proof of principle pointing at the possibility of defining peptide biomarkers reporting distinct proteolytic activities, of potential implication for improved diagnosis of wound healing and infection.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Antimicrobial peptide

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Sunil Adav

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Sze S K
Nanyang Technological University


