### Accession
PXD012570

### Title
Cryptococcus neoformans resist to drastic conditions by switching to viable but non-culturable cell phenotype

### Description
Metabolically quiescent pathogens can persist in a viable non-replicating state for months or even years. In specific infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, cryptococcosis,  histoplasmosis, latent infection is a corollary of this dormant state, with at some point a phase of reactivation, leading to the symptoms of the infection. During murine  cryptococcosis and macrophage uptake, stress and host immunity induce C. neoformans  heterogeneity with generation of a sub-population of yeasts that has been shown to harbor a phenotype compatible with dormancy (low stress response, latency of growth). In this  subpopulation, mitochondrial transcriptional activity has been shown to be up regulated and this phenotype has been considered as a hallmark of quiescence in stem cells. Based on  these findings, we worked to reproduce this phenotype in vitro model and standardized the  experimental conditions to generate dormancy in Cryptococcus neoformans. We found that incubation of stationary phase yeasts (STAT) in nutriment limited conditions and hypoxia during 8 days (8D-HYPOx) were able to mimic the phenotype obtained in vivo. In these conditions, mortality and/or apoptosis occurred in less than 5% of the yeasts  compared to 30-40% of apoptotic or dead yeasts upon incubation in normoxia (8D-NORMOx).  Yeasts in 8D-HYPOx harbored a lower stress response, delayed growth and less that 1% of  culturability on agar plates, suggesting that these yeasts are viable but non culturable  cells (VBNC). These VBNC were able to reactivate in the presence of pantothenic acid, a  vitamin that is known to be involved in quorum sensing and precursor of acetyl-CoA. Global metabolism of 8D-HYPOx cells showed some specific requirements and was globally shut down  compared to 8D-NORMOx and STAT conditions. Mitochondrial analyses showed that the  mitochondrial masse increased with mitochondria mostly depolarized in 8D-HYPOx compared to 8D-NORMox with an increased expression of mitochondrial genes. Proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of 8D-HYPOx revealed that the number of secreted proteins and transcripts  detected also decreased compared to 8D-NORMOx and STAT, but proteome, secretome and  transcriptome harbored specific profiles that are engaged as soon as four days of  incubation. Importantly, acetyl-CoA and fatty acid pathway involving mitochondria is  required for the generation and viability maintenance of VBNC.  All together, these data show that we were able to generate for the first time VBNC  phenotype in Cryptococcocus neoformans. This VBNC state is associated with a reduced and  specific metabolism that should be further studied to understand dormancy/quiescence in  this organism.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates were performed kinetically upon incubation D4, D6 and D8 in  hypoxia and normoxia starting from stationary phase. The suspensions were centrifuged at  4 000 rpm and the supernatants (secretome) filtrated through a 0.22 µM membrane. The  corresponding cell pellets (proteome) were extracted in parallel. For each biological  replicate, three technical replicates were pooled to increase the amount of recovered  proteins for the supernatants.  All samples (supernatant or pellet) were lyophilized overnight after flashed freezing in  liquid nitrogen. The lyophilized samples were resuspended in 0.5 mL of sterile milliQ water and the following 3 steps-protocol was done: i) the samples were precipitated at 4°C by  addition of 1 mL of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone (kept at -20°C) followed by  incubation for 5 min. After centrifugation at 20 000 g for 10 min at -20°C, the pellet was resuspended in 100% acetone with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), washed twice in this solution, and air dried; ii) the pellet was then solubilized in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)  extraction buffer containing 1% SDS, 0.15 M Tris HCl pH=8.8, 0.1 M DTT, 1 mM ethylene  diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA), 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and incubated for 1 h at room temperature and vortexed every 20 min. A 15 000 g centrifugation for 10 min at room temperature allowed recovery of the supernatant; iii) Phenol was added at equal  volume to the supernatant and the tube was vortexed for 3 min. After centrifugation at  20 000 g for 5 min at room temperature, the denser phenolic phase was recovered in the  lower part. An equal volume of washing solution (Tris HCl pH 8.0 10 mM, 1 mM EDTA, 0.7 M  sucrose) was added and the tube vortexed for 3 min. The phenolic phase was then recovered  on the upper part and transferred to a new tube. Then, 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol (-20°C) was added and the mixture stored at -20 ° C for 30 min. The precipitate was pelleted by 20 000 g centrifugation for 10 min at -20°C, and washed first with 0.1M ammonium  acetate in methanol and then with 100% acetone. After a last centrifugation step (20 000 g for 10 min at -20°C), the pellet was air-dried and resuspended in 350 μL of denaturing  buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0)for in solution protein digestion.  Briefly, samples were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in  the dark. Then, proteins were firstly digested for 5 h at 37°C with 250 ng rLys-C Mass  Spec Grade. Samples were then diluted 4-fold with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 to reach a  concentration of 2 M urea and then re-incubated overnight at 37°C with 1 µg Sequencing  Grade Modified Trypsin. A second incubation with the same amount of trypsin (5 h at 37°C)  was performed to ensure a complete digestion. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid  to 5 % final concentration and peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 SPE  cartridge according to manufacturer’s instructions. Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument coupled with an EASY nLC  1 000 chromatography system. Sample was loaded on an in-house packed 30 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur  Basic C18-HD resin) and equilibrated in 98 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 2 % solvent B  (ACN, 0.1 % FA). Peptides were first eluted using a 2 to 18 % gradient of solvent B during 112 min, then a 18 to 30 % gradient of solvent B during 35 min, a 30 to 45 % gradient of  solvent B during 15 min and finally a 45 to 60 % gradient of solvent B during 5 min all at 250 nL.m-1 flow rate. The instrument method for the Q Exactive Plus was set up in DDA mode (Data Dependent Acquisition). After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (resolution 70 000), the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized  collision energy set up to 27. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with  unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was  enabled for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched using Andromeda (93) with MaxQuant software (94,95) version 1.5.3.8 against the H99 strain proteins database (6 980 entries) and the H99 strain mitochondria  proteins database (13 entries) concatenated with usual known mass spectrometry contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications  included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable) and Nter acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was  applied for all samples with a maximal retention time window of 2 min. One unique peptide  to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate  (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. MaxLFQ, Maxquant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to calculate protein intensity profiles across samples (96). An LFQ value was assigned when the protein had at  least 2 peptides, of which 1 was unique.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolically quiescent pathogens can persist in a viable non-replicating state for months or even years. For certain infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, latent infection is a corollary of this dormant state, which has the risk for reactivation and clinical disease. During murine cryptococcosis and macrophage uptake, stress and host immunity induce Cryptococcus neoformans heterogeneity with the generation of a sub-population of yeasts that manifests a phenotype compatible with dormancy (low stress response, latency of growth). In this subpopulation, mitochondrial transcriptional activity is regulated and this phenotype has been considered as a hallmark of quiescence in stem cells. Based on these findings, we worked to reproduce this phenotype in vitro and then standardize the experimental conditions to consistently generate this dormancy in C. neoformans. We found that incubation of stationary phase yeasts (STAT) in nutriment limited conditions and hypoxia for 8 days (8D-HYPOx) was able to produced cells that mimic the phenotype obtained in vivo. In these conditions, mortality and/or apoptosis occurred in less than 5% of the yeasts compared to 30-40% of apoptotic or dead yeasts upon incubation in normoxia (8D-NORMOx). Yeasts in 8D-HYPOx harbored a lower stress response, delayed growth and less that 1% of culturability on agar plates, suggesting that these yeasts are viable but non culturable cells (VBNC). These VBNC were able to reactivate in the presence of pantothenic acid, a vitamin that is known to be involved in quorum sensing and a precursor of acetyl-CoA. Global metabolism of 8D-HYPOx cells showed some specific requirements and was globally shut down compared to 8D-NORMOx and STAT conditions. Mitochondrial analyses showed that the mitochondrial mass increased with mitochondria mostly depolarized in 8D-HYPOx compared to 8D-NORMox, with increased expression of mitochondrial genes. Proteomic and transcriptomic analyses of 8D-HYPOx revealed that the number of secreted proteins and transcripts detected also decreased compared to 8D-NORMOx and STAT, and the proteome, secretome and transcriptome harbored specific profiles that are engaged as soon as four days of incubation. Importantly, acetyl-CoA and the fatty acid pathway involving mitochondria are required for the generation and viability maintenance of VBNC. Altogether, these data show that we were able to generate for the first time VBNC phenotype in C. neoformans. This VBNC state is associated with a specific metabolism that should be further studied to understand dormancy/quiescence in this yeast.

### Keywords
Starvation, Reactivation, Cryptococcus neoformans, Growth, Transcriptome, Proteome, Secretome, Latency, Dormancy, Hypoxia, Quorum sensing, Viable but non culturable, Pantothenic acid

### Affiliations
Unité de recherche Mycologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Françoise Dromer
Unité de recherche Mycologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Docteur Roux 75015 Paris


