### Accession
PXD021513

### Title
Biostimulant impacts of Glutacetine® and derivated formulations on bread wheat grain proteome

### Description
Nitrogen (N) fertilization is essential in order to insure wheat bread yield and quality. Improving nitrogen use efficiency is therefore crucial for wheat grain protein quality. In the present work, we analysed the effects of new biostimulants containing Glutacetine® or derivate formulations that have been mixed with urea-ammonium-nitrate fertilizer (UAN) on winter wheat grain proteome. A largescale quantitative proteomics analysis of 2 wheat flour fractions led to a dataset of 4369 identified proteins. Quantitative analysis revealed 9, 39 and 96 proteins with a significantly varying abundance after Glutacetine®, VNT1 and VNT4 treatment, respectively, with 11 proteins (or homologue) which were affected by 2 different biostimulants. Major effects affected proteins involved in regulation processes with transcription regulator proteins, in stress responses with biotic and abiotic stress defence proteins, in flowering efficiency with proteins involved in pollen development, in storage functions with the gluten protein alpha-gliadins and starch synthase and in seed development with proteins implied in transport, proteases activity, energy machinery and N pathway. Altogether, our controlled conditions study showed that Glutacetine®, VNT1 and VNT4 biostimulants positively affected protein composition for grain quality.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 25 mg of wholemeal flour milled for 5 min at 4°C in cold KCl (50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, pH 7.8). Then, sample was centrifuged 15 min (12 000 tr/min, 4°C) and supernatant 1 was collected (KCl fraction, Fig. 1). 400 µL of SDS tampon (2% SDS, 10% Glycerol, 50 mM DTT, 40 mM Tris-Cl, pH 6.8) were added to the pellet for 1 h of incubation at ambient temperature. After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and 40 µl (10% v/v) of cold TCA 72% was added for 2 h of incubation à 4°C. After centrifugation, the resulting pellet was washed three times in ice-cold acetone then dried at room temperature and resolubilized in SDS tampon (SDS fraction, Fig. 1). The protein concentrations were finally determined by Bradford analysis. Then, 5 µg of each protein extract were prepared using a modified Gel-aided Sample Preparation protocol (Fischer and Kessler, 2015). Samples were digested with trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37°C. For nano-LC fragmentation, protein or peptide samples were first desalted and concentrated onto a µC18 Omix (Agilent) before analysis.  The chromatography step was performed on a NanoElute (Bruker Daltonics) ultra-high-pressure nano flow chromatography system. Approximatively 200ng of each peptide sample were concentrated onto a C18 pepmap 100 (5mm x 300µm i.d.) precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated at 50°C onto a reversed phase Reprosil column (25cm x 75μm i.d.) packed with 1.6μm C18 coated porous silica beads (Ionopticks). Mobile phases consisted of 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% water (v/v) (A) and 0.1% formic acid in 99.9% ACN (v/v) (B). The nanoflow rate was set at 400 nl/min, and the gradient profile was as follows: from 2 to 15% B within 60 min, followed by an increase to 25% B within 30 min and further to 37% within 10 min, followed by a washing step at 95% B and reequilibration.  MS experiments were carried out on an TIMS-TOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) with a modified nano electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics). The system was calibrated each week and mass precision was better than 1 ppm. A 1400 spray voltage with a capillary temperature of 180°C was typically employed for ionizing. MS spectra were acquired in the positive mode in the mass range from 100 to 1700 m/z. In the experiments described here, the mass spectrometer was operated in PASEF mode with exclusion of single charged peptides. A number of 10 PASEF MS/MS scans was performed during 1.25 seconds from charge range 2-5.

### Data Protocol
Before post-process, the samples are analysed using Preview software (ProteinMetrics) in order to estimate the quality of the tryptic digestion and predict the post-translational modifications present. The result, below, is used for the “bank research / identification” part. The fragmentation pattern was used to determine the sequence of the peptide. Database searching was performed using the Peaks X+ software. A UniProt Triticum aestivum database (September 2019) was used. The variable modifications allowed were as follows: C-Carbamidomethyl, K-acetylation, methionine oxidation, K and Nterm Propionoamide and Deamidation (NQ). In addition, C-Propionoamide was set as fix modification. “Trypsin” was selected as Specific. Mass accuracy was set to 30 ppm and 0.05 Da for MS and MS/MS mode, respectively. Data were filtering according to a FDR of 0.1%, 2 unique peptides and the elimination of protein redundancy on the basis of proteins being evidenced by the same set or a subset of peptides. To quantify the relative levels of protein abundance between different groups, four technical replications of each sample (66 LC-MS/MS runs) were analysed using the label-free quantification feature of PEAKS X+ software. Feature detection was separately performed on each sample by the expectation-maximization based algorithm. The features of the same peptide from all replicates of each sample were aligned through the retention time alignment algorithms. Mass error tolerance was set at 30 ppm, Ion Mobility Tolerance (1/k0) at 0.07 and retention time tolerance at 10 min. Normalization factors of the samples were obtained by the total ion current (TIC) of each sample. Quantification of the protein abundance level was calculated using the sum area of the top three unique peptides. Technical repeats of each sample were merged to give a protein detection profile. The protein abundance levels were separately compared for biological replicates. A 1.5-fold increase in relative abundance and a significance ≥ 15 using ANOVA as significance method were used to determine those enriched proteins. In addition, quality was set >2 peptides must be detected in a least 2 samples per group and modified forms were excluded. After proteins were identified, functional classifications of the proteins were analysed using bioinformatic method. First, Triticum aestivum differential expressed proteins were blasted using Protein Blast from NCBI (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) against Arabidopsis thaliana from UniProt. All accession from Triticum were switched by the best corresponding one from Arabidopsis. Then, all proteins or a number of differential expressed proteins were submitted to PANTHER database (http://www.pantherdb.org/http://www.pantherdb.org/) to perform Gene Ontology (GO).  Pathway and functional enrichment were illustrated using STRING Apps (https://string-db.org/) from Cytoscape software (3.8.0). Interactions were obtained by using group-specific and differential expressed proteins as input and applying a high-confidence filter (higher than 0.4).

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen (N) fertilizer is essential to ensure grain yield and quality in bread wheat. Improving N use efficiency is therefore crucial for wheat grain protein quality. In the present work, we analysed the effects on the winter wheat grain proteome of biostimulants containing Glutacetine&#xae; or two derived formulations (VNT1 and 4) when mixed with urea-ammonium-nitrate fertilizer. A large-scale quantitative proteomics analysis of two wheat flour fractions produced a dataset of 4369 identified proteins. Quantitative analysis revealed 9, 39 and 96 proteins with a significant change in abundance after Glutacetine&#xae;, VNT1 and VNT4 treatments, respectively, with a common set of 11 proteins that were affected by two different biostimulants. The major effects impacted proteins involved in (i) protein synthesis regulation (mainly ribosomal and binding proteins), (ii) defence and responses to stresses (including chitin-binding protein, heat shock 70&#xa0;kDa protein 1 and glutathione S-transferase proteins), (iii) storage functions related to gluten protein alpha-gliadins and starch synthase and (iv) seed development with proteins implicated in protease activity, energy machinery, and the C and N metabolism pathways. Altogether, our study showed that Glutacetine&#xae;, VNT1 and VNT4 biostimulants positively affected protein composition related to grain quality. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021513. SIGNIFICANCE: We performed a large-scale quantitative proteomics study of the total protein extracts from flour samples to determine the effect of Glutacetine&#xae;-based biostimulants treatment on the protein composition of bread wheat grain. To our knowledge, only a few studies in the literature have applied proteomic approaches to study bread wheat grains and in particular to investigate the effect of biostimulants on the grain proteome of this cereal crop. In addition, most approaches used fractional extraction of proteins to target reserve proteins followed electrophoresis which leads to low identification rate of proteins. We identified and quantified a large protein dataset of 4369 proteins and determined ontological class of proteins affected by biostimulants treatments. Our proteomics investigation revealed the important role of these new biostimulants in achieving significant changes in protein synthesis regulation, storage functions, protease activity, energy machinery, C and N metabolism pathways and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses in grain.

### Keywords
Plant biostimulant, Flour quality, Nitrogen fertilizer, Wheat

### Affiliations
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, INRAE, UMR EVA, SFR Normandie Végétal FED4277, Esplanade de la Paix, F-14032 Caen, France
University of Caen

### Submitter
VICTOR MAIGNAN

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Christophe AVICE
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, INRAE, UMR EVA, SFR Normandie Végétal FED4277, Esplanade de la Paix, F-14032 Caen, France


