### Accession
PXD028944

### Title
Circulating Microvesicles and Exosomes in Small Cell Lung Cancer by Quantitative Proteomics

### Description
Early detection of small cell lung cancer crucially demands highly reliable markers. Growing evidence suggests that extracellular vesicles carry tumor cell-specific cargo suitable as protein markers in cancer. Therefore, we isolated plasma-derived microvesicles from newly diagnosed small cell lung cancer patients and investigated proteome dynamics of these microvesicles aiming at improving the detection of small cell lung cancer. A total of 1,223 proteins were initially identified. After data processing and statistical analysis, several proteins were found to be differentially expressed in comparing small cell lung cancer patients and healthy individuals. Furthermore, our data may indicate involvement of complement activation, integrin-mediated signaling, cell adhesion- and migration, and blood coagulation in small cell lung cancer pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were collected from 24 patients with small cell lung cancer, diagnosed (baseline) and treated with chemotherapy between March 2015 to September 2017 at the Department of Oncology, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark. Additionally, blood samples from 24 age- and gender-matched healthy controls collected at the blood bank at Aalborg University Hospital were included. Blood was drawn from the antecubital vein using a vacutainer blood collection device with a 21-gauge needle (Vacuette, Greiner Bio-One, Austria) and collected in 9 mL 0.105 M (3.2 %) trisodium citrate tubes (BD Vacutainer®, UK). Platelet-poor plasma was prepared by double centrifugation at 2500x g for 15 minutes at room temperature. Plasma collection was stopped 1 cm above the buffy coat and pellet, respectively, after first and second centrifugation and the plasma isolates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Microvesicles were isolated from 1 mL plasma by double centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 1 hour at 4 °C using an Avanti J-30i centrifuge with a J A-30.50 fixed-angle rotor with a k-factor 280 (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA), resulting in a 20K pellet (microvesicles). The resultant microvesicles were washed in 1 mL phosphate-buffered saline filtered by a 0.22 µm filter, and the samples were resuspended in 20 µL filtered phosphate-buffered saline prior to mass spectrometry analysis. The samples were lysed and solubilized in 5 % sodium dodecyl sulfate containing 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.55. Alkylation and tryptic digestion were performed using S-TrapTM Micro Spin Columns (Protifi, NY, USA) and peptide concentrations were measured by fluorescence using an EnSpire microplate reader (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and injected with an amount of 1 µg. The peptides from the 20K preparations were analysed on a nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry platform consisting of an Ultimate 3000 and an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument from (Thermo Scientific Instruments, MA, USA). Samples were run in technical duplicates, however, due to technical difficulties, two healthy controls could not be analysed in duplicate. All in all, 94 20K raw files were generated 46 control files (20kCON) and 48 baseline files (20kB).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Raw data from the 46 control files, 48 baseline files and 48 files from treated patients searched against the human database from Uniprot (downloaded 09/02/2020). The following search parameters were used: Carbamidomethyl (C) was used as fixed modification; the false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches, protein, and site were each set at 1 %; the minimum ratio count for LFQ was set to 1. For quantification of proteins, unique and razor peptides, unmodified and modified with oxidation (M) or acetyl (protein N-terminal) were used. The function match between runs was used, reverse sequences were used for decoy search, and contaminant sequences were included in the search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Bent Honoré

### Lab Head
Dr Bent Honoré
Aarhus University


