### Accession
PXD039064

### Title
Translational control by Trypanosoma brucei DRBD18 contributes to the maintenance of the procyclic state

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei occupies distinct niches throughout its life cycle, both within the vertebrate host (fat tissue, bloodstream, central nervous system) and within the insect host, the tsetse fly (taken up with a bloodmeal and passing through the midgut, and migrating to the salivary glands). The immunological and biochemical complexity and variability of each of these environments require a reshaping of the protein landscape of the parasite both to evade surveillance and face changing metabolic demands. Whereas most well-studied organisms rely on transcriptional control as the main regulator of gene expression, post-transcriptional control mechanisms are particularly important in T. brucei, and these are often mediated by RNA-binding proteins. DRBD18 is a T. brucei RNA binding protein that interacts with ribosomal proteins and translation factors. Here, we tested a role for DRBD18 in translational control. We show that DRBD18 depletion by RNA interference leads to altered polysomal profiles with a specific depletion of heavy polysomes.  RiboSeq analysis reveals that 101 transcripts change in translational efficiency (TE) upon DRBD18 depletion: 41 of them exhibit decreased TE and 60 increased TE. A further 66 transcripts are buffered, i.e. changes in transcript abundance are compensated by changes in TE such that the total translational output is expected not to change. Proteomic analysis validates much of these data. In DRBD18 depleted cells, a cohort of transcripts that code for procyclic form specific proteins are translationally repressed while, conversely, transcripts that code for bloodstream form specific proteins are translationally enhanced. These data suggest that DRBD18 contributes to the maintenance of the procyclic state through both positive and negative translational control of specific mRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
T.brucei samples were subjected to a surfactant cocktail-aided precipitation/on-pellet digestion (SEPOD) procedure for protein extraction and digestion. Derived tryptic peptides were analyzed by a well-optimized trapping nano LC-Orbitrap mass spectrometry system for ultra-high-resolution OT MS1 and HCD-OT MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic quantification was accomplished by UHR-IonStar, an in-house developed MS1 ion current-based quantitative proteomics method, using the UHR-IonStar APP.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> occupies distinct niches throughout its life cycle, within both the mammalian and tsetse fly hosts. The immunological and biochemical complexity and variability of each of these environments require a reshaping of the protein landscape of the parasite both to evade surveillance and face changing metabolic demands. In kinetoplastid protozoa, including <i>T. brucei</i>, posttranscriptional control mechanisms are the primary means of gene regulation, and these are often mediated by RNA-binding proteins. DRBD18 is a <i>T. brucei</i> RNA-binding protein that reportedly interacts with ribosomal proteins and translation factors. Here, we tested a role for DRBD18 in translational control. We validate the DRBD18 interaction with translating ribosomes and the translation initiation factor, eIF3a. We further show that DRBD18 depletion by RNA interference leads to altered polysomal profiles with a specific depletion of heavy polysomes. Ribosome profiling analysis reveals that 101 transcripts change in translational efficiency (TE) upon DRBD18 depletion: 41 exhibit decreased TE and 60 exhibit increased TE. A further 66 transcripts are buffered, that is, changes in transcript abundance are compensated by changes in TE such that the total translational output is expected not to change. In DRBD18-depleted cells, a set of transcripts that codes for procyclic form-specific proteins is translationally repressed while, conversely, transcripts that code for bloodstream form- and metacyclic form-specific proteins are translationally enhanced. RNA immunoprecipitation/qRT-PCR indicates that DRBD18 associates with members of both repressed and enhanced cohorts. These data suggest that DRBD18 contributes to the maintenance of the procyclic state through both positive and negative translational control of specific mRNAs.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Drbd18, Trypanosoma brucei, Ionstar

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, SUNY at Buffalo
University at Buffalo

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, SUNY at Buffalo


