### Accession
PXD031279

### Title
Fixed and unalterable Matrix Associated Regions in Drosophila melanogaster genome

### Description
Eukaryotic genome is compartmentalized into structural and functional domains. One of the concepts of higher order organization of chromatin posits that the DNA is organized in constrained loops that behave as independent functional domains. A predominantly ribo-proteinaceous nucleoskeleton, termed as Nuclear Matrix (NuMat) is proposed to provide the structural platform for attachment of these loops. The DNA sequence located at the base of the loops are known as the Matrix Attachment Regions (MARs).  NuMat relates to all nuclear processes and has been shown to be cell type specific in composition. It is a biochemically defined structure and several protocols have been used to isolate the NuMat where some of the steps have been critically evaluated. In the present study we have looked into the dynamics of MARs when the isolation process is varied and also during embryonic development of D. melanogaster.  Our results show that a subset of MARs termed here as “Core-MARs” are fixed and unalterable anchor points in the Drosophila genome as they remain associated with NuMat at all developmental stages and do not depend on the isolation procedure used. Core-MARs are abundant in the pericentromeric heterochromatin. On the other hand, MARs in the euchromatin are dynamic and reflect the transcriptomic profile of the developmental stage of the host cell. New MARs are generated by nuclear stabilization (a critical step in the isolation procedure), and during development, mostly at the paused RNA polymerase II (Pol II) promoters. Paused Pol II MARs depend on RNA transcription for NuMat association. RNase A treatment leads to collapse of the NuMat and loss of paused Pol II promoter MARs. Our data reveals the role of MARs in functional compartmentalization of D. melanogaster genome and adds to the current understanding of nuclear architecture and 3D organization of a functionally dynamic nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos (0-2, 6-8, 14-16 or 0-16 hr of development) were collected from Drosophila melanogaster (Canton-S strain), and NuMat was prepared according to published protocol (10). The variation included in the protocol was skipping of the stabilization of nuclei at 37°C for20 mins for preparation of unstabilized NuMat. RNase A treated NuMat was prepared by including RNase A (2µg/ml) during DNase I digestion step.   For tryptic digestion, 2-4µg of protein were resolved on 12% SDS-PAGE. Gel slices were cut and dehydrated with sequential increase to 100% ACN. The gel slices were rehydrated with 100µl-200µl of Trypsin solution (10µg/ml, Promega) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Digestion was carried out at 37oC overnight and peptides were eluted with 50% ACN and 5% TFA, vacuum dried and stored at -70oC till loaded on to the mass spectrometer. The tryptic peptides were analyzed using standard columns with default settings on a 140 min gradient. The Proxeon LC system was directly connected with Thermo fisher scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument using Proxeon nanoelectrospray source. The nano source was operated at 2.2 kV and the ion transfer tube at 200oC without sheath gas. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire in a data-dependent mode. The scans were acquired with resolution 60,000 at m/z 400 in Orbitrap mass analyzer with lock mass option enabled for the 445.120024 ion. The 25 most intense peaks containing double or higher charge state were selected for sequencing and fragmentation in the ion trap by using collision induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 40%, activation q = 0.25, activation time of 10ms and one micro scan. Dynamic exclusion was activated for all sequencing events to minimize repeated sequencing. Peaks selected for fragmentation more than once within 30s were excluded from selection for next 90s, and the maximum number of the excluded peak was 500.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra obtained were processed with Andromeda search engine (MaxQuant software version 1.1.0.39). Search was performed against D. melanogaster protein database UniProtKB D. melanogaster database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The initial precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and fragment mass deviation was set at 0.25 Da. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The identification has been done keeping 1% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein level. Proteins identified with multiple peptides as well as one unique peptide with high confidence were listed and analyzed further.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mars, Drosophila, Numat, Development, Nuclear matrix

### Affiliations
CSIR-Centre for cellular and molecular biology, India
CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Rahul Sureka

### Lab Head
Dr Rakesh Kumar Mishra
CSIR-Centre for cellular and molecular biology, India


