### Accession
PXD006762

### Title
Proteomes of twenty bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic species for bench marking of Direct Protein-SIF (stable carbon isotope fingerprinting proteomics)

### Description
We developed a method that allows measuring the stable carbon isotope composition of individual species in microbial communities using metaproteomics. We call this methods “Direct Protein-SIF”. To benchmark this method, we measured twenty pure culture species using the Direct Protein-SIF method as well as Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometry. Some of the pure cultures were measured in technical replicates to see how consistent Protein-SIF measurements are between mass spec runs. This submission thus contains 29 raw files for the pure cultures. See table in the submission for details of which species was measured for which .raw file. We also included the Direct Protein-SIF specific isotope pattern files as well as the .mzML files and PSM files required as input for the Direct Protein-SIF software. In addition to the pure culture a protein reference material (MKH files) was measured. The respective .raw files and isotopic pattern files are also included in this submission (see publication for details on how the reference material is used to calibrate the method).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets. Cells were disrupted in lysing matrix tubes A (MP Biomedicals, Cat. No. 116910050) for 45 seconds at 6 m/s using a OMNI bead ruptor bead mill (Omni International, https://www.omni-inc.com/) and subsequently incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1 to 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. Two wash runs and one blank run were done between samples to reduce carry over. For the 1D-LC-MS/MS runs, 2 µg of peptide were loaded onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After loading, the pre-column was switched in line with a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 45° C. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column using 260 minute gradients and mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification protein sequence databases were created using the reference protein sequences for each species separately. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to each database. The databases were submitted with this PRIDE project. MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptide spectral matches were filtered using the Percolator node as described by Petersen et al. (Nature Microbiology 2016, 2:16195). The FidoCT node in Proteome Discoverer was used for protein inference and to restrict the protein-level FDR to below 5% (FidoCT q-value <0.05). Proteins with a FidoCT q-value of <0.01 were classified as high confidence identifications and proteins with a FidoCT q-value of 0.01-0.05 were classified as medium confidence identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Measurements of stable carbon isotope ratios (&#x3b4;<sup>13</sup>C) are widely used in biology to address questions regarding food sources and metabolic pathways used by organisms. The analysis of these so-called stable isotope fingerprints (SIFs) for microbes involved in biogeochemical cycling and microbiota of plants and animals has led to major discoveries in environmental microbiology. Currently, obtaining SIFs for microbial communities is challenging as the available methods either only provide low taxonomic resolution, such as the use of lipid biomarkers, or are limited in throughput, such as nanoscale secondary ion MS imaging of single cells. Here we present "direct protein-SIF" and the Calis-p software package (https://sourceforge.net/projects/calis-p/), which enable high-throughput measurements of accurate &#x3b4;<sup>13</sup>C values for individual species within a microbial community. We benchmark the method using 20 pure culture microorganisms and show that the method reproducibly provides SIF values consistent with gold-standard bulk measurements performed with an isotope ratio mass spectrometer. Using mock community samples, we demonstrate that SIF values can also be obtained for individual species within a microbial community. Finally, a case study of an obligate bacteria-animal symbiosis shows that direct protein-SIF confirms previous physiological hypotheses and can provide unexpected insights into the symbionts' metabolism. This confirms the usefulness of this approach to accurately determine &#x3b4;<sup>13</sup>C values for different species in microbial community samples.

### Keywords
Protein-sif, Metaproteomics, Stable isotopes, Stable carbon isotope fingerprinting, Lc-ms/ms, P-sif

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
University of Calgary


