### Accession
PXD011928

### Title
NEDD8 subtrates from NEDP1 knockout cells

### Description
The aim of the study was to identify proteins that are modified by NEDD8.  The NEDD8 specific protease NEDP1/SENP8 was deleted from HEK 293 cells via Crispr/CAS9 gene editing to allow for the accumulation of NEDD8 modified proteins.  Lysates from NEDP1 KO cells were then enriched via pulldown with a catalytically inactivated NEDP1 (C162A) fused to the HALO protein.  For a negative control a mutated NEDP1 (DAGC) with reduced binding to NEDD8 was also fused to the HALO protein for pulldown.  Pulldowns were resolved by SDS-PAGE and bands were excised and subjected to in gel trypsin digestion followed by mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Bands were excised, washed with water, dehydrated in acetonitrile, and rehydrated in 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0.  Gel slices were alkylated with 20 mM chloroacetamide, dehydrated in acetonitrile and then transferred to 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate.  Gel bands were incubated with trypsin (5 g/mL) overnight at 30°C. Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile, gel bands were incubated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and then peptides were extracted two more times with acetonitrile.  Extracted peptides were dried in a speed vac and then resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water.   Samples were analysed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system with 15 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 analytical column (75 um ID, 3 um C18 from Thermo Scientific) with an addition Pepmap trapping column (100 um x 2 cm, 5 um C18) (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Acquisition settings were lockmass of 445.120024, MS1 with 60,000 resolution, top 20 CID MS/MS using rapid scan, monoisotopic precursor selection, unassigned charge states and z = 1 rejected, dynamic exclusion of 60s with repeat count of 1.   One-hour linear gradients were performed from 5% solvent B to 35% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid, solvent B: 80% acetonitrile 0.08% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific), with Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) and subsequently processed in Scaffold 4.4.6 (Proteome Software) Searches were performed with a peptide tolerance of 10 ppm (monoisotopic) and a fragment tolerance of 0.60 Da (monoisotopic) or with MaxQuant v1.5.7.4 for label-free quantitative and iBAQ analysis.  Settings were: fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), dioxidation (M), LRGG (K) and GlyGly (K). Protein identifications were filtered with a 1% FDR.   Raw files were re-searched separately with variable modification for acetylated peptides acetyl (K) or phosphorylated peptides phospho (STY); both searches included the fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), and dioxidation (M).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Nedp1, Senp8, Hek 293, Nedd8

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular, Cellular, and Systems Biology University of Glasgow United Kingdom
University of Glasgow

### Submitter
Matthew Keuss

### Lab Head
Dr Thimo Kurz
Institute for Molecular, Cellular, and Systems Biology University of Glasgow United Kingdom


