### Accession
PXD032911

### Title
Spatial regulation of the glycocalyx component Podocalyxin is a switch for pro-metastatic function

### Description
The sialomucin Podocalyxin (PODXL) is required for normal tissue development and apicobasal cell polarity by promoting lumen formation. Remarkably, high PODXL expression is also associated with metastasis and poor clinical outcome in multiple tumour types, such as prostate cancer. We performed extensive in vitro analysis of prostate cancer cell lines that have the highest RNA levels of PODXL (PC3). We identified that elevated PODXL promoted invasion. We also isolated subpopulations that do not differ drastically in their overall expression of PODXL but have the stable feature of either high or low surface localisation of PODXL. High surface PODXL promote robust invasion of cells into extracellular matrix. Notably, knockdown of PODXL gave the same effect - reduced invasion - as having PODXL expressed but not being localised to the surface.By using proteomic analysis, we aimed to identify the strongest interactors of PODXL, trying to uncover molecular mechanisms that control PODXL function and localization.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling  For SILAC-based analysis of PODXL interactome and total proteome, cells were metabolically labelled using SILAC DMEM (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% 10 kDa dialyzed FBS (PAA), 1% glutamine, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. SILAC medium used for the “medium” labeled cells contained 13C6 l-arginine (84 mg/liter) and D4 l-lysine (175 mg/liter), and for the “heavy” labeled cells contained 13C6 15N4 l-arginine (84 mg/liter), and 13C6 15N2 l-lysine (175 mg/liter) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Experiments were conducted when incorporation rate of labelled amino acids was superior to 95%.  Mass spectrometry (MS): Sample preparation For evaluation of SILAC labelling, 20 g of total lysates from cells grown in SILAC medium were used for in-solution protein digestion. Proteins were reduced using 1 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h, RT and alkylated using 5.5 mM of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min, RT protected from light. A pre-digestion step was performed with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) for 3 h, RT. Then, peptides were diluted 4-fold with ABC buffer (Ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM pH8) and digested with Trypsin MS grade (Promega) overnight, RT. The next day, samples were acidified to pH <4.0 using 1% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were desalted and concentrated using C18 Stage Tips.  For the interactome analyses of PODXL, SILAC mixtures were loaded onto 4-12% SDS polyacrylamide gels for electrophoretic separation of proteins. Gel was stained and each gel lane was divided into 8-10 slices. Proteins were digested into peptides using in-gel digestion method 65.  For the total proteome analysis of PODXL, 200 g of protein (mixture containing 100 g of protein derived from each SILAC condition) was lysed in SDS buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.6). Proteins were digested into peptides using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method 66. Subsequently, 50 g of peptides was fractionated using strong anion exchange (SAX) chromatography on Stage Tips.  MS data acquisition Purified tryptic peptides were injected on an EASY-nLC system coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Pro Elite, through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An active background ion reduction device (ABIRD, SmartSource Solutions, LLC) was used to decrease air contaminants. Peptides were separated on a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with reverse-phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 m (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The emitter was heated to 35 C using a column oven (Sonation). The peptides were eluted with a two-steps gradient at a flow rate of 200 nl/min, with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The gradient length for in-gel digestion bands was of 150 min, and for the SAX fractions was of 255 min. MS data were acquired in a positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition with XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass range acquired for the full MS scan was 300 to 1650 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at 400 m/z. Only multiply charged ions from two to five charges were selected for fragmentation. For PODXL IP samples, higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation was triggered for the 10 most intense ions, using a maximum injection time of 150 ms or a target value of 40,000 ions, at a resolution of 15,000. For PODXL proteome samples, collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was triggered for the 10 most intense ions, using a maximum injection time of 25 ms or a target value of 5,000 ions. A dynamic exclusion window of 60 s was used for ions that had already been selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS .raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.0.36. The Andromeda search engine performed the search against the human UniProt database (release 2013, 88847 entries). The multiplicity was set accordingly to the SILAC labels of each experiment, and remainder parameters included: minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids; variable modifications acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M); fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C); specificity for trypsin cleavage; and maximum two missed cleavages allowed. For the search of the parent mass and fragment ions, an initial mass deviation of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, was required. The re-quantify parameter was enabled, and match between runs was used between similar fractions. The false discovery rate at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Unique peptides with at least two ratio counts were used. The MaxQuant output table “ProteinGroups.txt” was uploaded in Perseus version 1.5.2.11 for downstream analysis. Datasets were filtered to remove contaminants, reverse peptides that match a decoy database and proteins only identified by site. Proteins with at least one unique peptide were used for analyses. Normalized SILAC ratios were log2-transformed and intensities were log10-transformed. To organize PODXL-interacting proteins into functional cluster we used Cytoscape v3.9.0 with integrated STRING network analysis (0.7 confidence score).

### Publication Abstract
The glycocalyx component and sialomucin podocalyxin (PODXL) is required for normal tissue development by promoting apical membranes to form between cells, triggering lumen formation. Elevated PODXL expression is also associated with metastasis and poor clinical outcome in multiple tumor types. How PODXL presents this duality in effect remains unknown. We identify an unexpected function of PODXL as a decoy receptor for galectin-3 (GAL3), whereby the PODXL-GAL3 interaction releases GAL3 repression of integrin-based invasion. Differential cortical targeting of PODXL, regulated by ubiquitination, is the molecular mechanism controlling alternate fates. Both PODXL high and low surface levels occur in parallel subpopulations within cancer cells. Orthotopic intraprostatic xenograft of PODXL-manipulated cells or those with different surface levels of PODXL define that this axis controls metastasis in vivo. Clinically, interplay between PODXL-GAL3 stratifies prostate cancer patients with poor outcome. Our studies define the molecular mechanisms and context in which PODXL promotes invasion and metastasis.

### Keywords
Iinteractome, Prostate cancer, Invasion, Podocalyxin

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.
Proteomics

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute, Switchback Road, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK.


