### Accession
PXD001159

### Title
Identification of immunoreactive proteins of Mycobacterium avium subsp. Paratuberculosis

### Description
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) is the cause of a chronic enteritis of ruminants (bovine paratuberculosis-Johne disease) that is associated with enormous worldwide economic losses for the zootechnical industries. Diagnosis is based on observation of clinical signs, on the detection of antibodies in milk or serum or on evaluation of bacterial culture from feces. The limit of these methods is that they are not able to detect the disease in the subclinical stage and are applicable only when the disease is already in an advanced status. For this reason the main purpose of this study is to use the MAP proteome to detect novel immunoreactive proteins that may be helpful for paratuberculosis diagnoses. 2D electrophoresis and 2D immunoblotting of MAP proteins were performed using sera of control cattle and paratuberculosis infected cattle in order to highlight the specific immunoreactive proteins. Among the assigned identifiers to immunoreactive spots it was found that most of them correspond to surface-located proteins while three of them have never been described before as antigens. The identification of these proteins improves scientific knowledge that could be useful for paratuberculosis diagnoses. The sequence of the identified protein can be used for the synthesis of immunoreactive peptides that could be screened for their immunoreaction against bovine sera infected with MAP.

### Sample Protocol
MAP cell lysis 95 mg of cellular pellet of MAP have been diluted in 700 µl of 2DE buffer containing 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTT and protease inhibitors (GE Healthcare) according to manufacturer instructions. MAP lysis has been obtained using a combination of methods including bead beating and freeze thaw cycles in 2D electrophoresis buffer in order to avoid protein precipitation step and related protein loss. Bead beating procedures have been used with several changes to the previously described protocol. Briefly, samples have been processed with 5 cycles of 2 hours vortex bead beating (cold room) in 400 µg of 0,1 mm Zyrconium silica beads (Biospec products inc, USA) interspersed by 2h of fast freezing in a metal block and defrosting at room temperature exposed to air. The use of 0,1 mm Zirconium silica beads was important to have good cellular disruption. Moreover this method, using a vortex and the classical 2D electrophoresis buffer, allowed the solubilization of several surface proteins that have been identified as immunoreactive. The use of the 2D buffer for MAP cellular disruption was also important to avoid the precipitation step that is responsible for about 40% of protein loss. In five samples precipitated during previous trials the protein recovery was respectively 76,6%, 61%, 44%, 65,8% and 71% (data not shown). At the end of all cycles the samples have been centrifuged at 8000xg for 5 minutes, the supernatant has been collected and the samples have been used for the experiments or stored at -80°C up to the analysis. 2-DE Protein concentration in all samples was determined using 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Euroclone immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strips (EMP052040, 7 cm) with a linear pH range of 4.0–7.0 were rehydrated overnight in 125µl of buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea 2% CHAPS, 1% DTT, 2% ampholine pH 3.5–10. 100 µg of protein sample were loaded on each IPG strip using cup loading at the cathodic side. Isoelectric focusing was performed using an Ettan IPGphor III IEF system (GE Healthcare) at 20° C with a current of 120 µA per strip. For IEF the following protocol was used: 30 V (4 h), 50 V (3 h), 100 V (3 h), 500 V (3 h), 1000 V (3 h), 3000 V (3 h), 4000 V (3 h), 6000 V (3 h) and 8000 V (8 h). After the first dimension, IPG strips were equilibrated twice with a solution containing 6M urea, 2% SDS, 50 mMTris–HCl pH8.8 and 30% glycerol, for 15 min, under gentle stirring. For the first equilibration step was used 1% DTT and for the second 2.5% iodoacetamide. The second dimension was performed using homemade 12% acrylamide vertical SDS-PAGE slab gels on a mini-protean tetracell (BioRad). IPG strips were put on top of the SDS gels which were poured up to 1 cm from the top of the plates and then sealed with 1 ml of a solution containing 0.5% low-melting-point agarose diluted in hot SDS running buffer (25 mMTris–HCl pH 8.3, 192 mM glycine, 0.1% SDS). Molecular weight protein markers (Invitrogen) were applied on one end of the IPG strips. In the second dimension, gels were run at 15 mA per gel, for 20 min and then at 40 mA per gel, until the bromophenol blue front-line came out of the gel. After runs, gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie and digitalized with PharosFX Plus Laser Imaging System (BioRad). Protein identification from two-dimensional electrophoresis gel Single spots were excised from Coomassie-stained 2DE gels and gradually dehydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, a mixture of 50 Mm ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile (1:1), and 100% acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced for 45 min at 56°C with 10 mM DTT and alkylated at room temp in the dark with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. Gel plugs were subsequently hydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated in acetonitrile and then left to completely dry. Proteins were digested with a solution of 0.01 μg/μl of porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C for 16h. The reaction was stopped with 1% TFA in H2O (v/v). Peptides were desalted and concentrated by C18 ZipTip (Millipore) and co-crystallized with a solution of 0.5 mg/ml α-ciano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid dissolved in 50% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA on a Ground Steel plate (Bruker-Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) previously spotted with a thin layer of 10mg/ml α-ciano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid dissolved in Ethanol/Acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA in H2O. Mass spectra were acquired with an Ultraflex III MALDI-TOF/TOF spectrometer (Bruker-Daltonics) in positive reflectron mode. External calibration was performed using the standard peptide mixture calibration (m/z: 1046.5418, 1296.6848, 1347.7354, 1619.8223, 2093.0862, 2465.1983, 3147.4710; Bruker-Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
FlexAnalysis 3.1 software (Bruker-Daltonics) was used for the selection of the monoisotopic peptide masses. Internal calibration was performed on autolysis peaks from porcine trypsin (m/z: 842.509 and 2211.104). After exclusion of contaminant ions (known matrix and human keratin peaks), the created peak lists were analyzed by MASCOT v.2.3.0 algorithm (www.matrixscience.com) against NCBInr_20140323 database restricted to Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis taxonomy (class: Other Actinobacteria, 3371560 sequences).  The query for database searching was performed with carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionines as variable modification, one missed cleavage site allowed for trypsin and 70 ppm as maximal tolerance. Mascot protein scores greater than 66 were considered significant (p<0.05) for protein identification assignment. After MS spectra acquisition, the instrument was switched in LIFT mode and precursor ions were manually selected for the subsequent fragmentation. MS/MS spectra were acquired with 4–8×103 laser shots using the instrument calibration file. The precursor mass window was automatically set after the precursor ion selection. Spectra baseline subtraction, smoothing (Savitsky–Golay), and centroiding were operated by Flex-Analysis 3.0 software (Bruker-Daltonics). Database search was performed with these criteria: maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed, the mass tolerance of precursor ions and fragments were set to 50 ppm and 0.4 Da respectively, the allowed fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine and the allowed variable modification was oxidation on methionine, and taxonomy was restricted to Mycobacterium avium sub. paratuberculosis. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to _95% (p < 0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the identity threshold were considered correctly identified.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) is the cause of a chronic enteritis of ruminants (bovine paratuberculosis (PTB)--Johne's disease) that is associated with enormous worldwide economic losses for the animal production. Diagnosis is based on observation of clinical signs, the detection of antibodies in milk or serum, or evaluation of bacterial culture from feces. The limit of these methods is that they are not able to detect the disease in the subclinical stage and are applicable only when the disease is already advanced. For this reason, the main purpose of this study is to use the MAP proteome to detect novel immunoreactive proteins that may be helpful for PTB diagnoses. 2DE and 2D immunoblotting of MAP proteins were performed using sera of control cattle and PTB-infected cattle in order to highlight the specific immunoreactive proteins. Among the assigned identifiers to immunoreactive spots it was found that most of them correspond to surface-located proteins while three of them have never been described before as antigens. The identification of these proteins improves scientific knowledge that could be useful for PTB diagnoses. The sequence of the identified protein can be used for the synthesis of immunoreactive peptides that could be screened for their immunoreaction against bovine sera infected with MAP. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange consortium with identifier PXD001159 and DOI 10.6019/PXD001159.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis; johne’s disease; immunoreactive proteins; soil biological contaminant

### Affiliations
1. Department of Veterinary Science and Public Health (DIVET), University of Milan 2. Istituto Sperimentale Italiano Lazzaro Spallanzani, Milano
DIVET, Università degli studi di Milano

### Submitter
Paola Roncada

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Paola Roncada
1. Department of Veterinary Science and Public Health (DIVET), University of Milan 2. Istituto Sperimentale Italiano Lazzaro Spallanzani, Milano


