### Accession
PXD002692

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of Medicago truncatula and Sinorhizobium meliloti

### Description
In this resource we describe a large-scale, quantitative proteomic study, including key posttranslational modifications, to establish the first global proteomic blueprint of a legume and its rhizobial endosymbiont (www.compendium.medicago.wisc.edu).

### Sample Protocol
All collected tissues were homogenized, the extracted protein was precipitated and then proteolytically digested with trypsin to generate peptide mixtures.  To ensure as complete coverage of the proteome as possible, the peptides were pre-fractionated using either strong cation exchange or high pH reverse-phase chromatography and then each fraction was analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography using low pH reverse phase separations coupled with high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (nHPLC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
LFQ and TMT datasets were processed separately using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.0). Searches were performed against a non-redundant target-decoy consensus database (WMG Medicago database). Searches were conducted using the default precursor mass tolerances set by Andromeda (20 ppm first search, 4.5 ppm main search).  LFQ data and TMT data were searched using a product mass tolerance of 0.35 Da and 0.015 Da, respectively.  A maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavages were allowed.  The fixed modifications specified were carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT 10-plex on peptide N-termini, and TMT 10-plex on lysine residues.  The variable modifications specified were oxidation of methionine and TMT 10-plex on tyrosine residues.  Additional variable modifications were specified for phospho-peptide analyses (phosphorylation of threonine, serine, and tyrosine residues) and acetyl-peptide analyses (acetylation of lysine residues).

### Publication Abstract
Legumes are essential components of agricultural systems because they enrich the soil in nitrogen and require little environmentally deleterious fertilizers. A complex symbiotic association between legumes and nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria called rhizobia culminates in the development of root nodules, where rhizobia fix atmospheric nitrogen and transfer it to their plant host. Here we describe a quantitative proteomic atlas of the model legume Medicago truncatula and its rhizobial symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti, which includes more than 23,000 proteins, 20,000 phosphorylation sites, and 700 lysine acetylation sites. Our analysis provides insight into mechanisms regulating symbiosis. We identify a calmodulin-binding protein as a key regulator in the host and assign putative roles and targets to host factors (bioactive peptides) that control gene expression in the symbiont. Further mining of this proteomic resource may enable engineering of crops and their microbial partners to increase agricultural productivity and sustainability.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Rhizobia, Ptm, Medicago

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Joshua Coon

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J. Coon
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Chemistry


