### Accession
PXD001926

### Title
Legionella pneumophila proteome

### Description
Legionella pneumophila cells were harvested during exponential growth (RP) and stationary growth (TP). VBNC cells were also  anylzed. Protein subfractions were studied.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular proteins: protein precipitated from the medium, whole cell protein: cells lysed and centrifuged, surface proteins: cells  incubated with biotin, cells lysed, biotinylated proteins extracted with Neutravidin Agarose; all samples separated by 1D gel  electrophoresis, gel pieces digested with trypsin, peptides eluted and subjected to LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
search with sorcerer software against a Legionella pneumophila data base with common conterminants, fragment ion mass  tolerande: 1 Da, search tolerance: 5 ppm, 1 missed cleavage allowed, anaylsis with Scaffold: at least two unique peptides,  normalization over the sum of unweighted spectrum counts

### Publication Abstract
Major differences in the transcriptional program underlying the phenotypic switch between exponential and post-exponential growth of Legionella pneumophila were formerly described characterizing important alterations in infection capacity. Additionally, a third state is known where the bacteria transform in a viable but nonculturable state under stress, such as starvation. We here describe phase-related proteomic changes in exponential phase (E), postexponential phase (PE) bacteria, and unculturable microcosms (UNC) containing viable but nonculturable state cells, and identify phase-specific proteins. We present data on different bacterial subproteomes of E and PE, such as soluble whole cell proteins, outer membrane-associated proteins, and extracellular proteins. In total, 1368 different proteins were identified, 922 were quantified and 397 showed differential abundance in E/PE. The quantified subproteomes of soluble whole cell proteins, outer membrane-associated proteins, and extracellular proteins; 841, 55, and 77 proteins, respectively, were visualized in Voronoi treemaps. 95 proteins were quantified exclusively in E, such as cell division proteins MreC, FtsN, FtsA, and ZipA; 33 exclusively in PE, such as motility-related proteins of flagellum biogenesis FlgE, FlgK, and FliA; and 9 exclusively in unculturable microcosms soluble whole cell proteins, such as hypothetical, as well as transport/binding-, and metabolism-related proteins. A high frequency of differentially abundant or phase-exclusive proteins was observed among the 91 quantified effectors of the major virulence-associated protein secretion system Dot/Icm (&gt; 60%). 24 were E-exclusive, such as LepA/B, YlfA, MavG, Lpg2271, and 13 were PE-exclusive, such as RalF, VipD, Lem10. The growth phase-related specific abundance of a subset of Dot/Icm virulence effectors was confirmed by means of Western blotting. We therefore conclude that many effectors are predominantly abundant at either E or PE which suggests their phase specific function. The distinct temporal or spatial presence of such proteins might have important implications for functional assignments in the future or for use as life-stage specific markers for pathogen analysis.

### Keywords
Extracellular proteome, Surface proteome, Legionella, Whole cell proteome

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald
Institute for Microbiology, University Greifswald, F.-L.-Jahnstr. 15, 17487 Greifswald

### Submitter
Birgit Voigt

### Lab Head
Dr Miacheal Hecker
Institute for Microbiology, University Greifswald, F.-L.-Jahnstr. 15, 17487 Greifswald


