### Accession
PXD013396

### Title
Chronic exposure to chewing tobacco induces metabolic reprogramming and cancer stem cell-like properties in esophageal epithelial cells

### Description
Tobacco in its smoke and smokeless form are major risk factors for ESCC (esophageal squamous cell carcinoma). However, molecular alterations associated with smokeless tobacco exposure are poorly understood. In the Indian subcontinent, tobacco is predominantly consumed in chewing form. An understanding of molecular alterations associated with chewing tobacco exposure is vital for identifying molecular markers and potential targets. We developed an in-vitro cellular model by exposing non-transformed esophageal epithelial cells to chewing tobacco over eight month period. Chronic exposure to chewing tobacco led to increase in cell proliferation, invasive ability and anchorage independent growth indicating cell transformation. Molecular alterations associated with chewing tobacco exposure were characterized by carrying out exome sequencing and quantitative proteomic profiling of parental cells and chewing tobacco exposed cells. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed that established cancer stem cell markers are elevated in tobacco treated cells. Decreased expression of enzymes associated with the glycolytic pathway and increased expression of a large number of mitochondrially localized proteins involved in the electron transport chain as well as enzymes of TCA cycle were also identified. Electron micrographs revealed increase in number and size of mitochondria. Based on these observations, we hypothesise that chronic treatment of esophageal epithelial cells with tobacco leads to a cancer stem cell-like phenotype. These cells also show characteristic OXPHOS phenotype which can be potentially targeted as a therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Het1A-P and treated cell lines (Het1A-2M, Het1A-4M, Het1A-6M and Het1A-8M) were grown to ~80% confluence and washed with 1X PBS thrice and harvested in lysis buffer (2% SDS in 50 mM TEABC with protease inhibitors). The cell lysates were sonicated, centrifuged and protein concentration was determined by BCA. Equal amount of protein samples from all conditions were subjected to reduction and alkylation using 5mM DTT and 20mM IAA respectively. Proteins were precipitated using ice cold acetone and in-solution trypsin digestion of samples was carried out using 1:20 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. Trypsin digested peptides were lyophilized and labelled with TMT reagents as per manufacturer’s protocol. TMT labelled peptides were pooled and subjected to basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC)-based fractionation. A total of 12 fractions were analyzed in triplicates on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from mass spectrometry analysis were searched against Human RefSeq protein database using Sequest HT and Mascot search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. TMT at the N-terminus and lysine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications while oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% was used to identify peptide spectrum matches (PSMs).

### Publication Abstract
Tobacco in its smoke and smokeless form are major risk factors for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, molecular alterations associated with smokeless tobacco exposure are poorly understood. In the Indian subcontinent, tobacco is predominantly consumed in chewing form. An understanding of molecular alterations associated with chewing tobacco exposure is vital for identifying molecular markers and potential targets. We developed an in vitro cellular model by exposing non-transformed esophageal epithelial cells to chewing tobacco over an eight-month period. Chronic exposure to chewing tobacco led to increase in cell proliferation, invasive ability and anchorage independent growth, indicating cell transformation. Molecular alterations associated with chewing tobacco exposure were characterized by carrying out exome sequencing and quantitative proteomic profiling of parental cells and chewing tobacco exposed cells. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed increased expression of cancer stem cell markers in tobacco treated cells. In addition, tobacco exposed cells showed the Oxidative Phosphorylation (OXPHOS) phenotype with decreased expression of enzymes associated with glycolytic pathway and increased expression of a large number of mitochondrial proteins involved in electron transport chain as well as enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Electron micrographs revealed increase in number and size of mitochondria. Based on these observations, we propose that chronic exposure of esophageal epithelial cells to tobacco leads to cancer stem cell-like phenotype. These cells show the characteristic OXPHOS phenotype, which can be potentially targeted as a therapeutic strategy.

### Keywords
Chewing tobacco, Metabolic reprogramming, Cancer stem cells, Esophageal cancer

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560066, India

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560066, India


