### Accession
PXD021661

### Title
TMTPro Complementary Ion Quantification Increase Plexing and Sensitivity for Accurate Multiplexed Proteomics at the MS2 level

### Description
The ability of the TMTPro isobaric labeling reagents to form complementary ions for accurate multiplexed proteomics at the MS2 level was investigated. Human and yeast peptides were labeled in distinct ratios to analyze the effect of interference on the quantification accuracy. A method, TMTProC, was developed and optimized for accurate, sensitive MS2-level quantification of up to 8 conditions in one MS-run.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were mostly prepared as previously described. After lysis, reduction and alkylation was performed with DTT and NEM. Proteins were purified with a chloroform/MeOH precipitation. Samples were first digested with LysC at room temperature overnight, and then with trypsin/LysC at 37°C overnight in the presense of appropriate levels of GuaCl. TMTPro-labeling was done with a peptide/TMTPro ratio of 1/5, and TMTPro reagents were mixed prior to addition to the peptides. For fractionation, pH 8 and reverse phase C18 HPLC was utilized. All samples were desalted on C18 stage-tips prior to analysis. Analysis was performed on a easy-nLC 1200, coupled to a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed using the Gygi Lab GFY software licenced from Harvard. Thermo .raw-files were converted to mzXML using using ReAdW.exe (http://svn.code.sf.net/p/sashimi/code/). Incorrectly assigned precursor charge state as well as incorrectly determined monoisotopic peaks were corrected by custom code (Ramin reference) Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against the combined reference proteomes for Homo Sapies and S. cerevisiae acquired from Uniprot on 08/07/2016 (SwissProt + Trembl) along with common contaminants such as human keratins and trypsin. The target-decoy strategy was used to construct a second database of reversed sequences that were used to estimate the false discovery rate on the peptide level. SEQUEST searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance with the requirement that both N- and C-terminal peptide ends are consistent with the protease specificities of LysC and Trypsin. For high-resolution MS2 data (TMTPro-MS2, TMTProC) the fragment ion tolerance of the MS2 spectrum was set to 0.02 Da, whereas this value was set to 1 Da for low-resolution MS2 spectra acquired with TMTPro-MS3. TMTPro (+ 304.2071 Da) was set as a static modification on N-termini and lysines residues, and N-ethyl maleimide (+125.047679 Da) was set as a static modification on cysteine residues. Oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification, as well as the potential ring-opening of NEM-modified cysteines (+18.010564 Da) when searching the fractionated samples. A peptide level MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate of 1% was obtained by applying the target decoy strategy with linear discriminant analysis as described previously. Peptides were assigned to proteins and a second filtering step to obtain a 1% FDR on the protein level was applied. Peptides that matched multiple proteins were assigned to the proteins with the most unique peptides. Peptides identified in TMTPro-MS2 and TMTPro-MS3 experiments were only considered quantified if at least 75% of the signal in the MS1 spectra within the range of the isolation window came from the precursor peak (Isolation Specificity > 0.75). No isolation specificity filters were applied to the TMTProC data. For all TMTProC runs, peptides were filtered if after post-search calibration, one of the complementary peaks had an error of more than 10 ppm from the median of the other peaks. For all methods, peptides were only considered quantified if the signal to FT noise ratio (S:N) across all channels was greater than 40.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed proteomics is a powerful tool to assay cell states in health and disease, but accurate quantification of relative protein changes is impaired by interference from co-isolated peptides. Interference can be reduced by using MS3-based quantification, but this reduces sensitivity and requires specialized instrumentation. An alternative approach is quantification by complementary ions, the balancer group-peptide conjugates, which allows accurate and precise multiplexed quantification at the MS2 level and is compatible with most proteomics instruments. However, complementary ions of the popular TMT-tag form inefficiently and multiplexing is limited to five channels. Here, we evaluate and optimize complementary ion quantification for the recently released TMTpro-tag, which increases complementary ion plexing capacity to eight channels (TMTproC). Furthermore, the beneficial fragmentation properties of TMTpro increase sensitivity for TMTproC, resulting in &#x223c;65% more proteins quantified compared to TMTpro-MS3 and &#x223c;18% more when compared to real-time-search TMTpro-MS3 (RTS-SPS-MS3). TMTproC quantification is more accurate than TMTpro-MS2 and even superior to RTS-SPS-MS3. We provide the software for quantifying TMTproC data as an executable that is compatible with the MaxQuant analysis pipeline. Thus, TMTproC advances multiplexed proteomics data quality and widens access to accurate multiplexed proteomics beyond laboratories with MS3-capable instrumentation.

### Keywords
Multiplexing, Complementary ion quantification, Interference-free quantification, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Assistant Professor of Molecular Biology and the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University

### Submitter
Michael  Stadlmeier

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wühr
Assistant Professor of Molecular Biology and the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University


