### Accession
PXD009798

### Title
Specialisation events of fungal metacommunities exposed to a persistent organic pollutant are suggestive of augmented pathogenic potential

### Description
The impacts of man-made chemicals, in particular of persistent organic pollutants, are multifactorial as they may affect the integrity of ecosystems, alter biodiversity and hinder the health of most organisms. We have demonstrated that the belowground mycobiota of forest soils acts as a buffer against the pollution provoked by the biocide pentachlorophenol. However the trade-offs of the mitigation of the pollutant remain cryptic. To address this question we scrutinised the key changing aspects of a metacommunity of fungi when confronted (or not) with the biocide, comprising taxonomic and functional levels, as well as the identification of the major pollutant degraders within the metacommunity. Exposure to the biocide led to alterations in the metacommunity composition and functioning, many of which were not fully alleviated when most of the biocide was degraded, especially the dysregulation of the carbon and nitrogen metabolisms. The last is possibly linked to the higher pathogenic potential of the metacommunity after exposure to the biocide, supported by the secretion of proteins related to pathogenicity and reduced susceptibility to a standard fungicide. Our findings provide additional evidence for the silent risks of environmental pollution, particularly as it may favour the development of pathogenic trade-offs in fungi, which may impose serious threats to animals and plant hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis of the metacommunity-based cultures   Extraction of Mycelial proteins: Mycelial proteins were extracted using a modified Trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/Acetone protocol. Briefly, the frozen mycelia (in liquid nitrogen) were grinded using a mortar and pestle and homogenized in extraction buffer: 50 mM of Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100 and EDTA-free EASYpack protease inhibitors (Roche, Switzerland). To facilitate homogenisation and cell rupture, a TissueLyzer LT Adapter (Qiagen, Germany) was used, first 1 g of glass beads (half of each size: 0.5 and 0.1 mm) were added and then two consecutive cycles of 5 min at top speed were applied. Proteins were precipitated in acetone containing 10% TCA (v/v) and 40 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) (1:10 w/v) for 1 h at  20ºC; the pellet recovered by centrifugation at 10,400g for 15 min, washed three times in 10 mL of acetone containing 40 mM of DTT, finally dried under a nitrogen flow and stored at -80ºC until further analysis. Extracellular proteins: The extracellular culture fractions were first concentrated ca. 30 fold using Vivaspin Turbo 15 ultra-filtration systems (Sartorius, Germany). The concentrated samples were mixed with 200 mL of SDS boiling solution (2% SDS, 40 mM of Tris-base and 60 mM of DTT) and treated, first at 99ºC for 5 min at 350 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany), then kept at -20ºC overnight. Finally, proteins were precipitated in acetone with 60 mM DTT for 1 h at -20ºC, and recovered by centrifugation (4ºC; 15 min; 21,630g), washed five times with acetone containing 60 mM DTT, finally dried under a nitrogen flow and stored at -80ºC until further analysis. Mass spectrometry analyses of protein extracts: Proteins were recovered from the culture filtrates using denaturing precipitation conditions. After protein quantification (done with RC DCTM protein assay kit, Bio-Rad), 10 µg of total proteins (quantification were loaded in a precast gel (Criterion TM XT precast 1D gel 4-12% Bis-Tris, Bio-Rad) and separated on a short migration. The gel was stained with Instant Blue (Gentaur BVBA, Kampenhout, Belgium), sliced into bands. Proteins were first reduced, alkylated and de-stained, then digested by trypsin enzyme (sequencing mass grade, Promega). Peptides were extracted, dried and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS analysis. Peptides were analysed with a nano-HPLC system (NanoLC-2D, Eksigent, Sciex) coupled to a Triple TOF 5600+ HRMS (Sciex, Darmstadt, Germany) operated on positive ESI mode with a Nanospray III source. In details, after desalting and enrichment on C18 pre-column (C18 PepMap™, 5 μm, 5 mm x 300 μm, Thermo scientific), peptides were separated with a C18 reverse phase column (C18 PepMap™ 100, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 15 cm, Thermo scientific) using a linear binary gradient (A: 0.1% formic acid (FA); B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted from 5% to 55% solvent B over 45 min, risen to 100% to wash the column then re-equilibrated 25 min to the next injection. The twenty most intense precursors were selected for MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification:  The CID spectra was processed with Mascot (version 2.4.2) using Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.4.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) by searching against the SwissProt Fungi (31527 sequences) database released on May 2015 and the Emericella nidulans (36,970 sequences; 18,794,350 residues) database released on the 13th November 2015. Only the identified proteins with a significance threshold p<0.05 and at least two significant peptides per proteins were accepted.  Proteomics data analysis: To be more confident with the list of identified proteins, only the proteins that were present in at least two out of three biological replicates were considered for further analyses. The relative quantification of the proteins has been calculated using the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF). The spectral counts (SC) of each mass were normalized and further analysed using the RStudio (version 1.0.153) Bioconductor package edgeR, as previously suggested following a generalized linear models. This approach was used to analyse both the mycelial and the extracellular metaproteome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Pathogenic, Carbon and nitrogen metabolisms, Pcp, Biocide, Secreted proteins, Metacommunity

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-ERTP

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Renaut
LIST-ERIN-ERTP


