### Accession
PXD008971

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana anti-all-WRKY pull-downs from whole seedlings

### Description
The experiments were performed to monitor dynamics in WRKY transcription factor abundancies upon treatment with flg22, a peptide derived from the bacterial flagella. Mock-treated or WT seedlings treated for 2 h with flg22 were used to prepare crude nuclear lysates. Then pull downs were performed with an anti-all-WRKY antiserum to enrich for WRKY transcription factor proteins prior to MS.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve days old WT seedlings were mock treated or treated for 2 h with flg22, and 2 g material from each treatment ground in liquid nitrogen. The powder was processed as described in Gendrel et al, 2005, steps 7 to 17, which resulted in cleared nuclear lysates containing 1 % SDS. For IP 300 µl lysate from each treatment was diluted 12-fold with EWB (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT), plus 1% Triton and protease inhibitors and pre-cleared with 100 µl proteinA agarose for 3 h. Each lysate was then divided into two samples and incubated overnight either with anti-all-WRKY immune serum (Turck et al., 2004) or the corresponding pre-immune serum. The immune complexes were bound to proteinA agarose, washed five times with EWB, eluted two times with 50 µl 0.1 % TFA, and prepared for MS by neutralizing them with an equal volume of neutralization buffer (8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8).  Eluted proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in solution. Cysteines were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min. Subsequently, alkylation was performed by adding chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 14 mM and incubation for 30 min. The reaction was quenched by addition of DTT. Urea concentration was adjusted to 2 M by dilution with 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2. Trypsin digestion (1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio) was performed over night at 37°C and stopped by addition of 1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted with StageTip (Empore C18, 3M). After elution, peptides were dried and directly subjected to MS measurement Peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) on a 16 cm C18 column (3 µm bead size) with a 120 min segmented linear gradient. Peptides were analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a Top15 method.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.5.2.8). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the TAIR10 proteome (35,386 entries), and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
During microbe-associated molecular pattern-triggered immunity more than 5000 Arabidopsis genes are significantly altered in their expression, and the question arises, how such an enormous reprogramming of the transcriptome can be regulated in a safe and robust manner? For the WRKY transcription factors (TFs), which are important regulators of numerous defense responses, it appears that they act in a complex regulatory sub-network rather than in a linear fashion, which would be much more vulnerable to gene function loss either by pathogen-derived effectors or by mutations. In this study we employed RNA-seq, mass spectrometry and chromatin immunoprecipitation-seq to find evidence for and uncover principles and characteristics of this network. Upon flg22-treatment, one can distinguish between two sets of WRKY genes: constitutively expressed and induced WRKY genes. Prior to elicitation the induced WRKY genes appear to be maintained in a repressed state mainly by the constitutively expressed WRKY factors, which themselves appear to be regulated by non-WRKY TFs. Upon elicitation, induced WRKYs rapidly bind to induced WRKY gene promoters and by auto- and cross-regulation build up the regulatory network. Maintenance of this flg22-induced network appears highly robust as removal of three key WRKY factors can be physically and functionally compensated for by other WRKY family members.

### Keywords
Wrky, Arabidopsis, Pull-down, Flg22

### Affiliations
University of Muenster
Prof. Dr. Iris Finkemeier Pflanzenphysiologie Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen Westfälische Wilhelms Universität Münster Schlossplatz 7 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Iris Finkemeier

### Lab Head
Dr Iris Finkemeier
Prof. Dr. Iris Finkemeier Pflanzenphysiologie Institut für Biologie und Biotechnologie der Pflanzen Westfälische Wilhelms Universität Münster Schlossplatz 7 48149 Münster Germany


