### Accession
PXD023781

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 infects brain astrocytes of COVID-19 patients and impairs neuronal viability

### Description
COVID-19 patients may exhibit neuropsychiatric and neurological symptoms. We found that anxiety and cognitive impairment are manifested by 28-56% of SARS-CoV-2-infected individuals with mild respiratory symptoms and are associated with altered cerebral cortical thickness. Using an independent cohort, we found histopathological signs of brain damage in 25% of individuals who died of COVID-19. All of the affected brain tissues exhibited foci of SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication, particularly in astrocytes. Infection of neural stem cell-derived astrocytes changed energy metabolism, altered key proteins and metabolites used to fuel neurons and for biogenesis of neurotransmitters, and elicited a secretory phenotype that reduces neuronal viability. Our data support the model where SARS-CoV-2 reaches the brain, infects astrocytes and triggers neuropathological changes that contribute to the structural and functional alterations in the brain of COVID-19 patients.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, twelve COVID-19 patients were autopsied using the same approach. Brain tissue samples were collected and macerated in a lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100) prior to trypsin digestion. The autopsy studies were approved by the National Commission for Research Ethics (CAAE: 32475220.5.0000.5440 and CAAE: 38071420.0.1001.5404). .Astrocytes were infected with SARS-CoV-2 for 1 hour using an MOI of 0.1 (proteomics, metabolomics, gene expression, viral load, bioenergetics assays and flow cytometer analysis) and 1 (immunostaining experiments) under gentle agitation at room temperature. After viral adsorption, cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated with DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% GlutaMAX and 1% penicillin and streptomycin for 24 hours at standard culture conditions (37ºC and 5% CO2 atmosphere). Astrocytes cells were harvested according to the experiment: immunostaining,  proteomics and metabolomic analysis, gene expression analysis and viral load, bioenergetics test and flow cytometer analysis..Astrocytes infected with SARS-CoV-2 and a mock control were collected in biological triplicates. Cells were chemically lysed with Lysis Buffer: (100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and mechanically lysed with an ultrasonication probe in 3 cycles of 20s each with 90% of frequency. The total protein extract was quantified by BCA, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 30 µg of total protein extract from each sample was transferred to a Microcon-10 Centrifugal Filter, with 10 kDa cutoff, for FASP protein digestion 52. Proteins were reduced (10 mM DTT), alkylated (50 mM IAA) and digested overnight by trypsin at 37°C in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), pH 8.0. One the following day the peptides were recovered from the filter in 50 mM AmBic, and trypsin activity was quenched by adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v), after that the peptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until use. Digested peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in an ACQUITY M-Class System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). 1 μg of peptides were loaded onto a trapping column (Symmetry C18 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and subsequently separated in the analytical column (HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm; Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). For gradient elution, 0.1% FA was used as eluent A and Acetonitrile-FA (99.9% ACN:0.1% FA) as eluent B. Reversed phase gradient was carried out over 120 minutes, with a linear gradient 3 - 60% acetonitrile over 90 min at 300 nL/min. In the Synapt G2-Si, the peptide spectra were acquired by ion mobility-enhanced data-independent acquisition (HDMSe). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in “Resolution Mode”, switching between low (4 eV) and high (25–60 eV) collision energies, using a scan time of 1.0 s per function over 50–2000 m/z. The wave velocity for ion mobility separation was 1.000 m/s and the transfer wave velocity was 175 m/s. A [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B Standard (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) was used as the reference lock mass compound. Each sample was run in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from each experiment were processed in Progenesis QI for proteomics (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens proteome database (UNIPROT Protein reviewed release 2020-04), using tolerance parameters of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 10 ppm for product ions. For peptide identification, carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionines as a variable modification, 2 missed cleavages, and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. Protein identification was performed using a minimum of 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, a minimum of 3 fragment ions per protein and a minimum of 1 peptide per protein.  Label-free quantitative analysis was carried out using the relative abundance intensity normalized by all peptides identified. The expression analysis was performed considering the technical replicates for each experimental condition, following the hypothesis that each group is independent. Proteins with ANOVA (p) ≤ 0.05 between the groups were considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Although increasing evidence confirms neuropsychiatric manifestations associated mainly with severe COVID-19 infection, long-term neuropsychiatric dysfunction (recently characterized as part of "long COVID-19" syndrome) has been frequently observed after mild infection. We show the spectrum of cerebral impact of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, ranging from long-term alterations in mildly infected individuals (orbitofrontal cortical atrophy, neurocognitive impairment, excessive fatigue and anxiety symptoms) to severe acute damage confirmed in brain tissue samples extracted from the orbitofrontal region (via endonasal transethmoidal access) from individuals who died of COVID-19. In an independent cohort of 26 individuals who died of COVID-19, we used histopathological signs of brain damage as a guide for possible SARS-CoV-2 brain infection and found that among the 5 individuals who exhibited those signs, all of them had genetic material of the virus in the brain. Brain tissue samples from these five patients also exhibited foci of SARS-CoV-2 infection and replication, particularly in astrocytes. Supporting the hypothesis of astrocyte infection, neural stem cell-derived human astrocytes in&#xa0;vitro are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection through a noncanonical mechanism that involves spike-NRP1 interaction. SARS-CoV-2-infected astrocytes manifested changes in energy metabolism and in key proteins and metabolites used to fuel neurons, as well as in the biogenesis of neurotransmitters. Moreover, human astrocyte infection elicits a secretory phenotype that reduces neuronal viability. Our data support the model in which SARS-CoV-2 reaches the brain, infects astrocytes, and consequently, leads to neuronal death or dysfunction. These deregulated processes could contribute to the structural and functional alterations seen in the brains of COVID-19 patients.

### Keywords
Covid-19, Astrocytes, Proteomics, Sars-cov2

### Affiliations
Post doctor
Associate professor at University of Campinas-SP (UNICAMP-SP)

### Submitter
Victor Corasolla Carregari

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Martins-de-Souza
Associate professor at University of Campinas-SP (UNICAMP-SP)


