### Accession
PXD031189

### Title
The master energy homeostasis regulator PGC-1α couples transcriptional co-activation and mRNA nuclear export

### Description
PGC-1α plays a central role in maintaining the mitochondrial and energy metabolism homeostasis, linking external stimuli to the transcriptional co-activation of genes involved in adaptive and age-related pathways. The carboxyl-terminus encodes a serine/arginine-rich (RS) region and a putative RNA recognition motif, however potential RNA-processing role(s) have remained elusive for the past 20 years. Here, we show that the RS domain of human PGC-1α directly interacts with RNA and the nuclear RNA export factor NXF1. Inducible depletion of endogenous PGC-1α and expression of RNAi-resistant RS-deleted PGC-1α further demonstrate that the RNA-binding activity is required for nuclear export of co-activated transcripts and mitochondrial homeostasis. Moreover, a quantitative proteomics approach confirmed PGC-1α-dependent RNA transport and mitochondrial-related functions, identifying also novel mRNA nuclear export targets in age-related telomere maintenance. Discovering a novel function for a major cellular homeostasis regulator provides new directions to further elucidate the roles of PGC-1α in gene expression, metabolic disorders, ageing and neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
HEK FLpIN cell (Sham, PGC1α WT-res and PGC1α ΔRS-res) were cultured in 6-well plates. Cells washed with PBS containing protease inhibitors, gently scraped and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen followed by storage at -80°C. Three replicates were used for cells cultured in glucose, and two for those cultured in galactose giving a total of 10 samples. Each replicate represents a subsequent passage. Cell pellets were lysed in Urea/SDS lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 1% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.2, 10 mM Glycerol-2-phosphate, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM Sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM Sodium vanadate, 1 mM DTT, 500 nM Okadaic acid, protease inhibitors, Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail III). After protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA assay, 100 ug of each sample was used further for multiplexed quantitative proteomics giving a total of 1 mg protein. Each sample was reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 1 h at 55°C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. In order to remove SDS, each reaction was precipitated with 6 volumes of cold (-20°C) acetone and left overnight at -20°C. Samples were equilibrated to room temperature to avoid urea crystals and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. Supernatant was carefully removed and pellets were air-dried. Pellets were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.5 by vortexing and incubation in a sonic bath for 15 min. Resuspended samples were digested with LysC (Lysyl endopeptidase, 125-05061, FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals) and Trypsin (MS grade, 90058, ThermoFisher Scientific) at 37°C shaking overnight. Each sample was then tandem mass tag (TMT) labelled for an hour at room temperature using a TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (0.8 mg per tag, 90110, ThermoFisher Scientific; LOT UK282322) and following manufacturer’s instructions. A small aliquot of each sample was collected for a labelling efficiency and mixing accuracy quality checks (QCs) by liquid chromatography tandem mass spec (LC-MS/MS) using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer and a 60 min HCD MS2 fragmentation method. The rest of the sample was stored at -80°C until QC results. Labelling efficiency of higher than 99% was obtained for each reaction and a mixing accuracy with lower than 1.5x difference between samples with lowest and highest summed intensity. Samples were defrosted, quenched with hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature and pooled together. Combined mixture was partially vacuum-dried and acidified to pH 2 followed by sample clean-up using C18 Sep Pak Vac 1cc, 50mg bed volume (Waters) with gravity flow. Final mixing check was performed by LC-MS/MS with a 240 min HCD MS2 fragmentation method. From the pooled labelled mix, 100 g total (starting) protein was aliquoted and vacuum-dried to completion. Dried peptide mix was resuspended in 2% TFA and fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionmation kit (84868, ThermoFisher Scientific). Each fraction was vacuum-dried and resuspended in 25 ul 0.1% TFA. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm, 75 um I.D. Pepmap column over a 2 h gradient and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) with 3 injections of 7 ul for each fragmentation method – HCD MS2, and two methods for MS3. Xcalibur software was used to control the data acquisition. The instrument was run in data dependent acquisition mode with the most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.2.10 using reporter ion quantification method and adjusted isotopic distribution according to the TMT Lot number used. Peptide identification was carried out by Andromeda search engine using Uniprot human canonical reference proteome from September 2020. Peptide minimum lenght was set to 7 and peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
PGC-1&#x3b1; plays a central role in maintaining mitochondrial and energy metabolism homeostasis, linking external stimuli to transcriptional co-activation of genes involved in adaptive and age-related pathways. The carboxyl-terminus encodes a serine/arginine-rich (RS) region and an RNA recognition motif, however the RNA-processing function(s) were poorly investigated over the past 20 years. Here, we show that the RS domain of human PGC-1&#x3b1; directly interacts with RNA and the nuclear RNA export receptor NXF1. Inducible depletion of PGC-1&#x3b1; and expression of RNAi-resistant RS-deleted PGC-1&#x3b1; further demonstrate that its RNA/NXF1-binding activity is required for the nuclear export of some canonical mitochondrial-related mRNAs and mitochondrial homeostasis. Genome-wide investigations reveal that the nuclear export function is not strictly linked to promoter-binding, identifying in turn novel regulatory targets of PGC-1&#x3b1; in non-homologous end-joining and nucleocytoplasmic transport. These findings provide new directions to further elucidate the roles of PGC-1&#x3b1; in gene expression, metabolic disorders, aging and neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Nxf1-dependent mrna nuclear export, Energy metabolism, Mitochondria, Tmt lc-msms, Gene expression, Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha

### Affiliations
Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), Department of Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, 385 Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2HQ, United Kingdom
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Simeon Mihaylov

### Lab Head
Dr Guillaume M Hautbergue
Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience (SITraN), Department of Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, 385 Glossop Road, Sheffield S10 2HQ, United Kingdom


