### Accession
PXD028922

### Title
Proteomics analysis of tears and saliva from Sjogren’s syndrome patients

### Description
Sjogren’s syndrome (SS) is characterized by dysfunctional mucous membranes and dysregulated moisture-secreting glands resulting in various symptoms, including dry mouth and dry eyes. Here, we wanted to profile and compare the tears and saliva proteomes of SS patients to healthy controls. Tear and saliva samples were collected and subjected to an isotopic dimethylation labeling shotgun proteomics workflow to identify alterations in protein levels. In tear samples, we identified 83 upregulated and 112 downregulated proteins. Altered pathways in SS patients’ tears included leukocyte transendothelial migration, neutrophil degranulation, and post-translation protein phosphorylation. In healthy controls’ tears, enriched proteins for glycolysis, amino acid metabolism and apoptotic signaling pathway were identified. In saliva, we identified 108 upregulated and 45 downregulated proteins. Altered pathways in SS patients’ saliva included cornification, sensory perception to taste and neutrophil degranulation. In healthy controls’ saliva, enriched proteins for JAK-STAT signaling after interleukin-12 stimulation, phagocytosis and glycolysis in senescence were identified. Dysregulated protease activity is implicated in the initiation of inflammation and immune cell recruitment in SS. We identified 20 proteases and protease inhibitors in tears and 18 in saliva which are differentially expressed between SS patients and healthy controls. Next, we quantified endogenous proteoglycan 4 (PRG4), a mucin-like glycoprotein previously shown to be present in tears and never studied in saliva, in tear wash and saliva samples via a bead-based immune assay. We identified decreased levels of PRG4 in SS patients’ tear wash compared to normal samples. Conversely, in saliva, we found elevated levels of PRG4 concentration and visualized PRG4 expression in human parotid gland via immunohistological staining. These findings improve our mechanistic understanding of the disease and changes in SS patients’ protein expression will help identify new potential drug targets. PRG4 is among the promising targets, which we identified here, in saliva, for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative shotgun proteomics using Light (+28 Da) and Heavy (+34 Da) formaldehyde. We analyzed tears and saliva ssamples from Healhty and Sjogren's syndrome patients.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.10.23, at a peptide-spectrum match FDR of  < 0.01. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). N-terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylation were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P for the proteomics data, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cutoff values were determined after log(2) transformation by boxplot-and-whiskers analysis using the BoxPlotR tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protease, Proteomics, Prg4, Sjogren’s syndrome, Proteoglycan 4, Lubricin, Saliva, Protease inhibitor, Tears

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology 
University of calgary

### Submitter
Antoine Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
University of calgary


