### Accession
PXD019276

### Title
AtLEGbeta / gamma protease specificity and putative substrate characterization by HUNTER

### Description
Arabidopsis thaliana Legumain (aka VPE) beta / gamma were characterized for their cleavage specificity and putative substrates were identified by the N-termini enrichment method HUNTER.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana VPE quadruple mutant (VPE0, accession N67918) proteome extracts were harvested from 8 week old plant leaves. The proteomes were digested by recombinant AtLEGbeta/gamma subsequently followed by digestion with trypsin over night at 37 °C. Enrichment of N-terminal peptides was performed according to the HUNTER method (Weng. et al, 2019 - DOI: doi.org/10.1074/mcp.TIR119.001560). In brief, trypsin-digested sample was tagged with undecanal at a ratio of 50 : 1 (w/w) in 40% ethanol supplemented with 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride at 50 ºC for 45 min. Additional 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride was added for another 45 min under the same condition. The reaction was then acidified with a final concentration of 1% TFA and centrifuged at 21,000 x g for 5 min. Next, the supernatant was injected through a pre-activated HR-X (M) cartridge (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). The flow-through containing N-terminal peptides was collected. Remaining N-terminal peptides on the HR-X (M) cartridge were eluted with 40% ethanol containing 0.1% TFA, pooled with the first eluate and subsequently evaporated in the SpeedVac to a small volume suitable for C18 StageTip purification prior to mass spectrometric analysis. The assays were performed in three biological triplicates. Samples were analyzed on a two-column nano-HPLC setup (Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC system with uPAC TRAP and uPAC 50cm columns from Pharmafluidics) with a binary gradient from 5-32.5% B for 80 min (A: H2O + 0.1% FA, B: ACN + 0.1% FA) and a total runtime of 2 h per sample coupled to a high resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact II, Bruker) as described in (Rinschen et al, 2017). Data was acquired with the Bruker HyStar Software (v3.2, Bruker Daltonics,) in line-mode in a mass range from 200-1500 m/z at an acquisition rate of 4 Hz.

### Data Protocol
For HUNTER experiments, the A. thaliana UniProt proteome database (downloaded Dec 2018, 41592 entries) with appended laboratory contaminants was used for searches that considered C-terminal cleavage by ArgC as digestion enzyme. Further search parameters included isotope labeling by light (+28.031300), medium (+32.056407) or heavy (+36.075670) dimethylation of peptide N termini or Lys residues, Cys carbamido-methylation as fixed and Met oxidation, N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) or N-terminal pyroGlu formation from Glu (-18.010565) or Gln (-17.026549) as variable modifications. Further statistical data analysis, filtering and annotation was performed with the Perl script MANTI.pl 3.9.7 (https://manti.sourceforge.io).

### Publication Abstract
The vacuolar cysteine protease legumain plays important functions in seed maturation and plant programmed cell death. Because of their dual protease and ligase activity, plant legumains have become of particular biotechnological interest, <i>e.g.</i> for the synthesis of cyclic peptides for drug design or for protein engineering. However, the molecular mechanisms behind their dual protease and ligase activities are still poorly understood, limiting their applications. Here, we present the crystal structure of <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> legumain isoform &#x3b2; (AtLEG&#x3b2;) in its zymogen state. Combining structural and biochemical experiments, we show for the first time that plant legumains encode distinct, isoform-specific activation mechanisms. Whereas the autocatalytic activation of isoform &#x3b3; (AtLEG&#x3b3;) is controlled by the latency-conferring dimer state, the activation of the monomeric AtLEG&#x3b2; is concentration independent. Additionally, in AtLEG&#x3b2; the plant-characteristic two-chain intermediate state is stabilized by hydrophobic rather than ionic interactions, as in AtLEG&#x3b3;, resulting in significantly different pH stability profiles. The crystal structure of AtLEG&#x3b2; revealed unrestricted nonprime substrate binding pockets, consistent with the broad substrate specificity, as determined by degradomic assays. Further to its protease activity, we show that AtLEG&#x3b2; exhibits a true peptide ligase activity. Whereas cleavage-dependent transpeptidase activity has been reported for other plant legumains, AtLEG&#x3b2; is the first example of a plant legumain capable of linking free termini. The discovery of these isoform-specific differences will allow us to identify and rationally design efficient ligases with application in biotechnology and drug development.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana legumain vpe beta gamma protease hunter substrates

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str. D-52425 Juelich Germany
Forschungszentrum Juelich
ZEA-3 Analytics
Wilhelm-Johnen-Str
D-52425 Juelich

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Florian Huesgen
Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str. D-52425 Juelich Germany


