### Accession
PXD010457

### Title
Proteomic profiling of peroxisomal proteins in the ripening of sweet pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) fruit. Catalase as a case study

### Description
Fruit ripening is a very important physiological process which gains relevance in crop species due to their economical and nutritional repercussions. During fruit ripening enormous metabolic changes occur in a genetically-controlled scenario affecting the physiology of most cell compartments. Peroxisomes are single-membrane bounded organelles present in all eukaryotes which display a noteworthy nitro-oxidative metabolism, and harbor catalase as one of the major antioxidant enzymes in cells. Quantitative proteomics analysis by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) was used to investigate the ripening process in sweet pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) fruits. Out of 2,574 quantified proteins, 692 were found to be significantly more abundant in immature green fruits compared to red ones, but 497 showed a lower expression as the ripening proceeded. Overall, about 50% of the detectable proteins were estimated to modify their expression due to the ripening process. Data obtained from the Gene Ontology algorithms (AgriGO platform) showed that from all the identified proteins, 46 (2%) were only predicted to have a peroxisomal origin, with a high number of them displaying up-expression tendency during ripening. Catalase was framed within the group which showed lower expression in ripe fruits, but this enzyme was also susceptible to undergo posttranslational modifications (PTMs) promoted by reactive nitrogen and oxygen species (RNS and ROS) through nitration, S-nitrosylation and oxidation events which provoked its inhibition. The biochemical characterization of catalase indicates that it has atypical native molecular mass (125-135 kDa), since it behaves as a homodimer, and isoelectric point of 7.4, which is higher than that of the majority of plant catalases reported so far. Taking together, these data suggest that ROS and RNS could be essential to modulate the role of catalase for the maintenance of basic cellular peroxisomal functions during pepper fruit ripening where nitro-oxidative stress occur.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and tagging with iTRAQ-8plex® reagent: Total protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660nm protein assay (Thermo). For digestion, 40 µg of protein from each condition was precipitated by methanol/chloroform method. Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 20 µl 7 M Urea/2M Thiourea/100mM TEAB, pH 7.5, reduced with 2 µL of 50mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, SCIEX), pH 8.0, at 37°C for 60 min and followed by 1 µL of 200mM cysteine-blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Pierce) for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted up to 140 µL to reduce urea concentration with 25mM TEAB. Digestions were initiated by adding 2 µg sequence grade-modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) to each sample in a ratio 1:20 (w/w), which were then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The resulting peptides were subsequently labelled using iTRAQ-8plex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer's instructions as follows: 113: C1; 114: C1; 115: V1; 116: C2; 117: V2; 118: V2; 119: V2; 121: V2. Three biological replicates of each condition were analysed in this study. After labelling, the samples were pooled, evaporated to dryness and storaged at -20°C until the LC−MS analysis. Offline high pH reversed-phase (bRP-LC) peptide fractionation: bRP-LC C18 fractionation of the iTRAQ labelled peptides was performed on the SmartLine (Knauer, Germany) HPLC system using the Waters, XBridge C18 column (100 × 2.1 mm, 5 μm particle). The composition of mobile phase (A) was 10 mM ammonium hydroxide (pH 9.4), whereas the composition of mobile phase (B) was 80% methanol, 10 mM ammonium hydroxide (pH 9.3). The dried-up peptide pellet was dissolved in 100 μL of buffer A, injected in the sample loop and then fractionated using a linear gradient of 0–100% buffer B at 150 μL/min for 90 min. Thirty fractions were collected over the elution profile and pooled into 5 fractions using the fraction mixing strategy n+1 (i.e. fractions 1+6+11+16+21+26). The peptide fractions were dried, desalted using a SEP-PAK C18 Cartridge (Waters) and stored at −20 °C until the LC−MS analysis. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis: A 1 µg aliquot of labelled mixture was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 75 µm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size and 130 Å pore size (Waters). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo Scientific), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 250 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 120 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) 35, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 25, declustering potential (DP) 150 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 30 MS/MS scans of 150ms in the mass range of 100–1800. Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were exported to mgf format using Peak View v1.2.0.3 and searched using Mascot Server 2.5.1, OMSSA 2.1.9, X!TANDEM 2013.02.01.1, and Myrimatch 2.2.140 against a composite target/decoy database built from the 38631 Capsicum annuum Bell pepper sequences at Uniprot (proteome ID UP000189700, June 2017) plus some commonly occurring contaminants. Correctly identified peptides from an initial X!TANDEM search with mass error tolerance of 35 ppm were used to recalibrate parent ion mass measurements in all spectra using linear models. All search engines were then configured to match potential peptide candidates to recalibrated spectra with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13C) of 1, considering fixed MMTS modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus, and modification of lysine, tyrosine and peptide N-terminus with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values, and spectra recovered by a FDR <= 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Differential regulation was measured using linear models, and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics (Madrid, Spain).

### Publication Abstract
Nitric oxide (NO) is a free radical which modulates protein function and gene expression throughout all stages of plant development. Fruit ripening involves a complex scenario where drastic phenotypical and metabolic changes take place. Pepper fruits are one of the most consumed horticultural products worldwide which, at ripening, undergo crucial phenotypical and biochemical events, with NO and antioxidants being implicated. Based on previous transcriptomic (RNA-Seq), proteomics (iTRAQ), and enzymatic data, this study aimed to identify the ascorbate peroxidase (APX) gene and protein profiles in sweet peppers and to evaluate their potential modulation by NO during fruit ripening. The data show the existence of six <i>CaAPX</i> genes (<i>CaAPX1-CaAPX6</i>) that encode corresponding APX isozymes distributed in cytosol, plastids, mitochondria, and peroxisomes. The time course expression analysis of these genes showed heterogeneous expression patterns throughout the different ripening stages, and also as a consequence of treatment with NO gas. Additionally, six APX isozymes activities (APX I-APX VI) were identified by non-denaturing PAGE, and they were also differentially modulated during maturation and NO treatment. In vitro analyses of fruit samples in the presence of NO donors, peroxynitrite, and glutathione, showed that CaAPX activity was inhibited, thus suggesting that different posttranslational modifications (PTMs), including <i>S</i>-nitrosation, Tyr-nitration, and glutathionylation, respectively, may occur in APX isozymes. In silico analysis of the protein tertiary structure showed that residues Cys32 and Tyr235 were conserved in the six CaAPXs, and are thus likely potential targets for <i>S</i>-nitrosation and nitration, respectively. These data highlight the complex mechanisms of the regulation of APX isozymes during the ripening process of sweet pepper fruits and how NO can exert fine control. This information could be useful for postharvest technology; NO regulates H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> levels through the different APX isozymes and, consequently, could modulate the shelf life and nutritional quality of pepper fruits.

### Keywords
Reactive oxygen especies, Reactive nitrogen species., Peroxisomes, Catalase, Protein expression, Molecular characterization, Itraq, Pepper fruits ripening

### Affiliations
Estación Experimental del Zaidín, CSIC, Granada, Spain
Proteobotics S.L.

### Submitter
Antonio Ramos Fernández

### Lab Head
Dr José Manuel Palma Martínez
Estación Experimental del Zaidín, CSIC, Granada, Spain


