### Accession
PXD013684

### Title
Proteomic analysis of livers from the European flounder Platichthys flesus

### Description
Proteomics of livers from Platichthys flesus caught in the Canche estuary but having undergone a 1-month encagement in three estuarine sites for describing molecular players in response to encagement and environmental stresses.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
Estuaries are important areas highly vulnerable to anthropogenic pollutions. Therefore, the assessment of estuarine water quality is a major ecological issue. In this study, we sampled juveniles of the European flounder in the "pristine" Canche estuary, and caged them in Canche and in two polluted sites of the Seine estuary, Rouen and Fosse Nord. After one month, the metal and organic pollutants in these sites were assessed, and we evaluated several phenotypic indicators (condition index, RNA/DNA ratios and genotoxicity), and extracted the proteins in fish livers for analysis using a shotgun proteomics approach. The results showed strong modifications in the fish caged in both sites of the Seine estuary, as compared to those caged in Canche. In particular, many proteins involved in phase I and phase II detoxification reactions were accumulated in the liver of fish caged in the site showing the highest pollution, Rouen. In addition, we observed a general disruption of metabolism, in particular an increase in lipid synthesis and carbohydrate degradation in Rouen, and a decrease in the abundance of proteins associated to translational activity in Fosse Nord. At both sites, several stress proteins were decreased. The proteomic impact of the encagement by itself was also evaluated, by comparing the liver proteome of fish caged in Canche to that of fish stayed in natura during the same time. The results showed proteomic signatures of exposure to stressful conditions (particularly heat stress), most probably related to the micro-habitat in which the cages were placed. In conclusion, the caging technique is of great interest for ecotoxicological assessment of estuarine waters, but should consider that the results are representative of the micro-habitat around the cages, which does not necessarily represent the overall heterogeneity of the estuarine environment.

### Keywords
Environmental exposure, Pollutant, Ecotoxicology, Animal, Liver, Fish, Coastal waters, Encagement, Shotgun proteomics, Estuary, Stress

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


