### Accession
PXD020007

### Title
The CNS myelin proteome: Deep profile and persistence after post-mortem delay

### Description
We revisited the proteome of myelin biochemically purified from the brains of healthy c56Bl/6N-mice utilizing complementary proteomic approaches for deep qualitative and quantitative coverage. A data-independent acquisition (DIA) workflow with alternating low and elevated energy (MSE) provided the high dynamic range required for correct quantification of highest-abundance proteins. According to this analysis, the most abundant myelin proteins PLP, MBP, CNP and MOG constitute 38%, 30%, 5% and 1% of the total myelin protein, respectively. Combined with data from an ion mobility-enhanced version of the MSE mode (referred to as UDMSE) and from 1D-gel-based proteomic approaches, we provide the most comprehensive proteome resource of CNS myelin so far and correlate it with published datasets on mRNA and protein abundance profiles of myelin and oligodendrocytes. Using dynamic range enhancement (DRE)-UDMSE as a dedicated data acquisition mode for routine differential myelin proteome profiling, we also establish that the myelin proteome displays only minor changes if assessed after a post mortem-delay of six hours. Together, these data provide a basis for addressing proteomic heterogeneity of myelin in mouse models and human patients with white matter disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of central nervous system (CNS) myelin from mouse brains by discontinuous sucrose density gradient centrifugation. 1D-gel separation of myelin proteins followed by automated in-gel digestion and analysis by LC-MS. Solubilization of myelin proteins in ASB-14 detergent followed by automated in-solution protein digestion according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol and analysis by LC-MS. 1D LC separation of peptides using a Waters nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system. Mass spectrometric analysis performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA) on a Waters Synapt G2-S quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer equipped with ion mobility option.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with Waters ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS). Retention time alignment, exact mass and retention time (EMRT) and ion mobility clustering, data normalization, isoform/homology filtering and calculation of absolute in-sample amounts for each detected protein according to the TOP3 quantification approach with ISOQuant. Statistical analysis and visualization of data with an RStudio pipeline employing the Bioconductor packages "limma" and "q-value".

### Publication Abstract
Myelin membranes are dominated by lipids while the complexity of their protein composition has long been considered to be low. However, numerous additional myelin proteins have been identified since. Here we revisit the proteome of myelin biochemically purified from the brains of healthy c56Bl/6N-mice utilizing complementary proteomic approaches for deep qualitative and quantitative coverage. By gel-free, label-free mass spectrometry, the most abundant myelin proteins PLP, MBP, CNP, and MOG constitute 38, 30, 5, and 1% of the total myelin protein, respectively. The relative abundance of myelin proteins displays a dynamic range of over four orders of magnitude, implying that PLP and MBP have overshadowed less abundant myelin constituents in initial gel-based approaches. By comparisons with published datasets we evaluate to which degree the CNS myelin proteome correlates with the mRNA and protein abundance profiles of myelin and oligodendrocytes. Notably, the myelin proteome displays only minor changes if assessed after a post-mortem delay of 6 h. These data provide the most comprehensive proteome resource of CNS myelin so far and a basis for addressing proteomic heterogeneity of myelin in mouse models and human patients with white matter disorders.

### Keywords
Proteolipid protein (plp), Post mortem-delay, Oligodendrocyte, Myelin basic protein (mbp), Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (cnp), Demyelination, Autopsy, Myelin proteome, Transcriptome, Central nervous system (cns), Mass spectrometry, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323 E-mail: jahn@em.mpg.de URL: www.em.mpg.de/proteomics

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. Olaf Jahn
Proteomics Group Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental Medicine Hermann-Rein-Str. 3 37075 Goettingen, Germany Tel: +49-551-3899313 Fax: +49-551-3899323 E-mail: jahn@em.mpg.de URL: www.em.mpg.de/proteomics


