### Accession
PXD028695

### Title
Integrated analysis of the sialotrancriptome and sialoproteome of the rat flea Xenopsylla cheopis.

### Description
. Here we provide a deeper insight into Xenopsylla cheopis salivary glands contents pairing transcriptome and proteomic approaches. Sequencing of 99 pairs of salivary glands from adult females X. cheopis yielded a total of 7,432 coding sequences functionally classified into 25 classes, in which the secreted class was found to be the most abundant one. The translated transcripts also served as a reference database for the proteomic study, which identified peptides from 610 different proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Intact salivary gland pairs were collected from adult female X. cheopis from fleas 1, 2- and 3-days post-feeding were pooled together in RNAlater solution and used for RNA extraction. X. cheopis SG were also collected at the same timepoints and disrupted in 10 mM HEPES, 140 mM NaCl pH 7.4. These samples were centrifuged for 10 min at, 12,000 x g at 4°C and the supernatant was collected. The total protein concentration was determined with the PIERCE BCA Protein Kit assay.Each reaction contained 3 µg total protein in a final volume of 30 µl buffered with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0. The protein was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 40 min at 37°C. The samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min. Then, 200 ng of trypsin were added, and samples were incubated for 15 hours at 37°C. The pH was adjusted to approximately 2.5 with 10% TFA and samples were desalted and concentrated with Agilent OMIX10 tips (Agilent, USA). Peptides were eluted with 20 µl of 0.1% TFA/50% AcCN and dried under vacuum. The peptides were dissolved in 12 µl of 0.1% FA/3% AcCN and centrifuged at 18000xg for 5 minutes. The LC-MS experiment was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to EASY nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  Peptides were first bound to a PepMap C18 column (3 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 cm length) then separated using an EASY-Spray analytical column (PepMap C18, 2 µm particle, 100 Å pore, 75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm length) using a linear gradient of 0 to 40% acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% formic acid for 100 min, followed by 40-80% for 5 min, 80% hold for 5 min, 80-0% for 5 min, and 0% hold for 5 min. Data were acquired with a standard data-dependent acquisition strategy, in which the survey MS1 scan was done at least every 3 sec with Orbitrap mass analyzer at 120,000 resolution, and the MS2 scans were done with a linear ion trap mass analyzer for multiply charged precursor ions isolated with a 1.6 m/z window using a quadrupole and fragmented by CID at 35% collision energy. The EASY-IC internal calibration was utilized for Orbitrap scans, and the dynamic exclusion period was set at 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were analyzed using the PatternLab for proteomics 4.0 platform. A target-decoy database was generated using the deposited sequences from the Siphonaptera taxonomic group along with CDS obtained from the Illumina sequencing and searched with the Comet tool implemented in PatternLab. The search space included all fully tryptic peptide candidates and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a static modification. Data were searched with a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.4 Da fragment ion tolerance. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by Comet was assessed using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab. A cutoff score was established to accept a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. Results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with < 10 ppm precursor mass error and proteins with a unique peptide. Normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) was used to represent relative abundance, and only proteins that were identified in at least 3 of the 4 biological replicates were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Over the last 20&#xa0;years, advances in sequencing technologies paired with biochemical and structural studies have shed light on the unique pharmacological arsenal produced by the salivary glands of hematophagous arthropods that can target host hemostasis and immune response, favoring blood acquisition and, in several cases, enhancing pathogen transmission. Here we provide a deeper insight into Xenopsylla cheopis salivary gland contents pairing transcriptomic and proteomic approaches. Sequencing of 99 pairs of salivary glands from adult female X. cheopis yielded a total of 7432 coding sequences functionally classified into 25 classes, of which the secreted protein class was the largest. The translated transcripts also served as a reference database for the proteomic study, which identified peptides from 610 different proteins. Both approaches revealed that the acid phosphatase family is the most abundant salivary protein group from X. cheopis. Additionally, we report here novel sequences similar to the FS-H family, apyrases, odorant and hormone-binding proteins, antigen 5-like proteins, adenosine deaminases, peptidase inhibitors from different subfamilies, proteins rich in Glu, Gly, and Pro residues, and several potential secreted proteins with unknown function. SIGNIFICANCE: The rat flea X. cheopis is the main vector of Yersinia pestis, the etiological agent of the bubonic plague responsible for three major pandemics that marked human history and remains a burden to human health. In addition to Y. pestis fleas can also transmit other medically relevant pathogens including Rickettsia spp. and Bartonella spp. The studies of salivary proteins from other hematophagous vectors highlighted the importance of such molecules for blood acquisition and pathogen transmission. However, despite the historical and clinical importance of X. cheopis little is known regarding their salivary gland contents and potential activities. Here we provide a comprehensive analysis of X. cheopis salivary composition using next generation sequencing methods paired with LC-MS/MS analysis, revealing its unique composition compared to the sialomes of other blood-feeding arthropods, and highlighting the different pathways taken during the evolution of salivary gland concoctions. In the absence of the X. cheopis genome sequence, this work serves as an extended reference for the identification of potential pharmacological proteins and peptides present in flea saliva.

### Keywords
Flea, Transcriptome, Proteome, Sliavary glands

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, NIH
NIH/NIAID

### Submitter
Stephen Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Marcos Ribeiro
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, NIH


