### Accession
PXD000682

### Title
Transcriptomic and Proteomic Response of HC-04 to hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)

### Description
The routine study of human malaria liver-stage biology in vitro is hampered by low infection efficiency of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) lines (<0.1%), poor understanding of steady-state HCC biology, and lack of appropriate tools for trace sample analysis. HC-04 is the only HCC that supports complete development of human malaria parasites. We hypothesized that HCCs are in various intermediate stages of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and HC-04s retain epithelial characteristics that permit infection. We developed an novel analytical approach to test this hypothesis viz. the HC-04 response to hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). We used online two-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) to quantify protein expression profiles in HC-04 pre-/post-HGF treatment and validated these results by RT-qPCR and microscopy. We successfully increased protein identification efficiency over offline-2D methods by 12-fold using less sample material, allowing robust protein quantification. We observed expected up-regulation and down-regulation of EMT protein markers in response to HGF, but also unexpected cellular responses. HC-04 is thus susceptible to HGF-mediated signaling but to a lesser degree than what we observed for HepG2, a widely used, but poor malaria HCC model.  Our analytical approach to understanding the basic biology of HC-04 helps us understand the factors that may influence its utility as a model for malaria liver-stage development. We observed that HC-04 treatment with HGF prior to the addition of Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites did not facilitate cell invasion, arguing for unlinking the effect of HGF on malaria liver stage development from hepatocyte invasion. Finally, our 2D-LC-MS/MS approach and broadly applicable experimental strategy should prove useful in the analysis of various hepatocyte-pathogen interactions, tumor progression and early disease events.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble proteins were extracted using 5 mM phosphate buffer containing 0.5 mM PMSF, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 4 cycles of freezing and thawing. The membrane fraction was collected from the cell pellets following centrifugation of the supernatant at 20,000xg for 5 min at 4 0C, solubilization in SDST-lysis buffer (4% SDS (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.6), and boiling at 95 0C for 5 min. We performed soluble protein digestion using RapiGest SF as described , and the membrane protein fraction was digested according to a Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (EMD Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts).  To construct the online 2D methods, we integrated one SCX column (150 μm i.d. * 2 cm length, PolySULFOETHYL ATM, 5 μm 300 A, PolyLC INC) into an Agilent LC-MS system comprised of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6520 QTOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. For the online SCX fractionation, in the first dimension peptides were loaded into the SCX column at 1.8 μL/min and the peptides were eluted using the autosampler by injecting 6 μL of each increasing salt concentration (0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, 160 and 300 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA; followed by one injection of 500 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA to wash the column). The salt elution was captured by a C18 enrichment column integrated in the Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip (360 nL, 180 Å C18 trap with a 75 μm i.d., 150 mm length, 180 Å C18 analytical column). In the second dimension, with valve switched and RPLC gradient started, the peptides were eluted from the enrichment column and separated by a C18 analytical column. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a stepped gradient starting at 97% A (A: 99.9% water, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was 3-10% B for 4 min, 10-35% B for 56 min, 35-99% for 2 min, and maintained at 99% B (B: 90% ACN, 9.9% water, 0.1% FA) for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of column with 3% B for 10 min. Data dependent (autoMS2) MS acquisition was performed  by an Agilent 6520 QTOF at 2 GHz. Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1700 and the top 4 peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1700 at a scan rate of 1.5 spectra per second. A medium isolation width (∼4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.9 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied with precursors excluded for 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectrum was acquired.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic Format (.mgf) by Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.04.00. Mascot version 2.4.1 was used to search the SwissProt human 2012 protein FASTA sequence database (20,234 sequences) for peptide sequence assignments using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues. The Mascot searched results were exported as .DAT format and then imported into Scaffold software (Version 4.0.4, Proteome Software) for curation, label0-free quantification analysis, and visualization. Scaffold’s normalized  spectral counting was employed to compare relative protein abundance between naïve HC-04 and HGF treated HC-04 cell samples in each experiment as the basis for normalization of the spectral counts for all other LC-MS/MS data in that experiment. Scaffold calculates the spectrum count quantitative value by normalizing spectral counts across an experiment. The process of calculating normalized spectral counts is as follows: First, Scaffold takes the sum of all the Total Spectrum Counts for each MS sample. The sums are then scaled to the same level. Scaffold then applies the scaling factor for each sample to each protein group to produce an output with a normalized quantitative value.

### Publication Abstract
The routine study of human malaria liver-stage biology in vitro is hampered by low infection efficiency of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) lines (&lt;0.1%), poor understanding of steady-state HCC biology, and lack of appropriate tools for trace sample analysis. HC-04 is the only HCC that supports complete development of human malaria parasites. We hypothesized that HCCs are in various intermediate stages of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and HC-04s retain epithelial characteristics that permit infection. We developed a facile analytical approach to test this hypothesis viz. the HC-04 response to hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). We used online two-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) to quantify protein expression profiles in HC-04 pre-/post-HGF treatment and validated these results by RT-qPCR and microscopy. We successfully increased protein identification efficiency over offline-2D methods by 12-fold, using less sample material, allowing robust protein quantification. We observed expected up-regulation and down-regulation of EMT protein markers in response to HGF, but also unexpected cellular responses. We also observed that HC-04 is generally more susceptible to HGF-mediated signaling than what was observed for HepG2, a widely used, but poor malaria liver stage-HCC model. Our analytical approach to understanding the basic biology of HC-04 helps us understand the factors that may influence its utility as a model for malaria liver-stage development. We observed that HC-04 treatment with HGF prior to the addition of Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites did not facilitate cell invasion, which suggests unlinking the effect of HGF on malaria liver stage development from hepatocyte invasion. Finally, our 2D-LC-MS/MS approach and broadly applicable experimental strategy should prove useful in the analysis of various hepatocyte-pathogen interactions, tumor progression, and early disease events.

### Keywords
Malaria, Transcriptomics, Human hepatocellular carcinoma, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Emt, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Rhoel R. Dinglasan
W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology and the Malaria Research Institute, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health


