### Accession
PXD029898

### Title
Proximity labelling of FLAG-TurboID-tagged UPF3B wild type and interaction-deficient mutant proteins followed by proteomics analysis

### Description
UPF3A and UPF3B are paralogous genes in human cells that are involved in the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway. NMD is a cellular quality control mechanism that monitors mRNAs during translation. Aberrant translation due to features such as the presence of a premature stop codon downstream on an exon-exon junction activates NMD and leads to the degradation of the mRNA. To investigate the role of UPF3B in NMD, we have generated FLAG-TurboID-UPF3B wild type or mutant expressing human Flp-In T-Rex 293 UPF3B knockout cells using the PiggyBac transposon system. We generated proteomic data from the proximity labeled interactome of these UPF3B variants.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic protein digestion was performed by the proteomics core facility cologne and achieved by following a modified version of the single pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3). In brief, paramagnetic Sera-Mag speed beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to the reduced and alkylated protein samples and then mixed 1:1 with 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Protein-beads-complexes form during the 8 min incubation step, followed by capture using an in-house build magnetic rack. After two washing steps with 70% EtOH, the samples were washed once with 100% ACN. Then they were air-dried, resuspended in 5 μl 50 mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate supplemented with trypsin and LysC in an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 and incubated for 16 h at 37°C. The next day the beads were again resuspended in 200 μl ACN and after 8 min incubation placed on the magnetic rack. Tryptic peptides were washed with 100% ACN and air-dried before dissolved in 4% DMSO and transfer into 96-well PCR tubes. The last step was the acidification with 1 μl of 10% formic acid, then the samples were ready for mass spec analysis. Proteomics analysis was performed by the proteomics core facility cologne at CECAD via data-dependent acquisition using an Easy nLC1200 ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system connected via nano electrospray ionization to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (all Thermo Scientific) running in DDA Top10 mode. Based on their hydrophobicity the tryptic peptides were separated using a chromatographic gradient of 60 min with a binary system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) with a total flow of 250 nl/min. For the separation in-house made analytical columns (length: 50 cm, inner diameter: 75 μm) containing 2.7 μm C18 Poroshell EC120 beads (Agilent) that were heated to 50 °C in a column oven (Sonation) were used. Over a time period of 41 min Buffer B was linearly increased from 3% to 27% and then more rapidly up to 50% in 8 min. Finally, buffer B was increased to 95% within 1 min followed by 10 min at 95% to wash the analytical column. Full MS spectra (300-1,750 m/z) were accomplished with a resolution of 70,000, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. In each full MS spectrum, the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE:27) with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.8 m/z and 10 s dynamic exclusion. The MS/MS spectra were then measured with a 35,000 resolution, an injection time of maximum 110 ms and an AGC target of 5e5. For label-free measurements, MS analysis was performed as described above with a slightly adjusted gradient as followed: 3 – 30% B in 41 min, 30 – 50% B in 8 min, 50-95% B in 1 min, followed by 10 min washing at 95%.

### Data Protocol
The MS RAW files were then analyzed with MaxQuant suite (version 2.0.3.0) on standard settings with the before mentioned SILAC labels {Cox, 2008 #247}. By matching against the human UniProt database the peptides were then identified using the Andromeda scoring algorithm {Cox, 2011 #248}. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were variable modifications. The digestion protein was Trypsin/P. A false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 was used to identify peptide-spectrum matches and to quantify the proteins. Data processing and statistical analysis was performed in the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) {Tyanova, 2016 #249}. Using the One-sample t-test the significantly changed proteins were identified (H0 = 0, fudge factor S0 = 0.12). Visualization was performed with RStudio. For label-free analyses, LFQ values were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant. Significantly changed proteins were identified by two-sample t-testing (fudge factor S0 = 0.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Upf3, Nonsense-mediated mrna decay, Gene paralogs, Mrna turnover

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Niels H. Gehring
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany


