### Accession
PXD022999

### Title
Proteomics analysis of human intestinal organoids during hypoxia and reoxygenation as a model to study ischemia-reperfusion injury

### Description
Intestinal ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury is associated with high mortality rates, which have not improved in the past decades despite advanced insight in its pathophysiology using in vivo animal and human models. The inability to translate previous findings to effective therapies emphasizes the need for a physiologically relevant in vitro model to thoroughly investigate mechanisms of IR-induced epithelial injury and test potential therapies. In this study, we demonstrate the use of human small intestinal organoids to model IR injury by exposing organoids to hypoxia and reoxygenation (HR). A mass-spectrometry-based proteomics approach was applied to characterize organoid differentiation and decipher protein dynamics and molecular mechanisms of IR injury in crypt-like and villus-like human intestinal organoids.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were harvested using Cell Recovery Solution (Corning) and multiple ice-cold PBS washes to remove the BME. For protein extraction, a buffer containing 5 M Urea (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL), 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the organoid pellet. Cell lysis was performed by three freeze-thaw cycles, using a -80°C freezer for freezing and sonication (40 seconds) in an ultrasonic bath for thawing. Protein concentrations were assessed using Bradford assay, and equal amounts of protein were used for analysis. Protein lysates were reduced with 20 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 minutes, followed by alkylation with 40 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 minutes in the dark. The alkylation was terminated by 20 mM DDT to consume any excess Iodoacetamide. In solution digestion was performed with a Trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega, Madison, WI), added at a ratio of 1:25 (enzyme:protein), for two hours at 37°C in a Thermo Shaker (Grant Instruments, Shepreth, UK) at 250 rpm. The lysate was then diluted to 1 M Urea using 50 mM ABC and further digested at 37°C at 250 rpm overnight. Addition of formic acid (Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands) to a total of 1% terminated the digestion. Peptide separation was performed on a Thermo Scientific (Dionex) Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation ultrahigh-performance liquid-chromatography (UHPLC) system equipped with a PepSep C18 analytical column (15 cm, ID 75 µm, 1,9 µm Reprosil, 120Å). Prior to UHPLC separation, tryptic peptides were desalted on an online installed C18 trapping column. Peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 90 min linear gradient of acetonitrile (5-35%) with 0.1% FA at a 300 nL/min flow rate. Mass spectra were collected on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a data-dependent acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were processed in Proteome Discoverer software (PD, version 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Protein identification was performed using the SEQUEST search engine in combination with the SwissProt Human database (SwissProt TaxID=9606, v2017-10-25). The following parameters were used: Static Modifications: Static Modification:  Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C)  Dynamic Modifications: Dynamic Modification:  Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M) N-Terminal Modification:  Acetyl / +42.011 Da (N-Terminus)  - Enzyme Name:  Trypsin (Full) - Precursor Mass Tolerance:  20 ppm - Fragment Mass Tolerance:  0.5 Da  - Min. Precursor Mass:  350 Da - Max. Precursor Mass:  5000 Da  - Max. Missed Cleavage Sites:  2 - Min. Peptide Length:  6 - Max. Peptide Length:  144   Tolerances: - Precursor Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm - Fragment Mass Tolerance:  0.02 Da

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intestinal organoids hypoxia-reoxygenation proteomics

### Affiliations
Maastricht University
Department of Surgery, Maastricht University, Maastricht

### Submitter
Anna M Kip

### Lab Head
Dr Kaatje Lenaerts
Department of Surgery, Maastricht University, Maastricht


