### Accession
PXD038248

### Title
LC-MS/MS-based Proteomics Approach for the Identification of Candidate Serum Biomarkers in Patients with Narcolepsy Type 1

### Description
The study is based on the identification of serum protein biomarkers for NT 1. A total of 27 serum samples were collected (16 NT 1 and 11 controls), the altered expression levels of low-abundant proteins (DEPs) associated with narcolepsy type 1 was investigated by comparing the proteomes of the two sample cohorts. DEPs that are revealed to be most related to NT 1 pathogenesis and have high levels of fold changes were further targeted and validated by LC-PRM-MS. Then, the effects of the DEPs were explored by system biology analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The collected serum samples were depleted and denatured. Then the denatured proteins were reduced, alkylated, and then tryptic digested. The resulting peptides were separated and analyzed by LC-MS/MS label-free-proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected from the LC-MS/MS (Dionex 3000 Ultimate nano-LC system connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer) were analyzed by MaxQuant and visualized by Perseus software to generate a master file. Mann-Whitney U-Test statistical analysis was used to discover the differentially expressed proteins between NT 1 and control samples. Then, gene ontology analysis and IPA were conducted to investigate the biofunctions of the DEPs; and the most related proteins to NT 1 pathogenesis and pathophysiology were validated by targeted proteomics on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Then, Skyline software was further used to analyze the raw data collected from the targeted proteomics experiment, and Mann-Whitney U-Test was also used as statistical tool to compare the normalized protein abundance from the two sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
Narcolepsy type 1 (NT1) is the most common type of narcolepsy known to be caused by the loss of specific neurons responsible for producing peptide neurotransmitters (orexins/hypocretins), resulting in a sleep-wake cycle disorder. It is characterized by its association with cataplexy and abnormalities in rapid eye movement. To date, no cure has been established for this life-threatening condition. Misdiagnosis of NT1 is also quite common, although it is not exceedingly rare. Therefore, successfully identifying candidate serum biomarkers for NT1 would be a head start for accurate diagnosis and development of therapeutics for this disorder. This study aims to identify such potential serum biomarkers. A depletion protocol was employed for 27 human serum samples (16 NT1 and 11 healthy controls), followed by applying LC-MS/MS bottom-up proteomics analysis, then LC-PRM-MS for validation. The comparison of the proteome profiles of the low-abundant proteins in the samples was then investigated based on age, sex, sample groups, and the presence of the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) DQB1*0602 allele. The results were tracked to gene expression studies as well as system biology to identify key proteins and understand their relationship in the pathogenesis of NT1. Our results revealed 36 proteins significantly and differentially expressed. Among the impaired pathways and bioprocesses, the complement activation pathway is impaired by six of the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). They are coded by the genes C2, CFB, C5, C1R, C1S, and MASP1, while 11 DEPs are involved in Acute Phase Response Signaling (APRS), which are coded by the genes FN1, AMBP, APOH, CFB, CP, ITIH2, C5, C2, F2, C1, and ITIH4. The combined AUCs of the downregulated and upregulated DEPs are 0.95 and 0.76, respectively. Overall, this study reveals potential serum-protein biomarkers of NT1 and explains the possible correlation between the biomarkers and pathophysiological effects, as well as important biochemical pathways involved in NT1.

### Keywords
Acute phase response signaling, Autoimmunity, Pathophysiology, Human leukocyte antigen, Narcolepsy type 1, Lc-ms/ms, And orexin/hypocretin., Differentially expressed proteins (deps)

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Akeem Sanni

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


