### Accession
PXD012512

### Title
S-nitrosoproteome of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

### Description
NO performs its biological roles mainly through protein S-nitrosylation, but pathogenic roles of protein S-nitrosylation in PDAC remains largely unexplored. In this study, we identified large number of unique S-nitrosylation sites and proteins in PDAC patients and PANC-1 cells by a site-specific proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Cancerous and adjacent non-cancerous pancreatic tissues collected from 4 patients with PDAC, as four biological replicates (n = 4), were separately analyzed by site-specific proteomics for identification of S-nitrosylated proteins. Negative control without sodium ascorbate treatment during biotinylation of S-nitrosylated proteins was included for each cancerous or adjacent tissue, which were also analyzed by mass spectrometry to exclude false positive identification due to incomplete blocking. For identification of S-nitrosylated proteins in PANC-1 cells, the site-specific proteomics were biologically repeated for four times and negative control (without sodium ascorbate treatment) was included in each replicate.

### Data Protocol
Reliable identification of S-nitrosylated peptides were finally obtained by searching with MaxQuant (1.6.0.16) using a FDR of < 1% at both the peptide and protein group levels for control of false identification.

### Publication Abstract
NO (nitric oxide)-mediated protein S-nitrosylation has been established as one major signaling mechanism underlying cancer initiation and development, but its roles in PDAC (pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma) pathogenesis still remain largely unexplored. In this study, we identified 585 unique S-nitrosylation sites among 434 proteins in PDAC patients and PANC-1 cell line by a site-specific proteomics. Larger number of S-nitrosylated proteins were identified in PDAC tissues and PANC-1 cells than adjacent non-cancerous tissues. These S-nitrosylated proteins are significantly enriched in a multitude of biological processes associated with tumorigenesis, including carbohydrate metabolism, cytoskeleton regulation, cell cycle, focal adhesion, adherent junctions, and cell migration. Components of the pancreatic cancer pathway were extensively S-nitrosylated, such as v-raf-1 murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1 (Raf-1) and Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). Moreover, NOS (NO synthase) inhibitor significantly repressed STAT3 S-nitrosylation in PANC-1 cells, which caused significant increase of STAT3 phosphorylation and PANC-1 cell viability, suggesting important roles of protein S-nitrosylation in PDAC development. These results revealed extensive protein S-nitrosylation associated with PDAC pathogenesis, which provided a basis for protein modification-based cancer diagnosis and targeted therapy.

### Keywords
Panc-1, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, S-nitrosoproteome

### Affiliations
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Jiliang Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Jiliang Hu
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine


