### Accession
PXD043103

### Title
Immunorecognition of Streptococcus mutans secreted proteins protects against caries by limiting tooth adhesion

### Description
Childhood caries is an extremely common childhood chronic disease, affecting 60–90% of children in industrialized countries. It results in lesions in both the primary and permanent dentitions, hospitalizations and emergency room visits, high treatment costs, loss of school days, diminished ability to learn increases the risk of caries in adulthood. Streptococcus mutans is a key bacteria in caries development. While multiple caries risk factors have been identified, significant interpersonal variability not explained by known risk factors still exists. The immune system generates a personal antibody repertoire that helps maintain a balanced and healthy oral microbiome. Using mass-spectrometry, we probed in an hypothesis-free manner which S. mutans proteins are identified by antibodies of children with low and high DMFT (decayed, missing, filled teeth) scores. We identified a core set of proteins, recognized by the immune system of most individuals. This set was enriched with proteins enabling bacterial adhesion, and included glucosyltransferases and glucan-binding proteins known to be important for S. mutans cariogenicity. To explore the physiological relevance of these findings, we tested the ability of saliva from caries free individuals in preventing S. mutans from binding to the tooth surface. Indeed, saliva from individuals with caries free prevented S. mutans binding to teeth. These findings map the S. mutans proteome targeted by the immune system and suggest that inhibiting tooth attachment is a primary mechanism used by the immune system to maintain oral balance and prevent caries. These findings provide new insights into the role of the immune system in maintaining oral health and preventing caries development.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection:  Saliva samples were obtained from children between the ages of 6-12 at the Goldschleger school of dental medicine clinics in Tel Aviv University, after informed consent and legal guardian signed approval. Saliva was collected by spitting unstimulated saliva into a 50 mL tube. The whole saliva was centrifuged at 12,000 RCF for 7 minutes. Supernatant, containing the soluble antibodies, was separated and stored at -80°C until use.  Antigen Preparation: Streptococcus Mutans strain ATCC UA159 was obtained from Prof. Gilad Bachrach (The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel). We confirmed it as S. mutans through targeted PCR using the primers TCGCGAAAAAGATAAACAAACA and GCCCCTTCACAGTTGGTTAG, sequencing of the resulting product, and protein mass-spectrometry. Bacteria were cultured according to ATCC guidelines (Streptococcus mutans Clarke). For antigen preparation, we cultivated the bacteria under anaerobic conditions in a Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) medium for 48 hours. Cells were centrifuged for 30 minutes at 2000 RFC using an Eppendorf 5910R centrifuge, medium discarded, cells were washed with PBS and pellet resuspended in RIPA lysis buffer, followed by sonication for 10 minutes at 20% power (OMNI International - Sonic Ruptor 400). Following centrifugation at 4500 RCF for 30 minutes, we discarded the pellet. Protein concentration was measured using nanodrop OneC (Thermo-Fisher) 205 nm method. Proteins were aliquoted at 1 mG/mL and stored at -80°C until use. Study Design:  Reactivity of saliva antibodies against S. Mutans were evaluated in two different groups of children between the ages 6 – 12: caries free (DMFT=0; n=17) and high-DMFT (DMFT≥5; n=17). Antibody-bound proteins were identified using mass spectrometry. Selected proteins were further validated using ELISA on additional saliva samples. MS Sample preparations and analysis: Briefly, Saliva antibodies from 34 participants were captured on protein L affinity beads. Solubilized S. mutans antigens (proteins) were allowed to bind the antibodies anchored to the beads. After washes, eluted proteins were digested, TMT labeled, multiplexed, cleaned and sent for identification by mass-spec analysis. From the identified proteins, we filtered out proteins with less than 3 peptides. To account for non-specific binding, a ratio of the relative intensity of the positive control (diluted protein lysate) to negative control (full protocol with antibodies omitted) was calculated.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analysis: The 6 raw data files were searched against the Streptococcus Mutans UA159 proteome (uniprot #UP000002512) using MaxQuant V2.1.0.0 software (Max Planck institute). Protein minimal peptide count per protein was set to 3, with FDR set to 10% per peptide. Reverse sequences were used for decoy search and contaminant sequences were included in the search. Only proteins that included the relative intensity ratio of positive control / negative control > 1 were included in our data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caries; iga; mass-spectrometry; immunorecognition

### Affiliations
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Daniel Bar

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Zvi Bar
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel


