### Accession
PXD032138

### Title
Protein proximity networks and functional evaluation of the Casein Kinase 1 γ family reveals unique roles for CK1γ3 in WNT signaling

### Description
The WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway is evolutionarily conserved and controls normal embryonic development, adult tissue homeostasis, and regeneration. Aberrant activation or suppression of WNT signaling contributes to cancer initiation and progression, developmental disorders, neurodegeneration, and bone disease. Despite great need and more than 40 years of research, targeted therapies for the WNT pathway have yet to be fully realized. Kinases are exceptionally druggable and occupy key nodes within the WNT signaling network, but several pathway-relevant kinases remain understudied and ‘dark’. Here we studied the function of the CSNK1g subfamily of human kinases. miniTurbo-based proximity biotinylation and mass spectrometry analysis of CSNK1γ1, CSNK1γ2, and CSNK1γ3 revealed numerous established components of the β-catenin-dependent and independent WNT signaling pathways, as well as novel interactors. In gain-of-function experiments using a panel of transcriptional reporters, CSNK1γ3 but not CSNK1γ1 or CSNK1γ2 activated β-catenin-dependent WNT signaling, with minimal effect on other signaling pathways. Within the family, CSNK1γ3 expression uniquely induced LRP6 phosphorylation. Conversely, siRNA-mediated silencing of CSNK1γ3 alone had no impact on WNT signaling, though co-silencing of all three family members decreased WNT pathway activity. We characterized two moderately selective and potent small molecule inhibitors of the CSNK1γ family. These inhibitors and a CSNK1γ3 kinase dead mutant suppressed but did not eliminate WNT-driven LRP6 phosphorylation and β-catenin stabilization. Our data suggest that while CSNK1γ3 expression uniquely drives pathway activity, potential functional redundancy within the family necessitates loss of all three family members to suppress the WNT signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were incubated for indicated time with 50 mM biotin, washed 3x in cold PBS, then lysed in RIPA lysis buffer, flash frozen on dry ice, then thawed and incubated on ice for 30 mins. Lysates were then sonicated for 20 seconds in 5 second pulses. 50uL of bead slurry per sample was washed 5x in RIPA lysis buffer, then incubated with lysate at 4 °C with rotation overnight. Following the affinity pulldown (described above), beads were washed 2x with RIPA, 2x with TAP lysis buffer, 3x with 50 mM ammonium biocarbonate (ABC) buffer. 1mg of RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, cat# 186001861) was resuspended in 200uL of 50mM to give a 0.5% RapiGest solution. Streptavidin beads were resuspended in 100uL of 0.5% RapiGest and vortexed. 1M Dithiothreitol (DTT) in ABC was added to the sample for a final concentration of 5mM and samples were heated at 60°C for 30 mins. After allowing samples to cool to room temperature, chloroacetamide was added to each sample for a final concentration of 15mM and incubated in the dark for 20 minutes at room temperature. The samples were then centrifuged at 400 x g for 2 mins at room temperature to remove the supernatant containing protein from the streptavidin beads. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and 2.5 μg of mass spectrometry grade trypsin was added to each sample. The samples were incubated at 37°C overnight, then Hydrochloric acid (HCl) was added to the sample at a final concentration of 250mM and incubated for 45 mins at 37°C to deactivate the trypsin. Pierce C18 spin columns (ThermoFisher, cat#89870) were placed in a 2 mL centrifuge tube, the column was activated by adding 200 μL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and centrifuged at 3000 xg for 2 mins. Columns were equilibrated by adding 200 μL of 0.5% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 3000 xg for 2 mins. This step was then repeated. The sample was resuspended in 200 μL of 0.5% TFA, then loaded onto the column and centrifuged for 5 mins at 1000 xg. The sample was reloaded onto the column and centrifuged a second time for 5 mins at 1000 xg. The column was washed twice with 200 μL of 5% ACN/0.5% TFA and centrifuged for 2 mins at 3000 xg. The samples were eluted by adding 50 μL 70% ACN and centrifuged for 5 mins at 1000 xg. A second elution step was performed by adding 50 μL 70% ACN and centrifuged for 2 mins at 3000 xg. Following a C18 clean up, an ethyl acetate clean-up was performed. Trypsinized peptides were separated via reverse-phase nano-HPLC using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid as buffer A and acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid as buffer B. Peptides were loaded onto a µPACᵀᴹ Trapping column (PharmaFluidics) and separated on a 200 cm µPACᵀᴹ column (PharmaFluidics). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) (70) using the UniProtKB/SwissProt human canonical sequence database (20428 entries, downloaded Aug. 2019). The following parameters were used: specific tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, fixed carbamidomethyl modification, variable modifications for protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, match between runs, label-free quantification, 4.5 ppm precursor mass tolerance in the main search, 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance for Orbitrap MS2 scans and 0.5 da fragment mass tolerance for ion trap MS2 scans. The protein accepted false discovery rate was set to 1% and determined using the target-decoy strategy implemented by MaxQuant. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification due to the high tryptic peptide overlap between CK1γ1, CK1γ2, and CK1γ3. Baits were assigned fractions numbers >1 away from each other to enable match-between-runs within replicates, but not across different baits.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant activation or suppression of WNT/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling contributes to cancer initiation and progression, neurodegeneration, and bone disease. However, despite great need and more than 40 years of research, targeted therapies for the WNT pathway have yet to be fully realized. Kinases are considered exceptionally druggable and occupy key nodes within the WNT signaling network, but several pathway-relevant kinases remain understudied and "dark." Here, we studied the function of the casein kinase 1&#x3b3; (CSNK1&#x3b3;) subfamily of human kinases and their roles in WNT signaling. miniTurbo-based proximity biotinylation and mass spectrometry analysis of CSNK1&#x3b3;1, CSNK1&#x3b3;2, and CSNK1&#x3b3;3 revealed numerous components of the &#x3b2;-catenin-dependent and &#x3b2;-catenin-independent WNT pathways. In gain-of-function experiments, we found that CSNK1&#x3b3;3 but not CSNK1&#x3b3;1 or CSNK1&#x3b3;2 activated &#x3b2;-catenin-dependent WNT signaling, with minimal effect on other signaling pathways. We also show that within the family, CSNK1&#x3b3;3 expression uniquely induced low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 phosphorylation, which mediates downstream WNT signaling transduction. Conversely, siRNA-mediated silencing of CSNK1&#x3b3;3 alone had no impact on WNT signaling, though cosilencing of all three family members decreased WNT pathway activity. Finally, we characterized two moderately selective and potent small-molecule inhibitors of the CSNK1&#x3b3; family. We show that these inhibitors and a CSNK1&#x3b3;3 kinase-dead mutant suppressed but did not eliminate WNT-driven low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 phosphorylation and &#x3b2;-catenin stabilization. Our data suggest that while CSNK1&#x3b3;3 expression uniquely drives pathway activity, potential functional redundancy within the family necessitates loss of all three family members to suppress the WNT signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, Casein kinase 1 gamma

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Major
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA


