### Accession
PXD022455

### Title
A function-based determination of the cardiac endoplasmic and sarcoplasmic reticulum proteome

### Description
Cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) plays a central role in cellular Ca homeostasis, as does endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in the nonmuscle cell.  The importance of SR Ca-handling function has led to detailed understanding of Ca-release and re-uptake protein complexes, but relatively little information regarding other known ER functions. We isolated cardiac membranes based upon their ability to efficiently accumulate Ca by the SR,ER-ATPase (SERCA-positive membranes), a process known to produce two characteristic SR membrane fractions: those enriched in known junctional SR markers, and those enriched in proteins originating from classic ER subdomains. Using standard proteomic techniques, we determined the SR proteins in three membrane preparations: 1) the highest-density SERCA-positive microsomes (HighSR); 2) the slightly less dense SERCA-positive microsomes that are constrained by a ryanodine-dependent leak (MedSR); and the original crude cardiac microsomes. Only a third of all crude microsomal proteins in heart were enriched in SERCA-positive membranes at least two fold. This protocol completely excluded known contractile, mitochondrial, sarcolemmal, and other major microsomal proteins, producing a far cleaner preparation of SR.  Each SERCA-positive protein was distributed between HighSR and MedSR membrane vesicles in accordance with relative densities of SERCA2a versus ryanodine receptor. The distributions reinforced past findings on the distributions for several of the major known proteins. When combined with values for relative abundance, and enrichment over crude membranes, our protocol conveniently and effectively exposed multiple domains of the cardiac ER/SR. Most of the highly enriched and abundant cardiac SR/ER proteins represent proteins that have received little research attention. The data generate a useful quantitative analysis of intracellular membrane structure and function within cardiomyocytes, and may provide a reliable way of gauging broader changes in cardiac SR.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein samples for mass spectrometric analysis - To evaluate the protein composition of the two SERCA-positive membranes, relative to the crude cardiac membranes, we analyzed exactly 20 g each of MVs, MedSR, and HighSR membranes by SDS-PAGE.  The wet gel was stained with sypro red to visualize the protein separations qualitatively (Fig. 1C). Tryptic digestion of SR samples - For in-gel digestion (GeLC-MSMS), 20 g of each of three dog cardiac microsomal fractions were analyzed: crude cardiac microsomes (MV), MedSR, and HighSR membranes. Sample proteins were first separated by SDS-PAGE in three lanes. After the gel was stained with SYPRO Ruby, each lane was cut into 24 gel slices for protein identification.  The gel slices were then washed and digested with trypsin added in dilute solution (1:10 w/w) and overnight digestion at 37 oC. LC-MS/MS analysis and database search - Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography (Magic C18 column, Michrom), followed by ionization with the ADVANCE ion source (Michrom), and then analyzed in an LTQ-XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). For each MS scan, up to seven abundant peptide species were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.1 (Thermo) which incorporated the Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science).  The NCBI database was used against mammalian protein sequences and a reverse decoy protein database was run simultaneously for false discovery rate (FDR) determination.  Secondary analysis was performed using Scaffold (Proteome Software).  A fixed modification of +57 on cysteine (carbamidomethylation) and variable modifications of +16 on methionine (oxidation) and +42 on protein N-terminus (acetylation) were included in the database search.  Minimum protein identification probability was set at ≥ 95%, with 1 unique peptide at ≥ 95% minimum peptide identification probability. From 62,000 individual peptide spectra obtained, we identified 1105 different proteins, along with their relative levels within each of the three different membrane fractions, when levels were sufficient.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca<sup>2+</sup>-handling in heart has led to detailed understanding of Ca<sup>2+</sup>-release and re-uptake protein complexes, while less is known about other endoplasmic reticulum (ER) functions in the heart. To more fully understand cardiac SR and ER functions, we analyzed cardiac microsomes based on their increased density through the actions of the SR Ca<sup>2+</sup>-ATPase (SERCA) and the ryanodine receptor that are highly active in cardiomyocytes. Crude cardiac microsomal vesicles loaded with Ca oxalate produced two higher density subfractions, MedSR and HighSR. Proteins from 20.0&#xa0;&#x3bc;g of MV, MedSR, and HighSR protein were fractionated using SDS-PAGE, then trypsinized from 20 separate gel pieces, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS to determine protein content. From 62,000 individual peptide spectra obtained, we identified 1105 different proteins, of which 354 were enriched&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;2.0-fold in SR fractions compared to the crude membrane preparation. Previously studied SR proteins were all enriched, as were proteins associated with canonical ER functions. Contractile, mitochondrial, and sarcolemmal proteins were not enriched. Comparing the levels of SERCA-positive SR proteins in MedSR versus HighSR vesicles produced a range of SR subfraction enrichments signifying differing levels of Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak co-localized in the same membrane patch. All known junctional SR proteins were more enriched in MedSR, while canonical ER proteins were more enriched in HighSR membrane. Proteins constituting other putative ER/SR subdomains also exhibited average E<sub>sub</sub> enrichment values (mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;S.D.) that spanned the range of possible E<sub>sub</sub> values, suggesting that functional sets of proteins are localized to the same areas of the ER/SR membrane. We conclude that active Ca<sup>2+</sup> loading of cardiac microsomes, reflecting the combined activities of Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake by SERCA, and Ca<sup>2+</sup> leak by RyR, permits evaluation of multiple functional ER/SR subdomains. Sets of proteins from these subdomains exhibited similar enrichment patterns across membrane subfractions, reflecting the relative levels of SERCA and RyR present within individual patches of cardiac ER and SR.

### Keywords
Cardiac muscle, Proteomics, Ryanodine receptor, Cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum, Serca

### Affiliations
IEHS
Department of Physiology, Wayne State University

### Submitter
Nicholas Carruthers

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Cala
Department of Physiology, Wayne State University


