### Accession
PXD031784

### Title
Proteomic and functional characterization of intra-tumor heterogeneity in human endometrial cancer.

### Description
Endometrial cancer (EC) is one of the most frequently diagnosed gynecological cancers worldwide, and its prevalence has increased by more than 50% over the last two decades. Despite the understanding of the major signaling pathways driving the growth and metastasis of EC cells, clinical trials targeting these signaling pathways in human patients have reported poor outcomes. Heterogeneous nature of EC is suspected to be one of the key reasons for the failure of targeted therapies. However, no study so far has explored EC heterogeneity within the same patient at the proteomic level. In this study, we isolated proteins from tumor tissue samples obtained from different sites of EC from individual patients (~2-4 samples/patient). We then performed a SWATH-based comparative proteomic analysis, using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), to profile the protein content of different areas within EC tissue. Our results highlighted an average of 1424 unique proteins in 20 patient-derived EC tissues with a confidence corresponding to a false discovery rate below 1%. We have identified protein biomarkers that differentiate between premenopausal vs postmenopausal cancer, macroscopic vs microscopic tumor, and more vs less invasive cancer, and DNA mismatch repair defective vs intact tumor. Furthermore, the data revealed a list of unique proteins that, for the same patient, exist only in a single EC location but are not present in other locations within the same tumor. Overall, our proteomic analysis highlighted that tumor tissue samples collected from different sites of EC within the same patient can harbor diverse protein profiles. Importantly, this study sets the foundation for further investigations into the mechanisms of endometrial heterogeneity and some of the proteins identified here may represent potential novel EC drug targets.

### Sample Protocol
Tumour samples were taken from diffent sites in endometrial cancer tumors, lysed and peptides generated with trypsin. A search library was generated by pooling peptides, followed by HILIC fractination. Individual samples were then run in a q6600 operating in SWATH mode

### Data Protocol
A search library was generated using the paragon algorithm in ProteinPilot software. SWATH quantification was performed in Peakview software, and the statistical analysis performed in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Endometrial cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed gynecological cancers worldwide, and its prevalence has increased by more than 50% over the last two decades. Despite the understanding of the major signaling pathways driving the growth and metastasis of endometrial cancer, clinical trials targeting these signals have reported poor outcomes. The heterogeneous nature of endometrial cancer is suspected to be one of the key reasons for the failure of targeted therapies. In this study, we perform a sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH)-based comparative proteomic analysis of 63 tumor biopsies collected from 20 patients and define differences in protein signature in multiple regions of the same tumor. We develop organoids from multiple biopsies collected from the same tumor and show that organoids capture heterogeneity in endometrial cancer growth. Overall, using quantitative proteomics and patient-derived organoids, we define the heterogeneous nature of endometrial cancer within a patient's tumor.

### Keywords
Endometrial cancer

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Newcastle

### Submitter
Muhammad Fairuz Jamaluddin 

### Lab Head
Dr Pradeep Tanwar
School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Newcastle


