### Accession
PXD036365

### Title
Thinking outside the CaaX-box: an unusual reversible prenylation on ALDH9A1

### Description
Protein lipidation is a post-translational modification that confers hydrophobicity on protein substrates to control their cellular localization, mediate protein trafficking, and regulate protein function. In particular, protein prenylation is a C-terminal modification on proteins bearing canonical motifs catalyzed by prenyltransferases. Prenylated proteins have been of interest due to their numerous associations with various diseases. Chemical proteomic approaches have been pursued over the last decade to define prenylated proteomes (prenylome) and probe their responses to perturbations in various cellular systems. Here, we describe the discovery of prenylation of a non-canonical prenylated protein, ALDH9A1, which lacks any apparent prenylation motif. This enzyme was initially identified through chemical proteomic profiling of prenylomes in various cell lines. Metabolic labeling with an isoprenoid probe using overexpressed ALDH9A1 revealed that this enzyme can be prenylated inside cells but does not respond to inhibition by prenyltransferase inhibitors. Site-directed mutagenesis of the key residues involved in ALDH9A1 activity indicates that the catalytic C288 bears the isoprenoid modification likely through an NAD+-dependent mechanism. Furthermore, the isoprenoid modification is also susceptible to hydrolysis, indicating a reversible modification. We hypothesize that this modification originates from endogenous farnesal or geranygeranial, the established degradation products of prenylated proteins and results in a thioester form that accumulates. This novel reversible prenoyl modification on ALDH9A1 expands the current paradigm of protein prenylation by illustrating a potentially new type of protein–lipid modification that may also serve as a novel mechanism for controlling enzyme function

### Sample Protocol
LC–MS data acquisition The TMT-labeled peptides were resolved using a RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC (Dionex) with a reversed-phase column (75 μm i.d., 45 cm) packed in-house with ProntoSIL C18AQ 3 μm media at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Each fraction from the high pH reversed-phase separation was subjected to a distinct gradient of solvent B (0.1% HCO2H in CH3CN) and solvent A (0.1% HCO2H in H2O) with amounts ranging between 7 and 34% of solvent B for 80 min and sprayed directly into the Orbitrap using a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the multinotch SPS-MS3 approach, an Orbitrap Fusion Trihybrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer was used. MS1 scans were collected at 120,000 resolution in a 320–2,000 m/z range with a max injection time (IT) of 100 ms and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000. Subsequent data-dependent (top speed at 3 s) MS/MS scans were acquired using collision induced dissociation (CID) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% with a 1.3 m/z isolation window, a max IT of 100 ms, and an AGC target of 5,000. Dynamic exclusion was allowed for 60 s. Acquisition at MS3 was done by synchronously selecting the top 10 precursors for fragmentation by high-collisional energy dissociation (HCD) in the orbitrap with an NCE of 55% and a 2.5 m/z isolation window, 120 ms max IT, and 50,000 AGC target.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched using Andromeda embedded in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) against the non-redundant human (UP000005640) database from Uniprot. The peptides identified were based on full tryptic digestion with allowed missed cleavages of 3 with minimum peptide length of 7 residues. Fixed modifications were set for the TMT labels on both the N-terminal and lysine and variable modifications for methionine oxidation  and N-term acetylation.  The unique + razor peptides were used for quantification. The default settings in the software for other parameters were used. The resulting data were imported in Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) for filtering and statistical analysis. Proteins that were identified only by site, potential contaminant, or reversed were removed. The raw intensities were transformedto log2 values and proteins with less than 3 out of 6 values in each TMT channel were removed. Missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution. Reporter ion values were normalized by subtracting rows by means and columns by median. Statistical analysis was performed using two-sample t-tests with FDR = 0.01 and s0 = 0.5. Data were exported and processed in Microsoft Excel to generate volcano and fold-change correlation plots.

### Publication Abstract
Protein prenylation involves the attachment of one or two isoprenoid group(s) onto cysteine residues positioned near the C-terminus. This modification is essential for many signal transduction processes. In this work, the use of the probe C15AlkOPP for metabolic labeling and identification of prenylated proteins in a variety of cell lines and primary cells is explored. Using a single isoprenoid analogue, 78 prenylated protein groups from the three classes of prenylation substrates were identified including three novel prenylation substrates in a single experiment. Applying this method to three brain-related cell lines including neurons, microglia, and astrocytes showed substantial overlap (25%) in the prenylated proteins identified. In addition, some unique prenylated proteins were identified in each type. Eight proteins were observed exclusively in neurons, five were observed exclusively in astrocytes and three were observed exclusively in microglia, suggesting their unique roles in these cells. Furthermore, inhibition of farnesylation in primary astrocytes revealed the differential responses of farnesylated proteins to an FTI. Importantly, these results provide a list of 19 prenylated proteins common to all the cell lines studied here that can be monitored using the C15AlkOPP probe as well as a number of proteins that were observed in only certain cell lines. Taken together, these results suggest that this chemical proteomic approach should be useful in monitoring the levels and exploring the underlying role(s) of prenylated proteins in various diseases.

### Keywords
Prenyaltion, Lipidation, Prenylomics, Proteomics, Aldh9a1

### Affiliations
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota, United States
University of Minnesota 

### Submitter
Shelby Auger

### Lab Head
Dr Mark D
Chemistry Department, University of Minnesota, United States


