### Accession
PXD024592

### Title
Effects of thermal acclimation on the proteome of the planarian Crenobia alpina from an alpine freshwater spring

### Description
Is is a fundamental evolutionary question which coordinated molecular changes underly adaptation generally and thermal adaptation specifically. Here we profiled the proteome of the Planarian glacial relict species Crenobia alpina. We sampled individuals from an alpine spring, acclimated groups of individuals at 8, 11, 14 and 17 °C for one week and determined their proteome. These results give insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying thermal adaptation and acclimation to cold and warm temperatures.

### Sample Protocol
After acclimation, individuals were washed with cold 1xPBS, transferred to ice-cold 1.5 mL protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf), shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C. Samples were then thawed on ice and whole organisms treated with 5 % N-Acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC; Sigma-Aldrich) in 1x PBS for 8 min on ice to remove their mucous coating. Samples were vortexed and spun down at 5,000 rpm for 2 min (at 4 °C) and NAC decanted. Lysates were generated from whole organisms by adding 150 µl lysis buffer (5% SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM ABC, 1 mM phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, 1 mM protease inhibitor cocktail), homogenizing samples with a glass pestle and subjecting them to 10 cycles of ultrasonication (30 sec on, 30 sec off) using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode, Inc.). Samples were then heated for 10 min at 95 °C at 300 rpm in a PCR 96 heating block. At this point, protein concentrations were determined via a Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA; Thermo Scientific Pierce) according to manufacturer's instructions. After letting samples cool down to room temperature (RT), they were spun down at 5,000 rpm for 10 s and 0.5 µl iodoacetamide added and kept in the dark at 25 °C for 30 min at 500 rpm. Further analytical steps were performed with an aliquot of 50 µg protein. Following the suspension trapping (S-Trap) protocol, 2.5 µl 12% phosphoric acid and 165 µl of S-trap buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH = 7.1) were added to each sample. Samples were transferred to S-trap micro columns and washed 3 times by adding 150 µl S-trap buffer and centrifugation at 4000g for 1 min each wash. Columns were placed in new 2 mL tubes and 20 µl digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB, pH = 8), supplemented with 1:25 trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) were added to each column. Matrix-bound proteins were digested at 47 °C for 1h and resulting peptides collected by adding 40 µl of digestion buffer to columns and spinning at 4000g for 1 min. Fourty µl of 0.2 % formic acid were then added to each column, spun-down at 4000g for 1 min, followed by 35 µl of 50 % acetonitrile containing 0.2 % formic acid and samples spun down at 4000g for 1 min. Eluted peptides were concentrated to dryness by applying vacuum for 2h. Peptides were subsequently dissolved in 20 µl 0.1 % formic acid by 10 x 1 s ultrasonication and shaking at 1400 rpm at 25 °C for 5 min. Peptide concentrations were determined based on absorbance values using a SPECTROstar Nano Absorbance Plate Reader (BMG Labtech). Peptides were diluted to a concentration of 0.5 µg/µl in LC-buffer A. IRT peptides (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) were added to control for LC-MS performance, and samples were stored at - 20 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Next, samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60 °C. Peptides were resolved using an RP-HPLC column (75 µm x 36 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 12% B over 10 min to 35 % B over 80 min to 50 % B over 30 min to 95 % B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95 % B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a cycle time of 3 s between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120.000 full width at half maximum (at 200 m/z, MS1) and a scan range from 375 to 1,600 m/z followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans of the most intense precursors in the linear ion trap at "Rapid" scan rate with isolation of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms (MS1) and 35 ms(MS2) with an AGC target of 1.0E6 and 1.0E4, respectively. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to peptide, and the intensity threshold was set to 5.0E3. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were converted from .raw to .mzML format using MSConvert and subsequently submitted to a closed search with default settings in the MSFragger v.3.1.1 pipeline as implemented in FragPipe v.14.0 (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org). In MSFragger, enzyme specificity was set as fully tryptic, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The peptide spectrum-match false discovery rate (FDR) and the protein FDR were both set to 0.01 (based on the target-decoy approach) using the Philosopher toolkit v.3.3.12, consisting of PeptideProphet followed by ProteinProphet. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using IonQuant and the match between runs option (MaxLFQ algorithm; min. ions: 2) was specified. Oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation (Protein N-term) were specified as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) as fixed modifications. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids with two allowed missed tryptic cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Species' acclimation capacity and their ability to maintain molecular homeostasis outside ideal temperature ranges will partly predict their success following climate change-induced thermal regime shifts. Theory predicts that ectothermic organisms from thermally stable environments have muted plasticity, and that these species may be particularly vulnerable to temperature increases. Whether such species retained or lost acclimation capacity remains largely unknown. We studied proteome changes in the planarian Crenobia alpina, a prominent member of cold-stable alpine habitats that is considered to be a cold-adapted stenotherm. We found that the species' critical thermal maximum (CTmax) is above its experienced habitat temperatures and that different populations exhibit differential CTmax acclimation capacity, whereby an alpine population showed reduced plasticity. In a separate experiment, we acclimated C. alpina individuals from the alpine population to 8, 11, 14 or 17&#xb0;C over the course of 168&#x2005;h and compared their comprehensively annotated proteomes. Network analyses of 3399 proteins and protein set enrichment showed that while the species' proteome is overall stable across these temperatures, protein sets functioning in oxidative stress response, mitochondria, protein synthesis and turnover are lower in abundance following warm acclimation. Proteins associated with an unfolded protein response, ciliogenesis, tissue damage repair, development and the innate immune system were higher in abundance following warm acclimation. Our findings suggest that this species has not suffered DNA decay (e.g. loss of heat-shock proteins) during evolution in a cold-stable environment and has retained plasticity in response to elevated temperatures, challenging the notion that stable environments necessarily result in muted plasticity.

### Keywords
Climate change, Crenobia alpina, Temperature, Planarian, Lc-ms/ms, Freshwater springs, Adaptation, Acclimation

### Affiliations
University of Basel
Spring Ecology Research Group, Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Joshua Ebner

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Niklas Ebner
Spring Ecology Research Group, Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland


