### Accession
PXD005647

### Title
Deciphering the Protein-Protein Interaction Network Regulating Hepatocelluler Carcinoma Metastasis

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of mortality related to cancer all over the world. The poor prognosis of HCC is mostly due to recurrence and tumor metastasis. In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms of HCC metastasis, we analyzed the proteome of three HCC cell lines with different metastasis potentials by using quantitative proteomics and bioinformatics analysis. As a result, we identified 331 cellular proteins potentially associated to HCC metastasis, and constructed a highly connected protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. Functional annotation of the network uncovered prominent pathways and key roles of these proteins, suggesting that metabolism and cytoskeleton biological progresses are greatly involved with HCC metastasis. Furthermore, integrative network analysis revealed a rich-club organization in the PPI network indicating a hub center of connections, including several well-known cancer related proteins, such as SRC proto-oncogene, non-receptor tyrosine kinase (SRC) and pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2). Moreover, the differential expressions of two identified proteins, including PKM2 and actin-related protein 2/3 complex subunit 4 (ARPC4), were validated using Western blotting. These two proteins were identified as potential prognostic markers for HCC by using survival rate analysis.

### Sample Protocol
1 Antibodies and Reagents Dithiothreitol (DTT), iodoacetamide (IAA) , urea, formaldehyde, deuterated-formaldehyde, C13 labeled deuterated-formaldehyde, sodium cyanoborohydride, deuterated sodium borocyanohydride were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA); Mouse monoclonal antibody against β-actin were from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, CA, USA); Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2), and Actin-related protein 2/3 complex subunit 4 (ARPC4) were bought from Proteintech (Chicago, IL, USA). BCA reagents were purchased from Invitrogen (Grand Island, NY, USA). Enhanced chemiluminescence reagents were purchased from Pierce Biotechnology (Rockford, IL, USA). Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets were purchased from Roche Diagnostics (Indianapolis, IN, USA). Sequencing grade modified trypsin was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). Acetonitrile was from Merck (White-house Station, NJ, USA). Water used in this study was deionized using a Milli-Q purification system (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).  2 Cell Culture Three HCC cell lines, including Huh7, 97H and LM3, were maintained in our laboratory using the Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM). The cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (100µg/mL) at 37 oC in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2.  3 Proteolysis and Triplex Dimethylation Isotopic Labeling Cells were lysed using 8M urea and the protein concentration was measured using BCA assay. The samples were reduced by incubating with 10 mM DTT at 37 oC for 1 h. The reduced proteins were alkylated for 1 h in darkness with 40 mM IAA. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 50 mM. The urea in the solution was exchanged to 50 mM sodium bicarbonate buffer by centrifugation using 3 kDa ultrafiltration devices (Millipore). The samples were incubated with trypsin at 37 oC overnight for the digestion to complete.  The triplex dimethylation isotopic labeling experiment was performed as described by Boersema et al [18]. Briefly, sodium cyanoborohydridewas added to the protein digest for a final concentration of 50 mM, the deuterated sodium borocyanohydride was used for the heavy labeled samples. Samples were incubated with 0.2 mM formaldehyde, deuterated-formaldehyde or C13 labeled deuterated-formaldehyde respectively at 37 oC for 1 h. The reaction was quenched with 2 M NH4OH, and the samples were mixed and separated using high pH RP-HPLC.  4 High pH RP-HPLC Separation Samples were injected onto a HPLC system (Waters) coupled with a high pH stable C18 column (Phenomenex Gemini C18, 150 x 2.1 mm, 3 μm) at a flow rate of 150 μL/min. The peptides were eluted with a 40 min gradient 5-45% buffer B (Buffer A: 50 mM ammonium formate, pH 10; Buffer B: acetonitrile). Fractions were collected every 3 min for 60 min. Collected fractions were dried by Speedvac and reconstituted in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid.  5 LC-MS/MS The tryptic peptide samples eluted from the first dimensional HPLC were desalted using C18 ziptip and loaded on a nanoUPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA) equipped with a self-packed C18 column (C18, 150 × 0.075mm, 1.7μm). The peptides were eluted using a 5-40% B gradient (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 90 min into a nano-electrospray ionization (nESI) Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode in which an initial FT scan recorded the mass range of m/z 350-1500. The spray voltage was set between 1.8 and 2.0 kV, and the mass resolution used for MS scan is 70,000. The dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. The top 20 most intense masses were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentations (HCD). MS/MS spectra were acquired starting at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500. The AGC target value and maximum injection time were set as 1e6 and 100 ms respectively for MS scans, as well as 5e4 and 110 ms for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the uniprot human protein database containing 129499 sequence entries using the SEQUEST algorithm embedded in the Protein Discoverer 1.4 Software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The following parameters were applied during the database search: 10 ppm precursor and fragment mass error tolerance, static modifications of carbamidomethylation for all cysteine residues, dimethylation for the formaldehyde labeling (Δ28 Da), deuterated-formaldehyde labeling (Δ32 Da) or C13 labeled deuterated-formaldehyde labeling (Δ36 Da) on lysines and the N-terminus, flexible modification of oxidation modifications for methionine residues, and one missed cleavage site of trypsin was allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) <0.01 was used as filtering criteria for all identified peptides. In addition, only proteins identified with two or more peptides were considered, and proteins identified with the same set of peptides were grouped and treated as one.  Quantitation analysis was conducted using the Protein Discoverer 1.4 software. Ratios between the three HCC cell lysates were calculated based on the extract ion chromatography areas, and normalized using the medium.

### Publication Abstract
The systematic investigation of gene mutation and expression is important to discover novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets in cancers. Here, we integrated genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics to analyze three hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines with differential metastatic potentials. The results revealed the profile of the prometastasis metabolism potentially associated with HCC metastasis. The multiomic analysis identified 12 genes with variations at multiple levels from three metabolic pathways, including glycolysis, starch, and sucrose metabolism, and glutathione metabolism. Furthermore, uridine diphosphate (UDP)-glucose pyrophosphorylase 2 (UGP2), was observed to be persistently up-regulated with increased metastatic potential. UGP2 overexpression promoted cell migration and invasion and enhanced glycogenesis <i>in vitro</i> The role of UGP2 in metastasis was further confirmed using a tumor xenograft mouse model. Taken together, the compendium of multiomic data provides valuable insights in understanding the roles of shifted cellular metabolism in HCC metastasis.

### Keywords
Dimethylation; hcc; lc-ms/ms; protein-protein interaction; quantitative proteomics; tumor progression

### Affiliations
Tianjin Medical University

### Submitter
Ruibing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Ruibing
Tianjin Medical University


