### Accession
PXD016638

### Title
Dissecting the mechanism of signaling-triggered nuclear export of newly synthesized influenza virus ribonucleoprotein complexes

### Description
Influenza viruses (IV) exploit a variety of signaling pathways. Previous studies showed that the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway is functionally linked to nuclear export of viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complexes, suggesting that vRNP export is a signaling induced event. However, the underlying mechanism remained completely enigmatic. Here we have dissected the unknown molecular steps of signaling-driven vRNP export. We identified RSK1 as downstream target of virus-activated ERK signaling. While RSK2 displays an antiviral role, we demonstrate for the first time a virus-supportive function of RSK1, migrating to the nucleus to phosphorylate NP, the major constituent of vRNPs. This drives association with viral M1 at the chromatin, important for vRNP export. Inhibition or knockdown of MEK, ERK or RSK1 caused impaired vRNP export actions of different RSK isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
Strep-PB2-WSN infected and inhibitor treated HEK293 cells were incubated in DMEM containing 0.1 mM sodium orthovanadate 10 min prior cell  lysis. Cells were washed twice with 10 ml ice cold PBS, scraped and pelleted  by centrifugation. Supernatants were removed  and cells were lysed in 1 ml ice cold lysis buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After pipetting 5 times the lysates were sonificated twice followed by 15 min incubation at 4 °C. Cleared lysates were transferred to new reaction tubes and the total protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay. Approximately 15 mg of total protein were used for purification of Strep-PB2-vRNPs via streptactin-  sepharose beads. Lysates were incubated with beads for 4.0 h at 4 °C on a low-speed rotation shaker. Following washing bound proteins were eluted from the beads using desthiobiotin, aceton precipitated and subjected to in solution digests using trypsin. Tryptic digests were desalted using using Stage tips and stored at 4°C. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS using an EASY-nLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a Nanospray Flex ion source which harbored a C18 reversed phase capillary column.

### Data Protocol
raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10 and 1.6.4.0) with the built in Andromeda search engine and searched against the uniprot databases FASTAUP000000834.fasta (influenza virus, 02/2016) and FASTAUP000005640_9606.fasta (h. sapiens; 12/2015)using default parameters (except for min. peptide length, which was set to 5). Carbamidomethylation at cysteines was set as fixed modification, oxidation at methionines as well as phosphorylation at S, T, or Y were allowed as variable modifications. A FDR of 0.01 was required for identification on the peptide as well as protein level. Reverse hits from the search in a concatenated database were subsequently removed fro th elsit of identified proteins, as well as common lab contaminants and proteins that were not identified by at least 1 unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Vrnp export, Influenza virus, Proteomics, Kinase signalling, Mass spectrometry, Vrnp complex

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


