### Accession
PXD033773

### Title
Integrated proteomics unveils regulation of cardiac myocytes hypertrophic growth by a nuclear cAMP nanodomain under the control of PDE3A

### Description
Signalling by cAMP is organized in multiple distinct subcellular nanodomains regulated by cAMP-hydrolysing phosphodiesterase (PDEs). Cardiac b-adrenergic signalling has served as the prototypical system to elucidate cAMP compartmentalization. Here we employed an integrated  interaction and phosphoproteomics approaches that take advantage of the unique role that individual PDEs play in the control of local cAMP to identify previously unrecognizedncAMP nanodomains associated with b-adrenegic stimulation. The characterization of one such domain demonstrated that PDE3A isoforms operate in a nuclear nanodomain that involves SMAD4 and HDAC-1 to inhibit cardiac myocyte hypertrophic growth.

### Sample Protocol
Interactome PDE interacting proteins were enriched by performing RFP immunoprecipitation (RFP IP) using cell lysates from neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NVRMs) overexpressing PDE2A2-mCherry, PDE3A1-mCherry, or PDE3A2-mCherry. Control IP was performed using NVRM lysate overexpressing mCherry. Three biological replicates of each IP were performed. Phosphoproteome Adult ventricular myocytes (AVRMs) were treated with 1)  isoproterenol (ISO) (control group) 2) ISO and BAY60-7550, or 3) ISO and cilostamide. Paired control and each PDE inhibitor samples from at least three different animals were analysed. Tryptic digest of a total of 2mg AVRM proteins were prepared using FASP method. Subsequently, peptides were subjected to 0n-column stable iotope dimethyl labelling using SepPak 18 catridges. Peptide orginated from each paired control and PDE inhibitor treatment were mixed 1:1 ratio and subjected to phosphospeptide enrichment using TiO2-packed tips.

### Data Protocol
1% FDR at peptide and protein level, whcih are the standard database search statistics were used. Label-free quantification was performed by MaxQuant. In total, each IP dataset was consisted of three data points. Student's t-test was used to compare each PDE IP with control IP datasets. A protein was considered to be specifically enriched by PDE if it was statistically significant (p<= 0.05) with the mean enrichment ratio >= 2. Phosphoproteome Peptide identification and quantification of heavy (PDE inhibitor) to light (control) ratios was performed using MaxQuant. Groups were analysed with a multiplicity of two, accounting for the light and heavy dimethyl labels. Phospho (STY) was specified as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adrenegic, Phosphodiesterases, Sympathetic, Camp, Hypertrophy

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Duangnapa Kovanich

### Lab Head
Dr Manuela Zaccolo
University of Oxford


