### Accession
PXD020566

### Title
Protein Identification and Post-translational Analysis of DMD and its associated Proteins in H19-proficient and -deficient Cells

### Description
Dystrophin proteomic regulation in Muscular Dystrophies (MD) remains unclear. We report that a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) H19 associates with dystrophin. To investigate the biological roles of this interaction in vivo, we performed mass spectrometry analysis of dystrophin and its associated proteins in H19-proficient and -deficient C2C12 myotubes. Mass spectrometry data indicated that in H19-proficient myotubes, dystrophin associates with components of dystrophin-associated protein complex (DPC); however, in H19-deficient myotubes, dystrophin associated with UBA1, UB2G1, TRIM63 ubiquitin E3 ligase and ubiquitin. In H19-deficient myotubes, dystrophin was post-translationally modified with K48-linked poly-ubiquitination at Lys3577 (referred to as Ub-DMD). This mass spectrometry study demonstrated that lncRNA H19, associates with dystrophin and inhibits E3 ligase-dependent Ub-DMD formation and its subsequent proteasomal degradation. Based on this study, H19 RNA oligonucleotides conjugated with a muscle homing ligand Agrin (referred to as AGR-H19) and Nifenazone, a TRIM63-specific small molecule inhibitor, reverses the dystrophin degradation in iPSC-derived skeletal muscle cells from Becker Muscular Dystrophy patients. Furthermore,treatment of mdx mice with exon-skipping reagent, in combination with either AGR-H19 or Nifenazone, dramatically stablized dystrophin, preserved skeletal/cardiac muscle histology, and improved strength/heart function. In summary, this mass spectrometry study paves the way to meaningful targeted therapeutics for BMD and certain DMD patients.

### Sample Protocol
To extract lipid-free proteins from cells, which is critical to preserve the integrity of large cell membrane-associated proteins like dystrophin, the cell lysate from H19-proficient and -deficient C2C12 myotubes were extracted by Barocycler NEP3229 using Pressure Enhanced Systems Biology Kit (Pressure BioScience). The ProteoSolve-SB Kit (Pressure BioScience) was used for concurrent detergent-free extraction and fractionation of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids from cells. Following extraction, the sample was separated by centrifufation into three fractions-a lipid-containing upper phase, a protein-containing lower phase, and an insoluble fraction (pellet and interface), which contains the DNA and RNA-as well as a small amount of protein. The dissolved sample proteins from the lower phase were subjected to dystrophin immunoprecipitation. Dystrophin immunoprecipitation was performed using the Dynabeads Co-Immunoprecipitation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The eluted protein complexs were denatured, alkylated and digested with Immobilized Trypsin (Promega). The eluted peptides were sent to MD Anderson Cancer Center Proteomics Facility for Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were identified by comparing the fragment spectra against those in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database using Mascot (v2.4, Matrix Science). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), phospho (STY) and double GG (K) as variable modifications. A false discovery rate cutoff of 1% was used at the PSM and protein levels. Reverse and contaminant matches were removed from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, H19, Mouse, Bmd, Dmd, Agr-h19, Nifenazone, Dystrophin, C2c12

### Affiliations
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Liuqing Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Liuqing Yang
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center


