### Accession
PXD009867

### Title
Gastric Bypass and Sleeve Gastrectomy induce a new gastric mucosa phenotype with increased number of Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 expressing cells

### Description
The Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 (GLP-1) is a proglucagon-derived peptide with regulatory effects on many tissues, including the pancreas, stomach, liver, brain and heart. The rapid inactivation of intestinally secreted GLP-1 by DPP-4 enzyme raises the question of its production in proximity of its targets. Here we show some epithelial cells producing GLP-1 in the stomach of rats and humans. These cells respond specifically to intragastric load of glucose by increasing GLP-1 levels in the portal vein, in vivo in the rat. GLP-1 is known as an incretin, it decreases blood glucose levels after a meal by increasing insulin secretion in response to glucose. The increased GLP-1 secretion in obese individuals who have undergone bariatric surgery is considered as a keystone in the glycemic improvement observed in those patients. Here we show that obese rats that underwent RYGB or VSG exhibit a new gastric mucosa phenotype with expansion and hyperplasia of the mucus neck cells, and increased density of gastric GLP-1 expressing cells compared to sham animals. These findings highlight a potential role of stomach-derived GLP-1 in the outcomes of bariatric surgeries and raise the question of its role in physiology and metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Mucosa Extracts for quantification of GLP-1. Frozen rat gastric mucosa scrapings and human fundic and antral biopsies were homogenized (TissueLyser II, Retsch france with an ice-cold buffer containing 1M HCl containing 5% (vol/vol) formic acid, 1% (vol/vol) trifluoroacetic acid and 1% (wt/vol) NaCl. Homogenates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm 20 min at 4 °C and supernatants were collected and subjected to hydrophobic chromatography (C-18 SepPak cartridges, Waters) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Elution of the columns was performed with 1 mL of 80% (vol/vol) isopropanol/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried completely in a vacuum concentrator. For mass spectrometry analysis the pellets were suspended in PBS and protein concentration was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kit. LC-MS/MS acquisition. 30 µg of proteins extracted in duplicates from ileum and stomach were precipitated with acetone at -20°C. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C by 3 sequencing grade proteases: trypsin (12.5 µg/ml; Promega Madison, WI, USA) in 20 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3, GluC protease (25 µg/ml; Promega Madison, WI, USA) in 20 µl of 20 mM of phosphate buffer and chymotrypsin (25 µg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) in 20 µl of 100 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM CaCl2 pH 7.8. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Thermo Scientific) and were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid coupled to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (all from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by chromatography with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (75 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow rate, using a gradient rising from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 40 % B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 120 minutes, followed by a column regeneration of 20 min, for a total run of 140 min. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell, in full ion scan mode, at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), with a mass range of m/z 350-1550 and an AGC target of 2 x105. Fragments were obtained by high collision-induced dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30%, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in the top-speed mode, with a total cycle of 3 seconds at a resolution of 30,000, with an AGC target of 1x104, a dynamic exclusion of 50 seconds and an exclusion duration of 60 seconds. Precursor priority was highest charge state, followed by most intense. Peptides with charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 250 ms for MS acquisition and 30 ms for MS/MS acquisition in parallelization mode.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS data for protein samples were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.1) coupled to an in-house Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragments. The enzyme parameter was set to semi-specific for each enzyme used (trypsin, Glu-C, Lys-C and chymotrypsin) to identify putative sites of endogenous proteases. The following variable modifications were allowed: oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr), acetylation (Protein N-term). The SwissProt database (02/2017) with the Rattus norvegicus taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide Identifications were validated using a 1% FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucagon, Rattus, Gastric bypass, Glp1, Gastrectomy

### Affiliations
EHESP/LERES
Equipe B.A.D.O (Bariatric surgery Alimentary Diseases and Obesity) Inserm UMR 1149, Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation Paris Montmartre UFR de Médecine Paris Diderot, 16 rue Henri Huchard, 75890 Paris Cedex 18, France Tel. (33.1) 57 27 74 60

### Submitter
Thibaut LEGER

### Lab Head
Dr André Bado
Equipe B.A.D.O (Bariatric surgery Alimentary Diseases and Obesity) Inserm UMR 1149, Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation Paris Montmartre UFR de Médecine Paris Diderot, 16 rue Henri Huchard, 75890 Paris Cedex 18, France Tel. (33.1) 57 27 74 60


