### Accession
PXD018745

### Title
A novel transcriptional signalling pathway mediated by the trafficking protein Ambra1 via scaffolding Atf2 complexes

### Description
Previously, we reported that Ambra1 is a core component of a cytoplasmic trafficking network, acting as a spatial rheostat to control active Src and FAK levels in addition to its critical roles in autophagy during neurogenesis. Here we identify a novel nuclear scaffolding function for Ambra1 that controls gene expression. Ambra1 binds to nuclear pore proteins, to other adaptor proteins like FAK and Akap8 in the nucleus, as well as to chromatin modifiers and transcriptional regulators such as Brg1, Cdk9 and the cAMP-regulated transcription factor Atf2. Ambra1 contributes to their association with chromatin and we identified genes whose transcription is regulated by Ambra1 complexes, likely via histone modifications and phospho-Atf2-dependent transcription. Therefore, Ambra1 scaffolds protein complexes at chromatin, regulating transcriptional signalling in the nucleus; in particular, it recruits chromatin modifiers and transcriptional regulators to control expression of genes such as Angpt1, Tgfb2, Tgfb3, Itga8 and Itgb7 that likely contribute to the role of Ambra1 in cancer cell invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration was calculated using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Loughborough, UK). Ambra1 was immunoprecipitated from 2 mg nuclear lysates of SCC FAK-WT and -/- cells (samples in triplicates), using 2 μg of unconjugated antibodies (anti-Ambra1 and rabbit-anti-IgG) at 4°C overnight with agitation. Unconjugated antibody samples were incubated with 20 μl of Protein A agarose for 1 h at 4°C. Beads were washed twice in lysis buffer and twice in PBS. Beads were trypsinised, in order to digest the baits and the interacting proteins in 60 μL of Buffer 1 (containing 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 5 μg/mL Trypsin). Digestion was performed for 30 m 27 °C in a thermomixer, shaking at 800 rpm. After the initial digestion, the samples were centrifuged for 30 s at 7000 rpm and the supernatant was removed and collected into fresh, labelled tubes. Beads were washed twice in 25 μL of buffer 2 (containing 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 1 mM DTT) and the supernatants were pooled. Samples were left on the bench to continue to digest over night at room temperature.  Stage Tips Purification: The following morning, 20 μL of Iodoacetamide (5 mg/mL) was added to the samples and then incubated for 30 m in the dark. Samples were treated with 1 μL trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop the digestion and desalted in C18 stagetips. Briefly, the tips were prepared as described [6], placing a small disc of Empore material 3 M in an ordinary pipette tip, preparing a single tip for each sample. Tips were activated with 50 μL of 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA buffer and washed with 50 μL of 0.1% TFA. 100 μL of sample was added to the column and washed twice with 50 μL 0.1% TFA solution. Liquid was passed through the pipette tip manually with the aid of a syringe or with a light centrifugation step. For both of these steps a (light) centrifugation or the help of a syringe can be used to pass the liquid through the tips. Peptides were then eluted using 25 μL of 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA buffer twice. This last step was performed manually with the help of a syringe. Samples were evaporated in a Speedvac concentrator and re-suspended in 12 μL 0.1% TFA buffer and analysed by mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry analysis: The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) incorporating an autosampler. 5 μL of the tryptic peptides, for each sample, was loaded on a homemade column (100 mm length, 75 μm inside diameter [i.d.]) packed with 1.9 μm ReprosilAQ C18 (Dr. Maisch, Germany) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 40-min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%–32% Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220 °C, with a potential of 2000 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using the MaxQuant Software package in biological triplicate and technical replicate. Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant. All the samples were analyzed as two technical replicates and biological triplicates.  Data analysis: Data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software package. Raw data files were searched against a human database (Uniprot murine), using a mass accuracy of 4.5 ppm and 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein level. Every single file was considered as separate in the experimental design; the replicates of each condition were grouped for the subsequent statistical analysis. Carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as variable. Subsequently missing values were replaced by a constant in order to allow the following statistical analysis. Results were cleaned for reverse and contaminants and a list of significant interactions determined based on average ratio and t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Ambra1 is considered an autophagy and trafficking protein with roles in neurogenesis and cancer cell invasion. Here, we report that Ambra1 also localizes to the nucleus of cancer cells, where it has a novel nuclear scaffolding function that controls gene expression. Using biochemical fractionation and proteomics, we found that Ambra1 binds to multiple classes of proteins in the nucleus, including nuclear pore proteins, adaptor proteins such as FAK and Akap8, chromatin-modifying proteins, and transcriptional regulators like Brg1 and Atf2. We identified biologically important genes, such as <i>Angpt1</i>, <i>Tgfb2</i>, <i>Tgfb3</i>, <i>Itga8</i>, and <i>Itgb7</i>, whose transcription is regulated by Ambra1-scaffolded complexes, likely by altering histone modifications and Atf2 activity. Therefore, in addition to its recognized roles in autophagy and trafficking, Ambra1 scaffolds protein complexes at chromatin, regulating transcriptional signaling in the nucleus. This novel function for Ambra1, and the specific genes impacted, may help to explain the wider role of Ambra1 in cancer cell biology.

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics, Signalling

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


