### Accession
PXD047668

### Title
CSB promotes transcription-coupled repair of DNA-protein crosslinks

### Description
PxP-MS (Purification of x-linked Proteins coupled to Mass Spectrometry) was used to assess the role of CSB in DNA-protein crosslink repair. The CSB protein is a sensor that can detect stalled RNA polymerases at sites of DNA damage, thereby triggering transcription-coupled repair mechanisms. DPCs were induced in WT and CSB knock-out RPE1 cells using a pulse of formaldehyde. To identify crosslinked proteins that specifically require CSB for repair, DNA-protein crosslinks were isolated from cells using PxP either directly after formaldehyde exposure or following a chase in drug-free media and identified by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from RPE1 cells (WT or CSB KO)were prepared based on the Purification of x-linked Proteins (PxP)protocol. Agarose plugs were denatured with Urea to collect proteins.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from MS were processed in DIA-NN 1.8.2 beta 22 using an in-silico spectral library (N-Terminal methionine excision, Cysteine carbamidomethylation and 1 missed cleavage are enabled). Peptide length range was 7 to 35 and precursor m/z range was 350 to 1000. MBR was unchecked. For the rest, default parameters were used

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cockayne syndrome, Csb, Dna damage repair, Dna-protein crosslinks, Formaldehyde

### Affiliations
System Chronobiology Institute for Medical Psychology  Ludwig-Maximilians Universitat Muenchen Germany (lab head)
LMU - Muenchen

### Submitter
Fatih Aygenli

### Lab Head
Dr Charo Robles
System Chronobiology Institute for Medical Psychology  Ludwig-Maximilians Universitat Muenchen Germany (lab head)


