### Accession
PXD024488

### Title
Mitochondrial morphology, bioenergetics and proteomic responses in fatty acid oxidation disorders

### Description
Mutations in nuclear genes encoding for mitochondrial proteins very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) and trifunctional protein (TFP) cause rare autosomal recessive disorders. Studies in fibroblasts derived from patients with mutations in VLCAD and TFP exhibit mitochondrial defects. To gain insights on pathological changes that account for the mitochondria l deficits we performed quantitative proteomic, biochemical, and morphometric analyses in fibroblasts derived from subjects with three different VLCAD and three different TFP mutations. Proteomic data that was corroborated by antibody-based detection, indicated reduced levels of VLCAD and TFP protein in cells with VLCAD and TFP mutations respectively, which in part accounted for the diminished fatty acid oxidation capacity. Decreased mitochondrial respiratory capacity in cells with VLCAD and TFP mutations was quantified after glucose removal and cells with TFP mutations had lower levels of glycogen. Despite these energetic deficiencies, the cells with VLCAD and TFP mutations did not exhibit changes in mitochondria morphology, distribution, fusion and fission, quantified by either confocal or transmission electron microscopy and corroborated by proteomic and antibody-based protein analysis. Fibroblasts with VLCAD and to a lesser extend cells with TFP mutations had increased levels of mitochondrial respiratory chain proteins and proteins that facilitate the assembly of respiratory complexes. With the exception of reduced levels of catalase and glutathione S-transferase theta-1 in cells with TFP mutations, the levels of 45 proteins across all major intracellular antioxidant networks were similar between cells with VLCAD and TFP mutations and non-disease controls. Collectively the data indicate that despite the metabolic deficits, cells with VLCAD and TFP mutations maintain their proteomic integrity to preserve cellular and mitochondria architecture, support energy production and protect against oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblasts (non-disease control lines 1, 2, 3 and cellswith mutations in VLCAD and TFP Supplementary Fig. S1) were grown in T75 flasks at 90% confluence (about 1x106 cells) harvested by gentle scraping and cell pellets were collected. The pellets were washed 3 times with cold PBS. Cell pellets were lysed by addition of SDC buffer containing TCEP and 2-chloroacetamide (PreOmics). Benzonase was added and samples were triturated and heated at 95 oC for 10 minutes. Debris were cleared by centrifugation; protein concentration was quantified by the Bradford assay and 50 μg of protein was acetone/trichloroacetic acid precipitated. The resulting pellet was solubilized and digested with the iST kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). Briefly, solubilization, reduction, and alkylation were performed in sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer containing TCEP and 2- chloroacetamide. Proteins were enzymatically hydrolyzed for 1.5 hours at 37 °C by addition of LysC and trypsin. Peptides were de-salted, dried by vacuum centrifugation and were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA containing indexed Retention Time (iRT) peptides (Biognosys). Samples for the acquisition of the whole proteome were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) as described in detail previously [27]. Briefly, tryptic digests of cell protein pellets were separated by reverse-phase (RP)-HPLC and spectra were collected in data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA). For DDA, the mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1400 (R = 240,000) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, minimum AGC 1e4, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30s, (R=15000) FTMS full scan AGC target value was 3e6, while MSn AGC was 1e5, respectively. MSn injection time was 160 ms; microscans were set at one. Rejection of unassigned and 1+, 6-8 charge states were set. The raw files for Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) were collected using the following settings: one full MS scan at 120,000 resolution and a scan range of 300-1650 m/z with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum inject time of 60ms. This was followed by 22 (DIA) isolation windows with varying sizes at 30,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3e6, injection times set to auto, loop count and msx count of 1. The default charge state was 4, the first mass was fixed at 200 m/z and the normalized collision energy (NCE) for each window was stepped at 25.5, 27 and 30.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw files for the DDA were searched against a reference human protein sequence database including reviewed isoforms from the Uniprot database using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0. Trypsin was specified as an enzyme with two possible missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were considered variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance FTMS was set to 20 ppm. The false discovery rate limit of 1% was set for peptide and protein identification and the remaining search parameters were set to the default values. The MaxQuant output was used to generate the project-specific spectral library for DIA analysis. This library was supplemented with additional library generated using direct DIA approach in Spectronaut. The raw files for DIA analysis were processed with Spectronaut version 13. The default setting in Spectronaut was used for peptide and protein quantification at MS2 level. Perseus (1.6.6.0) was used for proteomics data processing and statistical analysis. The MS2 intensity values generated by Spectronaut were used to analyze the proteome data. The data were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median for each sample. We filtered the data to have three values in each group. Student’s t-test was employed to identify differentially expressed proteins and volcano plots were generated to visualize the affected proteins while comparing different groups of samples. Lists of differentially abundant proteins (with P.Value < 0.05 and |log2FC|>1) were selected and used for downstream bioinformatics analysis. For mitochondrial protein annotation, we utilized the newly released Mitocarta 3.0

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Long-chain fatty acids (lcfa), Very longchain acyl-coa dehydrogenase (vlcad), Proteomics, Trifunctional protein (tfp), Beta-oxidation

### Affiliations
Departments of Pediatrics and Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine,  University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Harry Ischiropoulos
Departments of Pediatrics and Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, the Raymond and Ruth Perelman School of Medicine,  University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.


