### Accession
PXD036479

### Title
IGFBP2 secretion by mammary adipocytes limits breast cancer invasion

### Description
The progression of noninvasive ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive ductal carcinoma for patients with breast cancer results in a significantly poorer prognosis and is the precursor to metastatic disease. In this work, we have identified insulin-like growth factor–binding protein 2 (IGFBP2) as a potent adipocrine factor secreted by healthy breast adipocytes that acts as a barrier against invasive progression. In line with this role, adipocytes differentiated from patient-derived stromal cells were found to secrete IGFBP2, which significantly inhibited breast cancer invasion. This occurred through binding and sequestration of cancer-derived IGF-II. Moreover, depletion of IGF-II in invading cancer cells using small interfering RNAs or an IGF-II–neutralizing antibody ablated breast cancer invasion, highlighting the importance of IGF-II autocrine signaling for breast cancer invasive progression. Given the abundance of adipocytes in the healthy breast, this work exposes the important role they play in suppressing cancer progression and may help expound upon the link between increased mammary density and poorer prognosis.

### Sample Protocol
MM231 cells were treated with concentrated conditioned media from TIFs overexpressing mT2 or IGFBP2-Clover (~30 μg). For the mT2 control medium, ~30-μg recombinant GFP (Abcam, ab84191) was added. After 1 hour, medium was collected and fixed with Dimethyl dithiobispropionimidate (DTBP) (5 mM; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 20665). Fixation occurred at 37°C for 30 min with gentle mixing. This was then quenched by the addition of quenching buffer [500 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 750 mM NaCl] for a further 10 min at 4°C while gently mixing. Once quenched, GFP-trap beads (30 μl, Chromotek, gfa) were added to the medium and incubated overnight at 4°C while gently mixing. Immunoprecipitations were then spun down at 300g for 5 min before washing beads thrice with PBS and then once with 50 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 150 mM NaCl. For the on-bead digestion, samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)/50 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0) in the presence of 8 M urea for 1 hour at 37°C and then alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0) for 1 hour in the dark. DTT was then added in excess to consume the remaining alkylating agent and dilute the urea before overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega, V5111) at 37°C. Samples were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (pH ~2) before desalting using Sep-Pak C18 96-well plates (Waters, 186002321). Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry was then performed as described previously, modified only in the use of 300 ng of sample for the analysis and in the application of a 50-min two-step gradient from 5 to 21% of eluent B for 28 min to 36% of eluent B for 22 min, followed by a wash stage with 100% of eluent B to eluate peptides. Assignment of peptides and quantification of abundance ratios (normalized to total peptide amount) by label-free quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using intensity values from the precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Assignment of peptides and quantification of abundance ratios (normalized to total preptide amount) by label-free quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher) using intensity values from the precursor ions.

### Publication Abstract
The progression of noninvasive ductal carcinoma in situ to invasive ductal carcinoma for patients with breast cancer results in a significantly poorer prognosis and is the precursor to metastatic disease. In this work, we have identified insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 2 (IGFBP2) as a potent adipocrine factor secreted by healthy breast adipocytes that acts as a barrier against invasive progression. In line with this role, adipocytes differentiated from patient-derived stromal cells were found to secrete IGFBP2, which significantly inhibited breast cancer invasion. This occurred through binding and sequestration of cancer-derived IGF-II. Moreover, depletion of IGF-II in invading cancer cells using small interfering RNAs or an IGF-II-neutralizing antibody ablated breast cancer invasion, highlighting the importance of IGF-II autocrine signaling for breast cancer invasive progression. Given the abundance of adipocytes in the healthy breast, this work exposes the important role they play in suppressing cancer progression and may help expound upon the link between increased mammary density and poorer prognosis.

### Keywords
Igfbp2, Lc-msms, Gfp trap

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku, Tykistökatu 6, FI-20520 Turku, Finland
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku, FI-20520 Turku, Finland

### Submitter
James Conway

### Lab Head
Dr Johanna Ivaska
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku, FI-20520 Turku, Finland


