### Accession
PXD001374

### Title
Label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics with novel pairwise abundance normalization reveals synergistic RAS and CIP2A signaling

### Description
Label-free quantification is a powerful method  for studying cellular protein phosphorylation dynamics. However, whether current data normalization methods achieve sufficient accuracy has not been examined systematically. Here, we demonstrate that a large uni-directional shift in the phosphopeptide abundance distribution is problematic for global median centering and quantile-based normalizations and may mislead the biological conclusion from unlabeled phosphoproteome data. Instead, we present a novel normalization strategy, named pairwise normalization, which is based on adjusting phosphopeptide abundances measured before and after the enrichment. The superior performance of pairwise normalization was validated by statistical methods, western blotting analysis, and by bioinformatics analysis. In addition, we demonstrate that the choice of normalization method influences the downstream analyses of the data and perceived pathway activities. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the developed normalization method, combined with pathway analysis algorithms, revealed a novel biological synergism between Ras signalling and PP2A inhibition by CIP2A.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were treated with CIP2A siRNA, RAS siRNA, and okadaic acid, as well as with control siRNA (labelled "SCR6"), in biological triplicates. Cell lysates (1 mg protein each) were spiked in with a phosphoprotein bovine alpha-casein (10 μg), and then digested with trypsin in parallel. The majority of the digests (99% v/v) were enriched for phosphopeptides by TiO2 affinity chromatography sequentially. The lysates of the same control samples were processed again on different days as a technical replicate (labelled "SCR5") and analyzed together with the above samples (TiO2-enriched and non-enriched) by LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data of the TiO2-enriched and non-enriched samples were searched with Mascot (v2.4.1) via Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.0.288), against a concatenated forward-reverse SwissProt database (v2012_04, Homo sapiens) supplemented with common contaminants (total 40,678 sequences). The Proteome Discoverer results (msf files) contain annotated MS/MS spectra. For phosphorylation site localization, phosphoRS (v3.0, the neutral loss option disabled) was enabled. In parallel, peak lists (mgf files) for the TiO2-enriched samples were exported. Spectral library searching was performed using an in-house made spectral library of simulated phosphopeptides (refer to PXD000474). MS/MS spectra of all possible isoforms of singly phosphorylated peptides were simulated using SimPhospho program based on 6 LC-MS/MS data of dephosphorylated peptides (not included here), where PeptideProphet probability ≥0.95, Mascot expectation value ≤0.05, and delta score ≥10 were applied for Mascot search as a cutoff. A consensus spectral library (SimPP2A) was built using SpectraST (version 4.0, released beta), which consists of 14,761 spectra for 3,208 peptide sequences. SpectraST searching against the SimPP2A library (SimSpectraST searching) was performed for the TiO2-enriched samples via Proteome Discoverer by submitting the mgf files. The SwissProt database without the reversed sequences was used. For estimating probability, Percolator was enabled. The search was repeated against the library supplemented with decoy entries, using the stand-alone SpectraST (after adjusting the mgf file format) to obtain its F-value and recalculated deltaDot score that are required for phosphorylation site localization. All the Mascot and SimSpectraST results were merged on Proteome Discoverer. An xlsx file was exported after applying Mascot expectation value ≤0.05, Percolator PEP ≤0.05, minimum 7 amino acid length, search engine rank 1, and protein grouping. As cutoffs for 1% FLR (i.e. high confidence phosphorylation sites), phosphoRS probability ≥99.3% was used, while SpectraST (stand-alone) F-value ≥0.49 and recalculated deltaDot score ≥0.005 were applied only when a singly phosphorylated peptide contains >1 Ser/Thr/Tyr in its sequence. Based on the localization confidence (high or low), a new score was given for each phosphopeptide spectral match (labelled "xcorr" in the xlsx file). FDRs were estimated using the target-decoy strategy at a (phospho)peptide spectral match level, i.e. 2 x decoy matches / total matches, resulting in 0.23% and 0.15% FDRs for TiO2-enriched phosphopeptides and non-enriched peptides, respectively. These datasets were used for label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperactivated RAS drives progression of many human malignancies. However, oncogenic activity of RAS is dependent on simultaneous inactivation of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) activity. Although PP2A is known to regulate some of the RAS effector pathways, it has not been systematically assessed how these proteins functionally interact. Here we have analyzed phosphoproteomes regulated by either RAS or PP2A, by phosphopeptide enrichment followed by mass-spectrometry-based label-free quantification. To allow data normalization in situations where depletion of RAS or PP2A inhibitor CIP2A causes a large uni-directional change in the phosphopeptide abundance, we developed a novel normalization strategy, named pairwise normalization. This normalization is based on adjusting phosphopeptide abundances measured before and after the enrichment. The superior performance of the pairwise normalization was verified by various independent methods. Additionally, we demonstrate how the selected normalization method influences the downstream analyses and interpretation of pathway activities. Consequently, bioinformatics analysis of RAS and CIP2A regulated phosphoproteomes revealed a significant overlap in their functional pathways. This is most likely biologically meaningful as we observed a synergistic survival effect between CIP2A and RAS expression as well as KRAS activating mutations in TCGA pan-cancer data set, and synergistic relationship between CIP2A and KRAS depletion in colony growth assays.

### Keywords
Hela, Phosphoproteomics, Ras, Mascot, Cip2a, Lc-ms/ms, Okadaic acid, Simspectrast

### Affiliations
Meijo University
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Finland

### Submitter
Susumu Imanishi

### Lab Head
Dr Susumu Y. Imanishi
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Finland


