### Accession
PXD020997

### Title
NPRA-deficient mice cardiac tissue LC-MS/MS

### Description
For this part, we analyzed 10 samples, which were two biological replicates for each NPRA-deficient mice and the matched littermate. The experimental system was designed for 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT)-based mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred milligrams of tissue in a 1.5 mL EP tube was lysed in 1000 µL buffer consisting of RIPA protease inhibitor cocktail and 1 mM PMSF. Protein quantification was performed using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay kit. Then, 100 µg protein from each sample was precipitated with an acetone precipitation method. Furthermore, resuspended protein was used for tryptic digestion, TMT labelling, SDC cleaning, and peptide desalting for base-reversed-phase (RP) fractionation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.5.6.0). The protein sequence database (UniProt_organism_2016_09) was downloaded from UniProt. For quantitative analysis, only proteins with at least one unique peptide match with TMT ratios were considered. A ≥1.20- or ≤0.83-fold cutoff value was used to identify upregulated and downregulated proteins, respectively, with a p-value of < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) are important biological markers and cardiac function regulators. Natriuretic peptide receptor A (NPRA) binds to an ANP or BNP ligand and induces transmembrane signal transduction by elevating the intracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) levels. However, the metabolic phenotype and related mechanisms induced by NPRA deletion remain ambiguous. Here, we constructed myocardial-specific NPRA deletion mice and detected the heart functional and morphological characteristics by histological analysis and explored the altered metabolic pattern and the expression patterns of proteins by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based omics technology. NPRA deficiency unexpectedly did not result in significant cardiac remodeling or dysfunction. However, compared with the matched littermates, NPRA-deficient mice had significant metabolic differences. Metabolomic analysis showed that the metabolite levels varied in cardiac tissues and plasma. In total, 33 metabolites were identified in cardiac tissues and 54 were identified in plasma. Compared with control mice, NPRA-deficient mice had 20 upregulated and six downregulated metabolites in cardiac tissues and 25 upregulated and 23 downregulated metabolites in plasma. Together, NPRA deficiency resulted in increased nucleotide biosynthesis and histidine metabolism only in heart tissues and decreased creatine metabolism only in plasma. Further proteomic analysis identified 136 differentially abundant proteins in cardiac tissues, including 54 proteins with higher abundance and 82 proteins with lower abundance. Among them, cytochrome c oxidase subunit 7c and 7b (Cox7c, Cox7b), ATP synthase, H+ transporting, mitochondrial Fo complex subunit F2 (ATP5J2), ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase, complex III subunit X (Uqcr10), and myosin heavy chain 7 (Myh7) were mainly involved in related metabolic pathways. These results revealed the essential role of NPRA in metabolic profiles and may elucidate new underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of NPRA in cardiovascular diseases.

### Keywords
Cardiac tissues plasma, Mice， npra

### Affiliations
Xi'an International Medical Center Hospital
 Xi'an International Medical Center Hospital

### Submitter
Yan Niu

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Yu
Xi'an International Medical Center Hospital


