### Accession
PXD024625

### Title
The biochemical basis of mitochondrial dysfunction in Zellweger Spectrum Disorder

### Description
We identified that peroxins were still expressed in Zellweger Spectrum Disorder (ZSD) and a subset of them accumulated on the mitochondrial membrane, which resulted in gross mitochondrial abnormalities and impaired mitochondrial metabolic function. In this complexome analysis we detected several peroxins in the mitochondrial fraction in the absence of functional peroxisomes and that this accumulation is exacerbated by the loss of the mitochondrial extractase Msp1. In addition, we observed that specific peroxisomal matrix proteins localize to the mitochondria, which suggest that a functional peroxisomal docking and import complex assembles on the mitochondria in the absence of peroxisomes.

### Sample Protocol
Blue native electrophoresis Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of yeast mitochondria were essential done as described (Wittig et al. 2006). Briefly, 400µg mitochondria were resuspended in 40 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 6 µl 20% digitonin [3g/g] (Serva). Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid).   Sample preparation for complexome profiling Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into 60 equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation, see gel figure). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry for complexome profiling Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 40 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min followed by an second gradient to 60% B for 10 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.6.4.0) using default settings. Proteins were identified using yeast reference proteome database UniProtKB with 6049 entries, released in 12/2020. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values of data sets were normalized to sample (2995).  Slice number of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complexes from bovine heart mitochondria were used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA (v.0.5.7) was used for hierarchical clustering of complexomics data [Giese et al. 2015].  Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peroxisomes, Mitochondria, Mitocondrial quality control, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Peroxisomal import, Peroxisomal biogenesis disorder

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Medical School, Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Jared Rutter
Medical School, Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA


