### Accession
PXD001719

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of the Arg/N-end rule pathway of targeted degradation in Arabidopsis roots

### Description
According to the Arg/N-end rule pathway, proteins with basic N-termini are targeted for degradation by the Arabidopsis thaliana E3 ligase, PROTEOLYSIS6 (PRT6). Proteins can also become PRT6 substrates following post-translational arginylation by arginyltransferases ATE1 and 2. Here, we undertook a quantitative proteomics study of Arg/N-end rule mutants, ate1/2 and prt6, to investigate the impact of this pathway on the root proteome. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling identified a small number of proteins with increased abundance in the mutants, some of which represent downstream targets of transcription factors known to be N-end rule substrates.  Isolation of N-terminal peptides using terminal amine isotope labelling of samples (TAILS) combined with triple dimethyl labelling identified 1465 unique N-termini. Stabilising residues were over-represented among the free neo-N-termini, but destabilising residues were not markedly enriched in N-end rule mutants. The majority of free neo-N-termini were revealed following cleavage of organellar targeting signals, thus compartmentation may account in part for the presence of destabilising residues in the wild type N-terminome. Our data suggest that PRT6 does not have a marked impact on the global proteome of Arabidopsis roots and is likely involved in the controlled degradation of relatively few regulatory proteins.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Plant growth and seedling treatments  Seeds were surface-sterilised and plated on 0.5 x MS medium containing 0.5 % sucrose. After 2 d dark chilling (4 °C), plates were transferred to a controlled environment cabinet for 5 d (18 h day; 6 h night, 22 °C).  2.3 Tandem Mass TagTM (TMT) labelling and protein quantification Methods for root proteome preparation, TMT labelling, mass spectrometry and statistical treatment of data are given in Supplementary data.  2.4 Dimethyl labelling and enrichment of N-termini by TAILS Protein N-termini were enriched from 5 d old roots using TAILS.  2.5 LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS was performed with a nanoAquity UPLC and an LTQ Obritrap Velos hybrid ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA

### Data Protocol
TMT data analysis  Raw data were searched against TAIR10 database (FASTA db: TAIR10_20110103_rgm.fasta, Version: 2.3, Number of sequences: 27417) using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer™ version 1.4.1.14 (DBVersion: 79; Thermo Scientific), employing Top 10 peaks filter node and percolator nodes. As filters, high peptide confidence corresponding to an FDR < 1%, search engine rank 1 and mascot ion score 20 were used.  TMT experiments included reporter ions quantifier employing trypsin enzyme specificity with a maximum of one missed cleavage with carbamidomethylation of Cys (+ 57.0214 Da) as a fixed modification and TMT 6plex (Thermo) at Lys and N-termini, oxidized methionine (+ 42.0105 Da) as variable modifications. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS and 0.06 Da for MS/MS. For quantification, integration window tolerance was set to 0.0075 Da. Each reporting ion was divided by the sum of total ion and normalized by medians of the samples.  TAILS data analysis Raw data were searched against TAIR10 database using Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer™ version 1.4.1.14 (DBVersion:79; Thermo Scientific), employing Top 10 peaks filter node and percolator nodes. As filters, high peptide confidence corresponding to an q-values below 0.01 (FDR < 1%), search engine rank 1 and Mascot ion score 20 were used. Dimethyl TAILS experiments employed the precursor ions quantifier using a three-step strategy and semi-ArgC enzyme specificity with a maximum of one missed cleavage with carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification and dimethylation light (+28.031 Da), dimethylation intermediate (+32.056 Da) and heavy (+36.076Da) at Lys, and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. First, N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0105 Da) was set as a variable modification; second, dimethylation light, intermediate and heavy at N-termini were set as variable modifications. Third, a variable modification search was used to for dimethyl-arginylation (see Supplementary Information). Mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS. For quantification, the maximum window for corresponding peptides was set to 1 min, single-Peak/Missing Channels allowed was set as two. The ratios were normalized by the medians of pre-TAILS samples searched with ArgC enzyme specificity.

### Publication Abstract
According to the Arg/N-end rule pathway, proteins with basic N-termini are targeted for degradation by the Arabidopsis thaliana E3 ligase, PROTEOLYSIS6 (PRT6). Proteins can also become PRT6 substrates following post-translational arginylation by arginyltransferases ATE1 and 2. Here, we undertook a quantitative proteomics study of Arg/N-end rule mutants, ate1/2 and prt6, to investigate the impact of this pathway on the root proteome. Tandem mass tag labelling identified a small number of proteins with increased abundance in the mutants, some of which represent downstream targets of transcription factors known to be N-end rule substrates. Isolation of N-terminal peptides using terminal amine isotope labelling of samples (TAILS) combined with triple dimethyl labelling identified 1465 unique N-termini. Stabilising residues were over-represented among the free neo-N-termini, but destabilising residues were not markedly enriched in N-end rule mutants. The majority of free neo-N-termini were revealed following cleavage of organellar targeting signals, thus compartmentation may account in part for the presence of destabilising residues in the wild-type N-terminome. Our data suggest that PRT6 does not have a marked impact on the global proteome of Arabidopsis roots and is likely involved in the controlled degradation of relatively few regulatory proteins. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001719 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001719).

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Root, N-end rule, Tmt, Tails

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry and Crop Protection Department, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK
Plant Sciences and the Bioeconomy, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK

### Submitter
Hongtao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Frederica L. Theodoulou
Biological Chemistry and Crop Protection Department, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK


