### Accession
PXD041220

### Title
c-Myc uses Cul4b to preserve genome stability and promote CD8+ T cell-mediated antiviral immune responses

### Description
During infection, virus-specific CD8+ T cells undergo rapid bursts of proliferation and differentiate into effector cells that kill virus infected cells and reduce viral load. This rapid clonal expansion can put T cells at significant risk for replication-induced DNA damage. We found that c-Myc utilizes the E3 ubiquitin ligase, Cul4b, to inextricably link CD8+ T cell expansion to DNA damage response pathways. Following activation, c-Myc increased levels of Cul4b and other members of the CRL4 complex. Despite having abundant c-Myc expression, Cul4b-deficient CD8+ T cells were unable to expand and clear virus. Cul4b-deficient CD8+ T cells accrued DNA damage and succumbed to proliferative catastrophe early after antigen encounter. Mechanistically, Cul4b ablation induced a protracted accumulation of p21 and Cyclin E2 resulting in replication stress. Our data show that, to support cell proliferation, c-Myc must employ Cul4b to maintain genome stability, thereby directly coupling these two interdependent pathways. These data clarify how CD8+ T cells use c-Myc and Cul4b to sustain their potential for extraordinary population expansion, longevity and antiviral responses.

### Sample Protocol
Naïve CD8+ T cells were isolated by MACS from control and Cul4bcKO mice. Cells were stimulated for 40 hrs with anti-CD3/CD28 mAbs. After stimulation cells were harvested and cell pellets were stored at -80°C. For Chromatin enriched proteomics (ChEP) after 40 hr stimulation cells were treated with camptothecin for 2 hrs. The chromatin bound fraction was isolated as described above and enriched chromatin was stored at -80°C. Protein Extraction: Samples were solubilized in 50 µL of extraction buffer containing 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Affymetrix), 50mM TEAB (pH 8.5, Sigma), and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche cOmplete, EDTA free). To shear DNA and ensure complete solubilization, samples were sonicated for 10 minutes at 10°C in a Covaris R230 focused-ultrasonicator with the following settings: Dithering: Y=3.0, Speed=20.0, PIP: 360.0, DF: 30, CPB: 200. Samples were centrifuged at 3000g for 10 minutes to clarify lysate. 1 µL of each sample was taken to estimate protein concentration by in-gel staining with Bradford Coomassie solution and intensity analysis with GelAnalyzer 19.1, using a serial dilution of an in-house generated E.coli lysate standard.  In-Solution Digestion: 100ug of each sample was digested per the S-Trap Micro (Protifi) manufacturer’s protocol 69. Briefly, proteins were reduced in 5mM TCEP (Thermo), alkylated in 20mM iodoacetamide (Sigma), then acidified with phosphoric acid (Aldrich) to a final concentration of 1.2%. Samples were diluted with 90% methanol (Fisher) in 100 mM TEAB, then loaded onto an S-trap column and washed three times with 50/50 chloroform/methanol (Fisher) followed by three washes of 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB. A 1:10 ratio (enzyme: protein) of Trypsin (Promega) and LysC (Wako) suspended in 20 µL 50mM TEAB was added, and samples were digested for 1.5 hrs at 47 °C in a humidity chamber. After incubation, peptides were eluted with an additional 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB, followed by 40 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Pierce) in water, and finally 40 μL of 50/50 acetonitrile:water (Fisher) in 0.1% TFA. Eluates were combined and organic solvent was dried off via vacuum centrifugation. Samples were then desalted using an Oasis HLB µElution plate (30um, Waters). Wells were conditioned two times with 200 µL of acetonitrile and equilibrated three times with 200 µL of 0.1% TFA. Samples were applied, washed three times with 200 µL 0.1% TFA, and eluted directly into autosampler vials in three increments of 65 µL of 50:50 acetonitrile:water. Eluates were then dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA containing iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). Peptides were quantified with A280 measurement on a NanoDrop 1000 (Thermo) and adjusted to 0.4 µg/µL for injection. Generation of Spectral Library: The spectral library was generated by pooling peptides from each sample. This mix was lyophilized, solubilized in 2% acetonitrile with 5 mM ammonium formate pH 10 (Sigma 17843), and separated by high pH RP-HPLC into 72 fractions which were recombined in a concatenated fashion into 12 sub-fractions 70, 71. These were dried by vacuum centrifugation and solubilized in 0.1% TFA containing iRT peptides (Biognosys AG, iRT).

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Acquisition: Samples were randomized and analyzed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and an EasySpray source. Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 75um x 2cm trap column (Thermo) at 5uL/min, and separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm id × 50cm 2um PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90-minute gradient from 3% B to 45% B. For data dependent acquisition (DDA), the mass spectrometer was set with a master scan at R=120000, with a scan range of 300-1400, and standard AGC target. Maximum injection time was set to auto, and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds for one repeat. Charge state 2-5 were included. Top 15 data dependent MSMS scans were collected at R=45000, with first mass at 120, normalized AGC target at 300%, automatic maximum injection time, and HCD NCE at 30. For data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometer settings were as follows: one full MS scan at 120,000 resolution with a scan range of 350-1200 m/z and normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target of 300%, and automatic maximum inject time. This was followed by variable (DIA) isolation windows, MS2 scans at 30,000 resolution, a normalized AGC target of 1000%, and automatic injection time. The default charge state was 3, the first mass was fixed at 250 m/z, and the normalized collision energy for each window was set at 27. System Suitability and Quality Control: The suitability of Exploris 480 instrument was monitored using QuiC software (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) for the analysis of the spiked-in iRT peptides. Meanwhile, as a measure for quality control, we injected standard E. coli protein digest before in the middle of, and after sample set using DDA mode. The collected DDA data were analyzed in MaxQuant 72 and the output was subsequently visualized using the PTXQC73 package to track the quality of the instrumentation.  Database Searching: The raw files for spectral library were processed with Spectronaut version 16.274 using reference mouse proteome from Uniprot (25,436 reviewed canonical and isoform proteins) and the MaxQuant list of protein contaminants (245 proteins). The default settings in Spectronaut were used for spectral library generation with cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal Acetylation as variable modifications. The generated spectral library was composed of 191,028 precursors (8,310 protein groups) and was employed to process the individual DIA files. Protein MS2 intensity values were measured, and cross-run normalized by Spectronaut. Data were filtered out at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at precursor, peptide and protein level.  The DDA files were processed with MaxQuant (2.0.3.0) using a mouse reference database from Uniprot appended with sequences for protein contaminants. Carbamidomethyl of Cys was defined as a fixed modification. Oxidation of Met and Acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestion enzyme. The False Discovery Rate for precursors, peptides, and proteins were set at 1%. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The MS/MS tolerance was set at 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids. The rest of the parameters were kept as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd8+ t cells, Antiviral immune responses, Replication stress, E3 ubiquitin ligases, C-myc, Cul4b

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania Children's Hospital of Philadelphia 816F ARC, 3615 Civic Center Blvd. Philadelphia, PA 19104 267-426-2839
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Paula M. Olive, PhD
University of Pennsylvania Children's Hospital of Philadelphia 816F ARC, 3615 Civic Center Blvd. Philadelphia, PA 19104 267-426-2839


