### Accession
PXD016011

### Title
Pronucleotide probe for in vivo imaging of protein AMPylation.

### Description
Protein AMPylation is a prevalent posttranslational modification in human cells involved in the regulation of unfolded protein response and neural development. Here we present a novel pro-N6azA probe suitable for in vivo imaging and chemical proteomics profilling of AMPylated proteins. The pro-N6azA probe provides stable fluorescent labelling in living cells accesible by straightforward strain-promoted azide-alkyne click reaction. Application of this probe may contribute significantly to the analysis of protein AMPylation during various metabolic processes including neurodevelopment and unfolded protein response.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics. Enriched proteins were on beads digested in 200 μL digestion buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea). Proteins were reduced (0.2 μL 1 M DTT, 45 min, 25 °C) and alkylated (2 μL, 30 min, 25 °C, in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of 0.8 μL 1M DTT and incubation for 30 min at 25 °C. Proteins were pre-digested with 1 μL LysC (Wako) at 25 °C for 4 h. 600 μL 50 mM TEAB buffer was added and the proteins were digested overnight with 1.5 μL sequencing grade trypsin (0.5 mg/mL, Promega) at 37 °C. The following day the beads were settled and the supernatant was acidified with 10 μL formic acid to a pH of 2–3. Peptides were desalted and on-column dimethyl labelled using 50 mg SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters Corp.) on a vacuum manifold. The cartridges were equilibrated with 1 mL acetonitrile, 1 mL 80% acetonitrile and 3 mL 0.5% formic acid. The samples were loaded on the cartridges and subsequently washed with 5 mL 0.5% formic acid. Cartridges were subsequently washed with 2 mL 0.5% formic acid. The peptides were eluted with two times 200 μL 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid. DMSO and probe-treated samples were combined and dried by lyophilization. Peptides were reconstituted in 30 μL 1% (v/v) formic acid, prepared for mass spectrometry by filtering through a membrane filter (Ultrafree-MC and –LC, Durapore PVDF-0.22 μm, Merck Millipore) and transferred into mass vials. Experiments were conducted in 6 replicates (Competition experiment)and 8 replicates (Enrichment). Mass Spectrometry. MS analysis was either performed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% TFA and separated on a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100A, inner diameter 75 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) constantly heated at 50 °C. The gradient was run from 5-32% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid during a 152 min method (7 min 5%, 105 min to 22%, 10 min to 32%, 10 min to 90%, 10 min wash at 90%, 10 min equilibration at 5%) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q Exactive Plus instrument survey scans (m/z 300-1,500) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and the maximum injection time set to 80 ms (target value 3e6). Data dependent HCD fragmentation scans of the 12 most intense ions of the survey scans were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500, maximum injection time of 50 ms as well as minimum and maximum AGC targets of 5e3 and 5e4, respectively. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z. Unassigned and singly charged ions were excluded for measurement and the dynamic exclusion of peptides enabled for 60 s. The lock-mass ion 445.12002 from ambient air was used for real-time mass calibration on the Q Exactive Plus. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software version 3.1sp3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software with the Andromeda search engine. Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, 7th December 2018, including isoforms). At least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1 % FDR both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels. Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant result table proteinGroups.txt was done with Perseus 1.5.1.6. Putative contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Normalized LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, hits with less than 3 valid values in each group were removed, missing values were imputed from the total matrix and -log10(p-values) were obtained by a two-sided two sample Student's t-test over replicates with the initial significance level of p = 0.05 adjustment by the multiple testing correction method of Benjamini and Hochberg (FDR = 0.05), the -log10 of p-values were plotted against the log2 of geometric mean of LFQ ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Conjugation of proteins to AMP (AMPylation) is a prevalent post-translational modification (PTM) in human cells, involved in the regulation of unfolded protein response and neural development. Here we present a tailored pronucleotide probe suitable for in situ imaging and chemical proteomics profiling of AMPylated proteins. Using straightforward strain-promoted azide-alkyne click chemistry, the probe provides stable fluorescence labelling in living cells.

### Keywords
Ampylation, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
LMU Munich
Technical University of Munich Chair of Organic Chemistry II LichtenbergstraÃŸe 4 D-85748 Garching German

### Submitter
Pavel Kielkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Stepahn A. Sieber
Technical University of Munich Chair of Organic Chemistry II LichtenbergstraÃŸe 4 D-85748 Garching German


