### Accession
PXD021616

### Title
MLL4-associated condensates counterbalance Polycomb-mediated nuclear mechanical stress in Kabuki Syndrome

### Description
The genetic elements required to tune gene expression are partitioned in active and repressive nuclear condensates. Chromatin compartments include transcriptional clusters whose dynamic establishment and functioning depends on multivalent interactions occurring among transcription factors, cofactors and basal transcriptional machinery. However how chromatin players contribute to the assembly of transcriptional condensates has not been addressed. By interrogating the effect of KMT2D haploinsufficiency in Kabuki Syndrome, we found that MLL4 contributes in the assembly of transcriptional condensates through liquid-liquid phase separation. MLL4 loss-of-function impaired Polycomb-dependent chromatin compartmentalization, altering nuclear architecture. By releasing the nuclear mechanical stress through the inhibition of the mechano-sensor ATR, we re-established the mechano-signaling of mesenchymal stem cells and their commitment towards chondrocytes both in vitro and in vivo. This study supports the notion that in Kabuki Syndrome the haploinsufficiency of MLL4 causes an altered functional partitioning of chromatin, which determines the architecture and mechanical properties of the nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
Histone samples (20ug) were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and subjected to chemical derivatization and digestion as previously described (Sidoli et al. 2016 doi:10.3791/54112). Briefly, propionic anhydride solution was freshly prepared by mixing propionic anhydride with acetonitrile in the ratio 1:3 (v/v), creating the propionylation mix. Next, propionylation mix was added to the histone sample in the ratio of 1:4 (v/v), immediately followed by NH4OH with a ratio of 1:5 (v/v) to adjust the pH to ∼8.0. Samples were incubated for 15 min at 37°. Propionylation was repeated a second time after drying samples in a SpeedVac centrifuge. Samples were dried, dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested overnight with trypsin at an enzyme:sample ratio of 1:20. The digested peptides were then treated with an additional round of propionylation for the derivatization of peptide N-termini. After drying in a SpeedVac, the samples were desalted by C18 stage-tip, lyophilized, and resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples were analyzed using an EASY nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, 1 µg of sample was loaded on a 25 cm long Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 2µm particle size, 100Å pore size, id 75 µm) heated at 40°C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v). The gradient was as follows: from 5 to 34%B over 45 min, from 34 to 90% B in 5 min, and 90%B for 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS acquisition was performed using a data independent acquisition (DIA) mode (doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.5b03009). A full scan MS (300-1100 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap at 120.000 resolution (at 200 m/z FWHM), maximum injection time of 50ms and AGC value set to 4x10^5. Each MS was followed by 16MS/MS scan events spanning through the same mass range with a 50m/z isolation window. Each MS/MS spectrum was acquired in the ion trap with a maximum injection time of 150ms and the AGC target set to 1x10^4. Fragmentation was performed in the high-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) cell set at 27%.

### Data Protocol
To quantify histone PTMs, raw files obtained from the nanoLC-MS/MS runs were processed using EpiProfile (doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.046011., doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.8b00133), a software tool that uses precursor and fragment extracted ion chromatography (peak extraction mass tolerance set to 10 ppm) to separate isobaric forms of histone peptides and perform peak area integration. The relative abundance of a given PTM was calculated by dividing its area by the summed total area of all modified and unmodified forms for that given peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptm, Kabuki syndrome, Histone, Mass spectrometry, Epiprofile

### Affiliations
University of Trento
Laboratory of Chromatin Biology & Epigenetics, Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, 38123 Trento, Italy

### Submitter
Romina Belli

### Lab Head
Dr Zippo Alessio
Laboratory of Chromatin Biology & Epigenetics, Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology (CIBIO), University of Trento, 38123 Trento, Italy


