### Accession
PXD026380

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Estrogen Mediated Enhancement of MSC-Induced Angiogenesis in vivo

### Description
Therapeutic use of mesangial stem cells (MSCs) for tissue repair, including heart, has great potential. MSCs from multiple sources, including those derived from human umbilical matrix, namely Wharton's jelly, may serve as a resourceful candidate. Even after more than a decade, low engraftment efficacy of MSCs, in vivo, remains a limitation which requires in-depth understanding of the mechanisms and factors involved to facilitate a better and clinically relevant outcome. We recently hypothesized and demonstrated that the sex hormone – 17-beta estradiol (E2) – facilitates protective processes within the cardiovascular system by modulating MSC function, in vitro. Here, using a proteomic approach, we investigated the angiogenic potential of MSCs in vivo and the modulatory actions of E2 on mechanisms involved in tissue repair (potentially post-ischemic injury). Employing an in vivo approach with an ovariectomized (OVX) mice model, we evaluated the effects of E2 on MSC-induced angiogenesis using Matrigel plug assay.

### Sample Protocol
After excision of all plugs from OVX female mice and control animals, we proceeded to homogenize the Matrigel plugs for proteomic analysis of the resulting supernatants. For sample preparation of LC-MS analysis we washed the cells with PBS 1X solution; centrifuged them and solubilized the resulting pellet in denaturing buffer (8 M urea, 1% DOC, 0.1% Tris-HCl - pH 8.8) and protease inhibitors through sonication for 30 seconds on ice (UP50H Ultrasonic Processor, Teltow, Germany). The cellular debris was discarded following centrifugation at 18,000 g and the supernatant used for measurement of protein quantity using the Pierce BCA colorimetric technique (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA).  The samples were precipitated with acetone and the carbamidomethylated proteins subjected to the proteolysis process followed by purification using solid phase extraction.   Materials utilized are listed under Major-resource-table. We rigorously followed pro-tocol as previously described [22]. LC–MS assay was performed using EASY n-LC II sys-tem (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA) while mass spectra were obtained with a 60k-LTQ mass spectrometer - Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) managed the protein identification in UniProtKB/SwissProt Homo sapiens fasta database using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) search algorithm. The dynamic modifications comprised oxidation of me-thionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a static modification. The peptide target false discovery rate (FDR) was < 0.05. Sieve 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) was employed for label-free relative quantification analysis, in which a spectral abundance alteration of at least 1.5-fold was considered sig-nificant if p-value <0.05. Thereafter, we used FunRich (version 3.1.3) bioinformatics soft-ware to assess the functional enrichment analysis to identify overrepresented classes. Al-so, we performed analyses to attain the biological pathways, gene ontology categories, protein domains, site of expression, transcription factors, clinical phenotypes, extracellu-lar vesicles, miRNA enrichment, protein interaction network and cross database accession conversion. Moreover, we used FunRich to evaluate miRNAs enrichment analysis to iden-tify biological pathways that may be perturbed.  For more in-depth information, we used Reactome database tool to reveal the most important biological processes and pathways, and show the over-representation results that were obtained as a list of statistically over-represented pathways / subpathways).  The third analysis that we have employed for our proteomic data was using the Panther bioinformatics software or Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships. Being part of the Gene Ontology Reference Genome Project, Panther allows to further clas-sify and identify our data by the functionality of the proteins and their genes for high-throughput analysis. Panther analysis allows to discover the functionality processes of proteins/genes, such as pathways, biological processes, molecular functions and cellu-lar components. The proteomic data analysis was performed for three biological replicates, each one with three technological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Therapeutic use of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) for tissue repair has great potential. MSCs from multiple sources, including those derived from human umbilical matrix, namely Wharton's jelly, may serve as a resource for obtaining MSCs. However, low in vivo engraftment efficacy of MSCs remains a challenging limitation. To improve clinical outcomes using MSCs, an in-depth understanding of the mechanisms and factors involved in successful engraftment is required. We recently demonstrated that 17&#x3b2;-estradiol (E2) improves MSCs in vitro proliferation, directed migration and engraftment in murine heart slices. Here, using a proteomics approach, we investigated the angiogenic potential of MSCs in vivo and the modulatory actions of E2 on mechanisms involved in tissue repair. Specifically, using a Matrigel<sup>&#xae;</sup> plug assay, we evaluated the effects of E2 on MSCs-induced angiogenesis in ovariectomized (OVX) mice. Moreover, using proteomics we investigated the potential pro-repair processes, pathways, and co-mechanisms possibly modified by the treatment of MSCs with E2. Using RT-qPCR, we evaluated mRNA expression of pro-angiogenic molecules, including endoglin, Tie-2, ANG, and VEGF. Hemoglobin levels, a marker for blood vessel formation, were increased in plugs treated with E2 + MSCs, suggesting increased capillary formation. This conclusion was confirmed by the histological analysis of capillary numbers in the Matrigel<sup>&#xae;</sup> plugs treated with E2 + MSC. The LC-MS screening of proteins obtained from the excised Matrigel<sup>&#xae;</sup> plugs revealed 71 proteins that were significantly altered following E2 exposure, 57 up-regulated proteins and 14 down-regulated proteins. A major result was the association of over 100 microRNA molecules (miRNAs) involved in cellular communication, vesicle transport, and metabolic and energy processes, and the high percentage of approximately 25% of genes involved in unknown biological processes. Together, these data provide evidence for increased angiogenesis by MSCs treated with the sex hormone E2. In conclusion, E2 treatment may increase the engraftment and repair potential of MSCs into tissue, and may promote MSC-induced angiogenesis after tissue injury.

### Keywords
Angiogeneis, Proteomics, Msc

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology


