### Accession
PXD007863

### Title
Enzyme and Chemical Assisted N-Terminal Blocked Peptides Analysis, ENCHANT, as a Selective Proteomics Approach Complementary to Conventional Shotgun Approach

### Description
Shotgun (bottom-up) approach has been widely applied in large-scale proteomics studies. The inherent shortages of shotgun approach lie in that the generated peptides often overwhelm the analytical capacity of current LC-MS/MS systems and that abundant proteins often hamper the identification of proteins in low abundance for highly complex samples. To reduce the sample complexity and relieve the problems caused by abundant proteins, herein we introduce a modified selective proteomics approach, termed ENCHANT, for enzyme and chemical assisted N-terminal blocked peptides analysis. Modified from our previous Nα-acetylome approach, ENCHANT aims to analyze three kinds of peptides, acetylated protein N-termini, N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal cysteine containing peptides. Application of ENCHANT to HeLa cells allowed to identify 3,375 proteins, 19.6% more than that by conventional shotgun approach. More importantly, ENCHANT demonstrated an excellent complementarity to conventional shotgun approach with the overlap of 34.5%. In terms of quantification using data independent acquisition (DIA) technology, ENCHANT resulted in 23.9% more quantified proteins than conventional shotgun approach with the overlap of 27.6%. Therefore, our results strongly suggest that ENCHANT is a promising selective proteomics approach complementary to conventional shotgun approach in both qualitative and quantitative proteomics studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and harvest HeLa (Human epithelial carcinoma) Cells (ATCC) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum in humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C and were grown as monolayer cultures in 10 cm tissue culture plate. Then the cells were digested by trypsin and collected by 2,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 15 min, E. coli strain DH5α cultures were grown in Luria-Bertani medium (10 g/L NaCl, 10 g/L tryptone, and 5 g/L yeast extracts) at 37 °C overnight. E. coli cells were harvested by 2,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 15 min. C.elegans were grown on NGM agar plates seeded with E. coli strain OP50 at 20 °C. The adult animals were washed off the plate in M9 buffer (5 g/L NaCl, 3 g/L KH2PO4, 6 g/L Na2HPO4 and 1 mM MgSO4) and then were harvested by 5,000 g centrifugation at 20 °C for 1 min.  Preparation of Protein Sample  Cells or animals were washed three times with 500 µL PBS buffer and then resuspended in 20x lysis buffer (4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB). The slurry solution was submitted for a total of 6 min sonication (2 s sonication and 5 s intervals, total time of 21 min) in ice incubation, and then the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 20 °C. After centrifugation a volume of 20 µL of sample aliquot was kept for protein determination by Bradford assay. The protein solution was diluted to 1 mg/mL with buffer containing 100 mM TEAB and 4 M guanidine hydrochloride prior to the following application. The protein solution was reduced by 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 45 min and then alkylated by 30 mM IAM in dark (Shotgun and ENCHANT approaches) or 100 mM acrylamide (Nα-acetylome approach) for 1 h at room temperature. All reactions were carried out in a Thermomixer Comfort (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) with a vortex of 800 rpm. It should be mentioned that, as illustrated in Figure 2A, the following sample treatment methods were different for different approaches. Protein Digestion  The FASP method was adapted for protein digestion. Briefly, the samples were transferred to Microcon YM-10 filters and centrifuged at 13,800 g for three-time buffer displacement with either 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) for conventional shotgun and Nα-acetylome samples or 50 mM Na2HPO4 (pH 8.0) for ENCHANT samples. Before digestion the sample concentration was diluted to 0.5 mg/mL. Trypsin was added to reach a ratio of enzyme: protein as 1: 50 and the solutions were kept at 37 °C for overnight digestion.  Enzyme assisted cyclization/removal of N-terminal pyroglutamate (N-terminal pyroQ)  In ENCHANT, the digested samples were submitted to enzyme assisted cyclization of N-terminal pyroQ and N-terminal camCysteine. For 100 μg peptide sample, 300 mU Qcyclase was added and the solution was incubated at 37 °C for 2 h at pH 8.0. In Nα-acetylome approach, the digested samples were submitted to enzyme assisted removal of N-terminal pyroQ. For 100 μg peptide sample, 100 mU pGAPase was first activated by incubation with the same volume of activation buffer (10 mM DTT, 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) at 37 °C for 10 min and then added to the solution with 300 mU Qcyclase. The solution was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h at pH 8.0 with 5 mM DTT. The DTT was quenched by 10 mM acrylamide for 30 min at 37 °C.  Enrichment of N-terminal blocked peptides  Before enrichment, 1 M HCl was added to adjust the pH to 6.0, which was proven to allow CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B resin to specifically couple peptides via Nα-amine instead ε-amine. Twice-incubation enrichment was adapted but operated in Microcon YM-10 filters. The CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B resin was rehydrated in 10 volumes of 5 mM HCl (ice cold) and washed with 10 volumes of 1 mM HCl (ice cold) for three times just before use. For 100 μg peptide sample, 100 mg resin (wet weight) was added and the mix solution was incubated for 2 h at 30 °C by a 5 rpm end-over-end rotation using Elmi Intelli-Mixer RM-2. After the first incubation, another 50 mg resin (wet weight) was added to the filter for the second 2 h incubation. After the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 13,800 g, 200 μL of 10% ACN was added to wash the resin and then was collected by centrifugation. The two filtrates were pooled and dried in a Speedvac to remove ACN.  Sample desalting  The desalting was employed on a homemade Poros R3 microcolumn. The solution was acidified by formic acid and then loaded onto a homemade Poros R3 microcolumn. The salt was washed away by 10 μL of 1% TFA and the bound peptides were eluted by 10 μL of 30% ACN and followed by 10 μL of 60% ACN. The two elutes were pooled and dried in a Speedvac.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were first loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano Trap Column (5 μm, 100 Å, 100 μm i.d. × 2 cm, (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)) and then analyzed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. × 25 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA)). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 2-5% in 2 min, 5-28% B in 98 min, 28-35% B in 5 min and 35-90% B in 2 min and 90% B for 13 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Ionization was performed with 2.0 kV spray voltage applied on a distal coating PicoTip emitter (FS360-20-10-D-20, New Objective, Woburn, MA) with the source temperature of 275 °C. DDA method consisted of a survey scan from m/z 400 to 1,600 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 (automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and maximum ion injection time (IIT) of 100 ms) and followed 15 MS/MS scans of the most intense precursors using HCD (normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%; isolation width of 2 m/z; resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400; AGC target of 5e4 and maximum IIT of 100 ms). Dynamic exclusion for 60 s was applied with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.  For Nα-acetylome and ENCHANT approaches, Single-Charge Ion Inclusion (SCII) method was applied to allow fragmentation of single-charge ions. The known background ions were input in Reject Mass List to avoid MS/MS analysis. In shotgun approach, 1 µg sample was used for each analysis, whereas in Nα-acetylome and ENCHANT approaches, fraction enriched from 20 µg raw sample was used for each analysis. All experiments were carried out in triplicate.  DIA analysis The LC conditions in DIA analysis were as same as that for DDA analysis. To facilitate the retention time calibration and data analysis by Spectronaut (Biognosys, Switzerland, version 10.0.12817.8), HRM calibration kit was spiked into samples. The DIA method consisted of a survey scan from 400 to 1,600 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 and the followed 24 predefined MS/MS scans of contiguous precursor windows at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400. The widths of precursor window were set as 25 m/z in the range of 400-800 m/z, 50 m/z in the range of 800-1,000 m/z, and 150 m/z in the range of 1,000-1,600 m/z. The data were analyzed by Spectronaut using default settings. The detailed parameters were summarized in Supplementary Information. Database Searching and Data Analysis The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK). Human database (20160213, 20,186 sequences), C. elegans database (20130328, 20,791 sequences) and E. coli database (20161228, 4,304 sequences) were downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation on methionine and N-terminal pyroQ as variable modifications. The additional approach-specific parameters are follows: for Nα-acetylome approach, propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modification; for shotgun and ENCHANT approaches, carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification and ammonia-loss of N-terminal cysteine as variable modification. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value were used to validate the search results and only hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Shotgun (bottom-up) approach has been widely applied in large-scale proteomics studies. The inherent shortages of shotgun approach lie in that the generated peptides often overwhelm the analytical capacity of current LC-MS/MS systems and that high-abundance proteins often hamper the identification of low-abundance proteins when analyzing complex samples. To reduce the sample complexity and relieve the problems caused by abundant proteins, herein we introduce a modified selective proteomics approach, termed ENCHANT, for enzyme and chemical assisted N-terminal blocked peptides analysis. Modified from our previous N&#x3b1;-acetylome approach, ENCHANT aims to analyze three kinds of peptides, acetylated protein N-termini, N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal cysteine containing peptides. Application of ENCHANT to HeLa cells allowed to identify 3375 proteins, 19.6% more than that by conventional shotgun approach. More importantly, ENCHANT demonstrated an excellent complementarity to conventional shotgun approach with the overlap of 34.5%. In terms of quantification using data independent acquisition (DIA) technology, ENCHANT quantified 23.9% more proteins than conventional shotgun approach with the overlap of 27.6%. Therefore, our results strongly suggest that ENCHANT is a promising selective proteomics approach, which is complementary to conventional shotgun approach in both qualitative and quantitative proteomics studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007863.

### Keywords
Single-charge ion inclusion, N-terminal blocked peptides, Cnbr-activated sepharose 4b, Dia

### Affiliations
Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Jingnan Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


