### Accession
PXD010486

### Title
Control vs Elp3-deficient mouse myeloid progenitors 6-plex TMT LC-MSMS

### Description
6-plex TMT LC-MSMS quantification of proteins in myeloid progenitors (Lineage- Sca1- Kit+ cells) isolated from the bone marrow of 8-12 week old male and female control and Elp3-deficient (Elp3fl/fl vav-iCreT/+) mice. Biological triplicates of each genotype were analyzed, each consisting of 1.10e6 cells from pools of 12-14 control (Elp3fl/fl) or 26-38 (Elp3-deficient) male and female mice.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  Cells were FACS-sorted in PBS. Pellets were snap-frozen and stored at -80°C before processing. Cell pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer. The lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes. After centrifugation, the supernatants were collected and proteins were precipitated using the methanol-chloroform precipitation method. The protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1M TEAB/0.1% Rapigest (Waters Inc.) buffer, reduced with TCEP for 60 minutes at 55 °C, and then alkylated with iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The denatured proteins were digested with trypsin by incubating overnight at 37 °C. The peptide concentration of the tryptic digest was determined by amino acid analysis using Hitachi L-8900 Amino Acid Analyzer.  6-plex TMT MS/MS analysis  The tryptic digests were labeled with TMT-6plex isobaric reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Equal concentrations (5 µg) of tryptic digest (based on Amino Acid Analysis) from three control samples were labeled with TMT reagents 126, 128, and 130 and three knock-out samples were labeled with TMT reagents 127, 129, and 131. The six TMT labeled samples were combined and dried via SpeedVac. For fractionation, the dried TMT labeled mixture was redissolved in 200 µl of 0.06% TFA and injected into a Hewlett Packard 1090 LC system. The peptides were separated and eluted over a C18 column (Vydac, 1 mm ID x 250 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Catalog Number:218TP51) using a gradient that starts at 2% B (80% acetonitrile/0.052% TFA) and increases to 100% B in two hours at a flow rate of 0.100 mL/min. Sixty 200uL fractions were collected over the peptide elution time and then pooled to generate 10 pools. Five fractions in the beginning, which correspond to the column void volume, and five fractions at the end, where no peak was observed, were excluded before pooling. The fractions were pooled in the following order: for 50 viable fractions, pool 1 consists of fractions 6, 16, 26, 36, 46; pool 2 consists of fractions 7, 17, 27, 37, 47; and, so on. Pools were dried down via SpeedVac, resuspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water), and subjected to mass spectrometric analysis.  The pools were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer interfaced with a nanoACQUITY UPLC System at the front end. Samples were loaded into a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 180 µm × 20 mm, Product Number: 186006527) at a flowrate of 5 µl/min and separated with a C18 column (nanoACQUITY column Peptide BEH C18, 75 µm × 250 mm, Product number: 186003545).  The peptides were eluted with buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) gradient from 5 to 35% in 110 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min.  LC-MS/MS data were acquired using Top-20 data-dependent acquisition method. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z range 200-2000) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 1e6, and maximum injection time of 30 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 17,500, AGC target of 2e5, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The precursor ions were selected with an isolation window of 1.5 m/z and fragmented by higher-collisional energy dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies set to 27 and 32. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s to keep the repeat sequencing of peptides to minimum.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Scientific) software. The files were searched against mouse SwissProt database (downloaded in September 2015; number of protein entries = 16,710) using the Sequest HT algorithm. The search parameters include 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance. TMT6plex (229.1629) on N terminus and lysine and carbamidomethyl (57.02146) on cysteine were defined as static modifications; oxidation on methionine (15.9949) was defined as dynamic modification. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were verified based on q-values set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator. Peptide Relative protein quantification was also performed using Proteome Discoverer. For quantification, 50 ppm was used as an integration tolerance for reporter ion peaks.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Elongator, Hematopoiesis, Trna, Myeloid progenitor, Elp3

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, GIGA B34, Liege University
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology B34, GIGA-Research, CHU, Liege University, Avenue de l'Hopital, 1 4000 Liege Belgium

### Submitter
Christophe Desmet

### Lab Head
Dr Cristophe Jean Desmet
Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology B34, GIGA-Research, CHU, Liege University, Avenue de l'Hopital, 1 4000 Liege Belgium


