### Accession
PXD010859

### Title
Precisely measured protein lifetimes in the mouse

### Description
The turnover of brain proteins is critical for organism survival, and its perturbations are strongly linked to pathology. Nevertheless, precise protein lifetimes have been difficult to obtain in vivo. They are readily measured in vitro by feeding cells with isotopically-labeled amino acids, followed by mass spectrometry analyses. In vivo proteins are generated from at least two sources: labeled amino acids from the diet, and non-labeled amino acids from the degradation of pre-existing proteins. This renders measurements difficult. We solved this problem rigorously by developing a novel workflow that combines mouse in vivo isotopic labeling with mass spectrometry and mathematical modeling. We also established several independent approaches to test and validate the results. This enabled us to measure, for the first time, the accurate lifetimes of ~3500 brain proteins. The high precision of our data provided a large set of biologically-significant observations, including pathway-, organelle-, organ-, or cell-specific effects, along with a comprehensive catalogue of stable proteins, including novel extremely long-lived proteins (ELLPs).

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration of individual samples was determined with a BCA kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). For each sample, 100 µg of total protein was loaded on pre-casted NuPAGE gels (4 -15%, ThermoFisher Scientific). Gels were run at constant voltage, stained overnight with Coomassie Blue, and were destained with water. After destaining, each lane was cut into 23 gel pieces using an in-house-made gel cutter, and processed for in-gel digestion using trypsin (Serva). The eluted peptides were dried and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid solution, and were further processed for LC-MS in an online UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled online to the Q-Exactive-HF. Peptides were desalted on a reverse phase C18 pre-column (3 cm long, 100 μm inner diameter 360 μm outer diameter) for 3 minutes. After 3 minutes the pre-column was switched online with the analytical column (30 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) prepared in-house using ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm reversed phase resin. The peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 5-50% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at flow rate of 10 nl/min over 88 min and 58 min gradient time. The temperature of the pre-column and of the column was set to 50°C during chromatography. The MS data were acquired by scanning the precursors in mass range from 350 to 1600 Da at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. The top 30 precursor ions were chosen for MS2 by using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with maximum IT of 50 ms. For MS2, HCD fragmentation was performed with the AGC target fill value of 1e5 ions. The precursors were isolated with a window of 1.4 Da. The lock mass option (m/z 445.1200) was used for internal recalibration.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data was analysed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 based on the Andromeda search engine. The mouse UniProt database (downloaded on 2015.11; containing 16,727 reviewed entries) was used for identifying proteins. For defining the label on peptides, the multiplicity was selected to “2” and the label 13C6-lysine was ticked as heavy. Protein quantification was based on “unique and razor peptides” for a given protein. For each protein, at each one of the three time points (5, 14 and 21 days), three biological replicates and three technical replicates were measured (27 measurements in total for each type of sample). For the analysis of long-living proteins, we defined ad hoc a database of proteins that had longer lifetimes in our results, but we also included the previously described long-living proteins and the proteins that were identified only in the label-free fraction in all measured samples. For a more appropriate determination of the lifetimes of these long-living proteins we also used longer pulses (30 and 60 days). For the analysis of the peptides containing two lysines (mis-cleavage analysis), we designed a set of specific experiments. In these, 34 peptides were reliably measured in three different biological replicates in their zero-, one- and two-13C-lysine form. For the analysis of the in vivo double pulse data we used only the unique peptides that were reliably detected in all four forms (light, Lys6, Arg10 and Lys6-Arg10) with this pulsing scheme. For the amino acid pool modeling and lifetime determination please refer to the original manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
The turnover of brain proteins is critical for organism survival, and its perturbations are linked to pathology. Nevertheless, protein lifetimes have been difficult to obtain in vivo. They are readily measured in vitro by feeding cells with isotopically labeled amino acids, followed by mass spectrometry analyses. In vivo proteins are generated from at least two sources: labeled amino acids from the diet, and non-labeled amino acids from the degradation of pre-existing proteins. This renders measurements difficult. Here we solved this problem rigorously with a workflow that combines mouse in vivo isotopic labeling, mass spectrometry, and mathematical modeling. We also established several independent approaches to test and validate the results. This enabled us to measure the accurate lifetimes of ~3500 brain proteins. The high precision of our data provided a large set of biologically significant observations, including pathway-, organelle-, organ-, or cell-specific effects, along with a comprehensive catalog of extremely long-lived proteins (ELLPs).

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Neuron, Ellps, Brain turnover, Cortex, Protein lifetimes, Glia, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
University Medical Centre Göttingen, 
Georg-August-Universität

Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology University Medical Center Göttingen Humboldtallee 23 37073 Göttingen

### Submitter
Sunit Mandad

### Lab Head
Dr Silvio O. Rizzoli
Department of Neuro- and Sensory Physiology University Medical Center Göttingen Humboldtallee 23 37073 Göttingen


