### Accession
PXD016886

### Title
Structural diversity of toxins contained within the venom of the funnel web spider Hadronyche infensa.

### Description
The project aims to map the structural diversity of toxins contained within the venom of the funnel web spider Hadronyche infensa.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, 5 mg of milked venom pooled from three specimens was fractionated on a Shimadzu Prominence HPLC (Kyoto, Japan) using a Vydac C18 column (300 Å, 5 μm, 4.6 mm × 250 mm). Venom was eluted using a gradient of 5–80% solvent B (90% acetonitrile [ACN], 0.043% trifluoroacetic acid [TFA]) in solvent A (0.05% TFA) over 2 h. Twelve fractions were manually collected (one every 10 min) and absorbance was monitored at 214 nm and 280 nm. Fractions were lyophilized, reconstituted in ultrapure water, and 1/10 removed for proteomic analyses. Fractionated proteins and peptides were reduced with dithiotheitol (5 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 15% ACN, pH 8), alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mM in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 15% ACN, pH 8), and digested overnight with trypsin (30 ng/µL in 15 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 15% ACN, pH 8). Upon completion of digestion, formic acid (FA) was added to a final concentration of 5% and the digested samples desalted using a C18 ZipTip (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). Desalted, digested samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 0.5% FA, and 2 µg analysed by LC-MS/MS on an AB Sciex 5600TripleTOF (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) equipped with a Turbo-V source heated to 550°C and coupled to a Shimadzu Nexera UHPLC. Samples were fractionated on an Agilent Zorbax stable-bond C18 column (2.1 × 100 mm, 1.8 μm, 300 Å pore size) using a gradient of 1–40% solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 0.1% FA over 45 min, using a flow rate of 180 µL/min. MS1 survey scans were acquired at 300–1800 m/z over 250 ms, and the 20 most intense ions with a charge of +2 to +5 and an intensity of at least 120 counts/s were selected for MS2. The unit mass precursor ion inclusion window was ± 0.7 Da, and isotopes within ± 2 Da were excluded from MS2, which scans were acquired at 80–1400 m/z over 100 ms and optimized for high resolution.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against the translated annotated H. infensa venom-gland transcriptome using ProteinPilot v4.5.1 (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Searches were run as thorough identification searches, specifying tryptic digestion and cysteine alkylation by iodoacetamide. Decoy-based false discovery rates (FDR) were estimated by ProteinPilot; for protein identification we used a protein confidence cut-off corresponding to a local FDR of <1%. Spectra were also manually examined to further eliminate false positives.  We also searched the MS/MS data against the same transcriptome database with Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA), using a decoy-based FDR of <1 % as our cut-off. For the mascot search, we specified trypsin as our enzyme, allowed up to one missed cleavage, set the peptide tolerance to ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance to ± 0.1 Da, instrument to ESI-QUAD-TOF, cysteine carboxymethylation as fixed modification. As variable modifications, we included C-terminal amidation of peptides and proteins as well as pyroglutamate formation from N-terminal glutamine.

### Publication Abstract
Spiders are one of the most successful venomous animals, with more than 48,000 described species. Most spider venoms are dominated by cysteine-rich peptides with a diverse range of pharmacological activities. Some spider venoms contain thousands of unique peptides, but little is known about the mechanisms used to generate such complex chemical arsenals. We used an integrated transcriptomic, proteomic, and structural biology approach to demonstrate that the lethal Australian funnel-web spider produces 33 superfamilies of venom peptides and proteins. Twenty-six of the 33 superfamilies are disulfide-rich peptides, and we show that 15 of these are knottins that contribute &gt;90% of the venom proteome. NMR analyses revealed that most of these disulfide-rich peptides are structurally related and range in complexity from simple to highly elaborated knottin domains, as well as double-knot toxins, that likely evolved from a single ancestral toxin gene.

### Keywords
Toxin, Venom, Spider, Mascot, Proteinpilot

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway;  University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; University of Queensland, Brisbane Australia University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia

### Submitter
Eivind Undheim

### Lab Head
Dr Eivind Undheim, University of Queensland
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway;  University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; University of Queensland, Brisbane Australia University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia


