### Accession
PXD026563

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteomic profiling in prefrontal cortex of prenatal stressed offspring rats

### Description
We used MS-based TMT quantitative proteomics in combination with phosphopeptide enrichment method to compare phosphoproteomic profiling in prefrontal cortex of of PS-S and CON offspring rats.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, protein enzymolysis, and peptide TMT labeling After all behavioral tests, rats were sacrificed and the PFC was harvested. Tissue lysate was used to extract total protein from tissue (n =3) and the protein content was determined according to BCA Protein Measuring Kit instructions. Appropriate amount protein was taken from each sample and digested with trypsin according to FASP method[20]. The digest was desalted over a C18 cartridge and lyophilized, subsequently peptides were redissolved in 40uL dissolution Buffer and quantified by measuring absorbance at 280 nm (OD280).1μg peptides from each sample were labeled by TMT according to TMT-Labeling reagent kit(Thermo) instructions. Phosphopeptides enrichment The labeled peptide mixtures were pooled and vacuum-dried，then enriched by High-SelectTM Fe-NTA Phosphopeptides Enrichment Kit(Thermo Scientific).Phosphopeptides were concentrated using a vacuum and resuspended in 20 µl of 5% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS/MS Samples were loaded and separated using an Easy nLCnanoflow HPLC liquid phase system.A total of 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution and a 0.1% formic acid-84% acetonitrile-water solution were used as buffer A and buffer B, respectively. Following column equilibration 95% buffer A, the sample was injected via autosampler and loaded onto the column(Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100,100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18), separation was carried out on the analytical column (Thermo Scientific EASY column, 10cm, ID75μm, 3μm,C18-A2) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.After the separation by HPLC, the peptide samples were analyzed by a Q-Exactivemass spectrometer. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed in positive-ion mode, by a parent ion scan range of m/z 79, with the primary source with a resolution of 7000 at 200 m/z. AGC target was set to 1e6 with Maximum injection time of 50 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 60 s.The mass-to-charge ratios of polypeptides and polypeptide fragments are obtained by collecting 20 fragment patterns(MS2 scan) after each full scan at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z, by high energy collision dissociation (HCD), with the normalized collision energy to 30eV, and isolation window of 2 m/z, and the underfill ratio as 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
Original mass spectrometry data were in RAW files, MaxQuant software was used to perform database searches and quantitative analysis. The relevant parameters were defined as Table 1. Phosphopeptides were considered as differentially expressed according to the screening criteria of a fold change >1.2 (more than 1.2 or less than 0.83)and a p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Many investigations have indicated that prenatal stress (PS) causes depressive-like disturbances in offspring rats. However, the underlying pathogenic mechanisms have not yet been fully elucidated. The prefrontal cortex (PFC) has been shown to play a role in susceptibility to stress during fetal development; thus, we focused our attention on differential protein phosphorylation in this region of PS-S (susceptibility to PS) offspring rats. The sucrose preference test was used to screen for susceptibility to PS. The validity of the prenatally stressed model was verified by other common depression-like behaviors. We used MS-based TMT quantitative proteomics in combination with the phosphopeptide enrichment method to compare phosphoproteomic profiling in the PFC of PS-S and control male offspring rats. In total, 3,418 phosphoproteins, 8,404 phosphopeptides, and 12,175 phosphosites were identified in this analysis. According to the screening criteria, 902 phosphopeptides increased and 609 decreased in the PFC of the PS-S group compared to the control rats. Gene ontology enrichment analysis indicated that the main enriched terms in the cellular component category were "synapse part," "myelin sheath," "synapse," "neuron part," and "axon." The phosphoproteins enriched in the molecular function and biological process categories were mainly related to cytoskeleton- and projection morphogenesis-associated proteins. KEGG pathway enrichment analyses identified 30 significant KEGG pathways; the top five pathways included salivary secretion, endocrine and other factor-regulated calcium reabsorption, pancreatic secretion, and insulin secretion. Motifs such as &#x2026;&#x2026;_S_P&#x2026;RR, &#x2026;&#x2026;S_PE&#x2026;&#x2026;, &#x2026;&#x2026;_S_PV&#x2026;&#x2026;, &#x2026;&#x2026;_S_P.H&#x2026;&#x2026;, and &#x2026;S&#x2026;_S_PT&#x2026;. were the top five motifs enriched in phosphorylated sites. PS may induce depressive-like behaviors in male offspring rats by regulating the phosphorylation of proteins mainly related to synapses, myelin sheaths, neurons, and the cytoskeleton. The phosphorylation of related proteins may act as key pathogenic hits. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026563.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Depression, Prefrontal cortex, Prenatal stress

### Affiliations
Shaanxi Institute for Pediatric Diseases, Xi’an Children’s Hospital (The Affiliated Children’s Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University), Xi’an, Shaanxi, 86-710003, P.R. China
Shaanxi Institute for Pediatric Diseases, Xi'an Key Laboratory of Children's Health and Diseases, Xi’an Children’s Hospital (The Affiliated Children’s Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University), Xi’an, Shaanxi, 86-710003, P.R. China

### Submitter
Wei He

### Lab Head
Dr Hongli Sun
Shaanxi Institute for Pediatric Diseases, Xi’an Children’s Hospital (The Affiliated Children’s Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University), Xi’an, Shaanxi, 86-710003, P.R. China


