### Accession
PXD000695

### Title
In-depth proteomic analyses of ovarian cancer cell line exosomes reveals differential enrichment of functional categories compared to the NCI 60 proteome.

### Description
Molecular communication between cancer cells and its stromal microenvironment is a key factor for cancer progression. Alongside classic secretory pathways, it has recently been proposed that small membranous vesicles are alternative mediators of intercellular communication. Exosomes carry an effector-rich proteome with the ability to modulate various functional properties of the recipient cell. In this study, exosomes isolated from four epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR3, OVCAR433, OVCAR5 and SKOV3) were characterized using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using an optimized workflow consisting of efficient exosome solubilization and the latest generation of proteomic instrumentation, we demonstrate improved detection depth. Systematic comparison of our cancer cell line exosome proteome against public data (ExoCarta) and the recently published NCI 60 proteome revealed enrichment of functional categories related to signaling biology and biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were isolation from four established ovarian cancer cell lines through differential ultracentrifugation. Exosomes were lysed, reduced and alkylated using trifluoroethanol, dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide. Subsequently, extracted proteins were trypsin digested overnight followed by solid phase extraction for peptide clean up. For each sample, 2 ug of peptides was loaded on column. Samples were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000 and QExactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was searched using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 using the UniProt complete human proteome protein sequence database (version: 2012-07-19). False discovery was controlled using a target/decoy approach with false discovery level set to 1% (for peptides and proteins). Only protein groups identified with at least two or more peptides (sum of razor and unique) were carried forward in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular communication between cancer cells and its stromal microenvironment is a key factor for cancer progression. Alongside classic secretory pathways, it has recently been proposed that small membranous vesicles are alternative mediators of intercellular communication. Exosomes carry an effector-rich proteome with the ability to modulate various functional properties of the recipient cell. In this study, exosomes isolated from four epithelial ovarian cancer cell lines (OVCAR3, OVCAR433, OVCAR5 and SKOV3) were characterized using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Using an optimized workflow consisting of efficient exosome solubilization and the latest generation of proteomic instrumentation, we demonstrate improved detection depth. Systematic comparison of our cancer cell line exosome proteome against public data (Exocarta) and the recently published NCI 60 proteome revealed enrichment of functional categories related to signaling biology and biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Exosome, Proteomics, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Princess Margaret Cancer Center, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Medical Biophysics

### Submitter
Thomas Kislinger

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Kislinger
Princess Margaret Cancer Center, Toronto, ON, Canada.


