### Accession
PXD001603

### Title
Signaling pathways altered at the mitotic spindle in clathrin depleted cells

### Description
We present a snapshot of the regulation of mitotic-spindle proteins and their phosphorylation status in the absence of clathrin during metaphase. A reference list of proteins and phosphosites identified from a mitotic spindle preparation was generated using a label-free and a parallel chemical dimethyl isotopic peptide labelling approach. We further designed experiments to analyse proteins and phosphosites at the mitotic spindle whose abundance was affected by the knock-down of clathrin. We used dimethylation labelling of peptides in combination with fractionation strategies to identify and quantify phosphopeptides enriched by TiO2 beads and the flow-through non-phoshopeptides by ESI-LC-MS/MS for a broad coverage of the mitotic spindle proteome in the absence of clathrin.

### Sample Protocol
We combine mitotic spindle isolation with dimethylation peptide labelling, TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment, high pH reverse phase elution of phosphopeptides and strong cation exchange of non-phosphopeptides for an extensive coverage of the spindle proteome.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from each sample generated on the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany).  Peak lists were searched against the UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens (downloaded 16th September 2013). Deamidation (N/Q), oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S/T/Y) were specified as variable modifications.  The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin, including cleavage before proline.  The first search and main search were set to 20 and 6 ppm, respectively allowing up to 3 missed cleavages and a maximum of 7 modifications per peptide.  MS/MS search parameters were set as follows: the MS/MS tolerance for FTMS and ITMS were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively (default setting).  “Methylthio” was used as a fixed modification, the protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05 for the analysis of phosphopeptides while the site FDR was set to 0.01.  Only phosphopeptides with a localization probability >0.75 were reported. For the non-phosphopeptide analysis, an FDR of 0.01 was used both for peptide, protein and site FDR.  The minimum peptide length was set to 5.  Minimum peptides for quantification was set to 2 using ‘unique and razor peptides’.  A reversed database was searched to determine the FDR.  All other parameters were the default settings.  The phospho and nonphosphopeptide raw files were processed separately and so were files from Analysis 1 and Analysis 2 approaches as depicted in Figure E2. The proteinGroups.txt output file from MaxQuant (nonphosphopeptide datset) was imported into Microsoft Excel for further analysis. The proteinsGroups.txt file thus processed separately from Analysis 1 and Analysis 2 were then combined manually. Reversed database identification and contaminants were deleted.  The average ratios from the same protein found from both analyses was used. Protein abundance ratios (CHC/Luc) from each biological replicate were averaged and only those ratios determined from 3 or more replicates for each protein are reported.  Significance tests (t-test) were carried out on log2 transformed ratios and proteins with a p value < 0.05 were considered significant. The Phospho(STY).txt output file from MaxQuant was imported into Microsoft Excel.  The Phospho(STY).txt file thus processed separately from Analysis 1 and Analysis 2 were then combined manually. Phosphopeptides with p >0.75 were classified as Class I peptides. Peptides with the same phosphosite position were grouped and averaged (including Class II peptides with p<0.75 within the same group). If however, there were no Class I peptides found within the grouped peptides, the phosphopeptides were eliminated from analysis.  Each phosphopeptide ratio (CHC/Luc) was divided by the respective protein abundance ratio generated above for each respective biological replicate, to correct for differences in protein abundance.  There were instances where the protein ratio was not available to apply a correction (i.e. either non-phosphorylated peptides were not detected for that protein or the respective protein abundance ratio was not detected within a biological replicate). Such ratios/instances were not considered for phosphorylation abundance analysis (The uncorrected list of all phosphopeptides of presented in Table E7). After correction, the average ratio for each phosphopeptide was calculated across the 6 biological replicates. Only phosphopeptides that were detected in 3 or more replicates are reported.  Significance tests were carried out on log2 transformed ratios and phosphosites with p value < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
The mitotic spindle is required for chromosome congression and subsequent equal segregation of sister chromatids. These processes involve a complex network of signaling molecules located at the spindle. The endocytic protein, clathrin, has a "moonlighting" role during mitosis, whereby it stabilizes the mitotic spindle. The signaling pathways that clathrin participates in to achieve mitotic spindle stability are unknown. Here, we assessed the mitotic spindle proteome and phosphoproteome in clathrin-depleted cells using quantitative MS/MS (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001603). We report a spindle proteome that consists of 3046 proteins and a spindle phosphoproteome consisting of 5157 phosphosites in 1641 phosphoproteins. Of these, 2908 (95.4%) proteins and 1636 (99.7%) phosphoproteins are known or predicted spindle-associated proteins. Clathrin-depletion from spindles resulted in dysregulation of 121 proteins and perturbed signaling to 47 phosphosites. The majority of these proteins increased in mitotic spindle abundance and six of these were validated by immunofluorescence microscopy. Functional pathway analysis confirmed the reported role of clathrin in mitotic spindle stabilization for chromosome alignment and highlighted possible new mechanisms of clathrin action. The data also revealed a novel second mitotic role for clathrin in bipolar spindle formation.

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-ms/ms, Chc knock-down, Scx, Dimethylation, High ph reverse phase, Tio2

### Affiliations
Cell Cycle Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, 214 Hawkesbury Road, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Sushma Rao

### Lab Head
Dr A/Prof. Megan Chircop
Cell Cycle Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, 214 Hawkesbury Road, Westmead, NSW 2145, Australia


