### Accession
PXD036712

### Title
Lignocellulose-rich residues in anaerobic digestion

### Description
In this study, a complex microbial community from a semi-continues reactor, which only substrate is wheat straw, was incubated in a batch experiment with 13C-cellulose. protein stable isotope probing (protein-SIP) was used to identify the organisms, at high taxonomic resolution, involved in the degradation of cellulose by tracking the incorporation of 13C in the newly synthetized proteins. Thereby providing information regarding identity and function simultaneously and enable the optimization of biotechnologies for biofuels production.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed using liquid-liquid extraction using TEAB (0.05 M TEAB buffer stock, 1.0 mg/L NaDOC, pH ≤ 8) as resuspension buffer. Extracted proteins were digested using in-gel digestion protocol, following desalting and analysis of tryptic peptides by automated liquid chromatograph-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
To identify the peptides/proteins a search using OMSSA in an OpenMS pipeline, with the precursor mass tolerance set to 5 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance to 0.01 Da, and false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%. RIA and the labelling ratio (LR) were determined using OpenMS and the MetaProSIP tool with a minimum correlation of 0.7 and a mass window of 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
The biogas produced through anaerobic digestion (AD) of renewable feedstocks is one of the promising alternatives to replace fossil-derived energy. Even though lignocellulosic biomass is the most abundant biomass on earth, only a small fraction is being used towards resources recovery, leaving a great potential unexploited. In this study, the combination of state-of-art genomic techniques and engineered systems were used to further advance the knowledge on biogas production from lignocellulosic-rich residues and the microbiome involved in the anaerobic digestion hereof. A long-term adapted anaerobic microbiome capable of degrading wheat straw as the sole substrate was investigated using protein stable isotope probing (protein-SIP). The results indicated that a diverse microbial community, primarily composed of Firmicutes and Methanogens, played crucial roles in cellulose degradation and methane production. Notably, Defluviitoga tunisiensis, Syntrophothermus lipocalidus, and Pelobacter carbinolicus were identified as direct metabolizers of cellulose, while Dehalobacterium assimilated labelled carbon through cross-feeding. This study provides direct evidence of primary cellulose degraders and sheds light on their genomic composition. By harnessing the potential of lignocellulosic biomass and understanding the microbial communities involved, we can promote sustainable biogas production, contributing to energy security and environmental preservation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Lignocellulose, Anaerobic digestion

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, 9220 Aalborg E, Denmark
Department of Biology, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Jan Struckmann Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jeppe Lund Nielsen
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University, Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H, 9220 Aalborg E, Denmark


