### Accession
PXD039409

### Title
Characterization of spatial heterogeneity in metastasized colorectal cancer by MALDI imaging

### Description
About 50% of colorectal cancer patients develop liver metastases. Patients with metastatic colorectal cancer have 5-year survival rates below 20% despite new therapeutic regimens. Tumor heterogeneity has been linked with poor clinical outcome, but was so far mainly studied via bulk genomic analyses. In this study we performed spatial proteomics via MALDI mass spectrometry imaging on six patient matched CRC primary tumor and liver metastases to characterize interpatient, intertumor and intratumor hetereogeneity. We found several peptide features that were enriched in vital tumor areas of primary tumors and liver metastasis and tentatively derived from tumor cell specific proteins such as annexin A4 and prelamin A/C. Liver metastases of colorectal cancer showed higher heterogeneity between patients than primary tumors while within patients both entities show similar intratumor heterogeneity sometimes organized in zonal pattern. Together our findings give new insights into the spatial proteomic heterogeneity of primary CRC and patient matched liver metastases.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue specimens were formalin-fixed directly after surgical removal and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) as previously described 28. All tissue specimens were reviewed by an experienced pathologist to confirm diagnosis of colorectal adenocarcinoma and ensure the presence of vital tumor tissue. 6 µm thick sections of the FFPE tissue blocks were sliced with a microtome and mounted onto indium tin oxide (ITO) coated glass slides (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany).The sliced and mounted tissue slides were deparaffinized according to a standard procedure 28 and prepared for MALDI imaging measurement as previously described 29. Samples were rinsed 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, heated at 100°C for 1 hour in citrate buffer for antigen retrieval, twice rinsed in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate and dried at room temperature. Trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA) was sprayed over the whole slide using the iMatrixSpray (Tardo GmbH, Subingen, Switzerland, parameters: height: 60 mm, line distance: 1 mm, speed: 180 mm/s, density: 0.5 μL/cm3, cycles: 10, delay: 15 s, pressure: 1.6 bar). The specimen was placed in a digestion chamber containing a saturated potassium sulfate solution according to Ly et al. 30 and incubated at 50°C for 2 hours. 10 mg/ml alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA, Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany) matrix was prepared in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. A custom internal calibration mix including 0.08 µg/ml Angiotensin I (Anaspec, Seraing, Belgium), 0.04 µg/ml Substance P (Anaspec, Seraing, Belgium), 0.15 µg/µl [Glu]-Fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany), and 0.30 µg/µl ACTH fragment (18-39) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was prepared 31 and mixed with the matrix solution with a ratio of 1:12 (v/v). The matrix/calibrant mix was sprayed across the slide with the iMatrixSpray (parameters: height: 60 mm, line distance: 1 mm, speed: 180 mm/s, density: 0.5 μL/cm3, cycles: 20, delay: 5 s, pressure: 1.6 bar). Teach marks were added manually in all 4 tissue corners by scratching a small cross into the slide surface and painting over it with a xylene resistant pen (LabID Technologies, BH 's- Hertogenbosch, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The Analyze7.5 MALDI imaging files were uploaded to the European Galaxy cloud (https://usegalaxy.eu), where the large majority of MALDI imaging data analysis was performed using previously developed mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) Galaxy tools and workflows 32,33. To obtain information about the tissue outline and annotated tumor areas in the H&E image, image co-registration of the H&E image and MALDI image was performed, according to a previously published workflow based on teachmarks and affine transformation in the Galaxy framework 29,33. Raw MALDI imaging data was assessed with the MSI qualitycontrol tool using the internal calibrant peaks as reference peaks with mass range of 200 ppm. The samples were assessed for imaging artefacts, spectra quality including m/z accuracy and intensity variation. The findings were used to confirm sufficient data quality and find suitable preprocessing parameters. Before preprocessing only spectra from the tissue areas were kept while spectra from the slide background were removed. The detailed preprocessing parameters are listed in Table S1, including resampling, smoothing, baseline removal, m/z recalibration using the internal calibrants, peak picking, alignment and filtering, contaminants removal. Exemplary Galaxy workflow for preprocessing is displayed in Figure S1. As samples were separately measured, a common peak list was extracted by combining all preprocessed samples, removing empty m/z bins and exporting the m/z features. This list was used for peak integration of the raw data of the single, total ion current (TIC) normalized files. Between each preprocessing step, the MSI qualitycontrol tool was applied to monitor and optimize preprocessing parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer; metastasis; tumor heterogeneity; spatial proteomics; mass spectrometry imaging; maldi imaging; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues

### Affiliations
Universitätsklinik Freiburg
Institute for Surgical Pathology, Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Lennart Moritz

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Föll
Institute for Surgical Pathology, Medical Center and Faculty of Medicine - University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany


