### Accession
PXD043503

### Title
dia-PASEF analysis of human amygdala in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
dia-PASEF analysis of human amygdala in Parkinson’s disease

### Sample Protocol
Frozen unfixed samples were homogenized in 0.4 ml of radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), agitated and centrifugated. The supernatant was collected. Supernatant samples were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. Pellet was dissolved in 100 μl of RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters). Total protein was measured using the Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and 25 μg of protein were digested using the iST kit (PreOmics, Germany). Peptides were diluted using LC-MS H2O 0.1% (v/v) formic acid to 10 ng/μl. 200 ng of peptides were loaded onto Evotips (Evosep) for purification. Pierce Hela tryptic Digest Standard (Thermo Scientific) was also loaded for quality control. LC-MS/MS was carried out using a Evosep One LC system (Evosep) coupled to a TIMS Q-TOF instrument (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics) via a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive Spray Source, Bruker Daltonics). Samples were separated with the predefined 60 sample per day method (21 min gradient time, 200 ng peptides), on a reverse-phase analytical column 8 cm X 150 μm, C18 1.5 μm (EV1109) heated to 40 ºC. Mobile phases were H2O and acetonitrile, buffered with 0.1% formic acid (LC-MS grade, Fisher Scientific). To build the MS/MS spectral libraries a pool of equal mixtures of the original samples were analyzed using dda-PASEF and the individual samples were analyzed using dia-PASEF. The acquisition modes recording spectra from 475 to 1,000 m/z. Ion mobility resolution was calibrated with three Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix ions (mass spectra, ion mobility: 622.0289 m/z, 0.9848 Vs cm−2; 922.0097 m/z, 1.1895 Vs cm−2; 1221.9906 m/z, 1.3820 Vs cm−2) and set to 0.85-1.30 Vs cm−2. dda-PASEF consisted of four PASEF MS/MS. The accumulation of ions and the ramp times parallel to the scans were 100 ms, with a total cycle time of 0.53 s. Any individually charged ions were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Moreover, precursors that reached the target value of 20,000 were excluded for 0.4 min. A Q window of ± 2 Da for m/z <700 and ± 3 Da for m/z >800 was used for isolating precursors. The 12 most intense ions were fragmented. For dia-PASEF, 21 non-overlapping windows of 25 Da were set, making a total cycle time of 0.95 s. The collision energy was decreased linearly from 45 eV at ion mobility of 1.30 Vs cm−2 to 27 eV at 0.85 Vs cm−2 in both dda-PASEF and dia-PASEF methods.

### Data Protocol
FragPipe (17.1), which includes MSFragger (3.4), and EasyPQP (0.1.25) components were used to build spectral libraries. Peptide identification was performed using MSFragger. Databases of H. sapiens protein sequences (UP000005640) from UniProt (reviewed sequences only; Apr 2021) and common contaminating proteins, which containing 20382 total sequences, were used. Inverted protein sequences were added to the original databases. The initial mass tolerance was set at 70 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. Trypsin was set as above with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were established as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation was established as fixed. A range from 7 to 50 amino acids peptide length and 500 to 5,000 Da peptide mass was set. A maximum of 3 variable modifications per peptide were fixed. PeptideProphet was used to calculate the probability of correct identification of peptides for spectrum matching and to assemble peptides into proteins. Philosopher Filter was used to assign each identified peptide as a razor peptide to a single protein or protein group that had the greatest peptide evidence. False discovery rate was set to 1% for peptide spectrum match or ion/peptide and protein identification. EasyPQP was used for aligning peptides to a common indexed retention time scale and peptides ion mobility to that from one of a reference runs automatically selected. Final spectral library was filtered at 1% false discovery rate at peptide and protein level. DIA-NN 1.8 (https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN/releases/tag/1.8) was used for dia-PASEF analysis and operated with maximum mass tolerances set to 15 ppm. The samples were analyzed with run-to-run pairing (match between ranks) enabled. Protein inference in DIA-NN was configured to use the assembled proteins in the spectral library. Protein.Group column in the DIA-NN report was used to identify the protein group and PG.MaxLFQ label free quantification was used to obtain the normalized amount. Tables generated by Philosopher were used to identify proteotypic peptides. The quantification mode was set to "Any LC (high precision)". All other settings were left as default. The DIA-NN output was filtered at q value < 1% for precursor and protein. The FDR validation was filtered to include only unmodified peptides or with carbamidomethylated cysteines, oxidized methionines, or excised N-terminus of methionines. The library was screened for precursors/proteins with 2-4 charge range and 100.0-1700.0 m/z mass range.

### Publication Abstract
&#x3b1;-Synuclein, a protein mostly present in presynaptic terminals, accumulates neuropathologically in Parkinson's disease in a 6-stage sequence and propagates in the nervous system in a prion-like manner through neurons and glia. In stage 3, the substantia nigra are affected, provoking motor symptoms and the amygdaloid complex, leading to different nonmotor symptoms; from here, synucleinopathy spreads to the temporal cortex and beyond. The expected increase in Parkinson's disease incidence accelerates the need for detection biomarkers; however, the heterogeneity of this disease, including pathological aggregates and pathophysiological pathways, poses a challenge in the search for new therapeutic targets and biomarkers. Proteomic analyses are lacking, and the literature regarding synucleinopathy, neural and glial involvement, and volume of the human amygdaloid complex is controversial. Therefore, the present study combines both proteomic and stereological probes. Data-independent acquisition-parallel accumulation of serial fragmentation proteomic analysis revealed a remarkable proteomic impact, especially at the synaptic level in the human amygdaloid complex in Parkinson's disease. Among the 199 differentially expressed proteins, guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(i) subunit alpha-1 (GNAI1), elongation factor 1-alpha 1 (EEF1A1), myelin proteolipid protein (PLP1), neuroplastin (NPTN), 14-3-3 protein eta (YWHAH), gene associated with retinoic and interferon-induced mortality 19 protein (GRIM19), and orosomucoid-2 (ORM2) stand out as potential biomarkers in Parkinson's disease. Stereological analysis, however, did not reveal alterations regarding synucleinopathy, neural or glial populations, or volume changes. To our knowledge, this is the first proteomic study of the human amygdaloid complex in Parkinson's disease, and it identified possible biomarkers of the disease. Lewy pathology could not be sufficient to cause neurodegeneration or alteration of microglial and astroglial populations in the human amygdaloid complex in Parkinson's disease. Nevertheless, damage at the proteomic level is manifest, showing up significant synaptic involvement.

### Keywords
Human, Amygdala, Parkinson

### Affiliations
University of Castilla-La Mancha
University of Castilla-La Mancha (lab head)

### Submitter
Alicia Flores

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Alino Martinez-Marcos
University of Castilla-La Mancha (lab head)


