### Accession
PXD022506

### Title
Discovery of biomarkers in radioresistant MCF7R breast cancer xenografts

### Description
Radioresistance of tumors is not completely understood. Our previous studies have shown that MCF-7 breast cancer cell line exposed to 6 Gy and allowed to recover for 7 days (D7-6G) developed radio-resistance. In this study, we have tested the ability of these cells to form tumors in SCID mice and characterized these tumors by proteomic analyses. Untreated (MCF-C) and D7-6G cells (MCF-R) were injected s.c. in SCID mice and tumor growth monitored. On day 18, the mice were sacrificed and proteins were extracted from tumor tissues label free proteomic analyses was carried out by LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues stored in RNA later were homogenized and used for MS analyses. Proteins were extracted from tumour tissues in buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS, 0.5% SDS in HPLC grade water), by sonication at 20% amp., 1 sec on/ 2 sec off cycle for 10 min followed by centrifugation at 14000 RPM for 30 min at 40C. Supernatant was collected and 6 volume of ice cold acetone was added slowly and kept overnight at-200C. Precipitate formed was collected after centrifugation. Acetone was allowed to evaporate from the samples. The pellets were dissolved in 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) + 6 M urea buffer. Protein estimation was carried out by Bradford assay and 100 µg of total protein was used for further process.  Denaturation and reduction of protein samples: Samples were denatured and reduced according to manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 100 µg of protein was denatured with 2% Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and reduced with (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) (TCEP) at 600C for 1 h and cysteine residues were blocked with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 30 minutes in dark at room temperature (RT), followed by trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C. The peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and fractionated by cation exchange (SCX) cartridge system (Sciex, USA). The dried sample was reconstituted with 8 mM ammonium formate (AF)/25% acetonitrile (ACN) (pH 3.0) and eluted from the column using 50 to 500 mM AF/25% ACN (pH 3.0). Three fractions were obtained. The dried fractions were purified through ZipTip pipette tips C18 (Merck-Millipore, USA), eluted with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 80% ACN and dried with vacuum centrifuge. The samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in H2O and analysed by LC MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on O-HRLCMS-72 and Thermo EASY-nLC from SAIF facility at IIT BOMBAY. LC-MS analysis: Samples were introduced into the EASY-nLC 1200 instrument (Thermo scientific, USA), using the analytical Column: PepMap RSLC C18 2µm, 100A x 50 cm. Pre-column used was Acclaim PepMap 100, 100µm x 2cm nanoviper. Mobile phase consisted of solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile; wash solvent 3:0.1% formic acid. Temperature was maintained at 300C and the flow rate was 4.0 µl/min. The samples were injected (12 µL) into the HPLC system in acetonitrile. The MS and MS/MS studies were performed on Thermofisher Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) using electrospray ionization source and orbitrap mass analyser. For ionization, heated electrospray ionization source was used and heater temperature was 4500C and capillary of the ESI interface was 2500C. As sheath gas and auxiliary gas, nitrogen was used. The electro spray set at 4.5 kv and tube lens was set at 90 V. The mass spectrometer was operated in full scan MS. The selected range was from 100 to 1000 m/z and the resolution was 70,000 full width half maximum (FWHM) with an isolation window applied

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for MS/MS searches and protein quantitation. SEQUEST algorithm was used for database searches with NCBI RefSeq human protein database. The search parameters included trypsin as the protease with maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed; oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification while static modifications included carbamidomethyl (alkylation) at cysteine. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by carrying out decoy database searches and peptides scoring better than 1% FDR score cut-off were considered for further analysis

### Publication Abstract
Our previous studies have shown that MCF-7 breast cancer cell line exposed to 6&#x2009;Gy and allowed to recover for 7 days (D7-6G) developed radio-resistance. In this study, we have tested the ability of these cells to form tumors in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice and characterized these tumors by proteomic analyses. Untreated (MCF-C) and D7-6G cells (MCF-R) were injected s.c. in SCID mice and tumor growth monitored. On Day 18, the mice were killed and tumor tissues were fixed in formalin or RNA later. Expression of genes was assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and proteins by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay/antibody labeling and flow cytometry. Label free proteomic analyses was carried out by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Metabolic analysis was carried out using Seahorse analyzer. MCF-R cells had a shorter latency and formed larger tumors. These tumors were characterized by an increased expression of transforming growth factor&#xa0;&#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) isoforms; its downstream genes pSMAD3, Snail-1, Zeb-1, HMGA2; hybrid epithelial/mesenchymal phenotype; migration, enrichment of cancer stem cells and radioresistance following challenge dose of radiation. Proteomic analysis of MCF-7R tumors resulted in identification of a total of 649 differentially expressed proteins and pathway analyses using protein annotation through evolutionary relationship indicated enrichment of genes involved in metabolism. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022506. Seahorse analyzer confirmed increased metabolism in these cells with increased oxidative phosphorylation as well as glycolysis. Increased uptake of 2-NBDG further confirmed increased glycolysis. In summary, we demonstrate that radioresistant breast cancer cells had an enrichment of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling and increased metabolism.

### Keywords
Mcf7, Xenografts, Radioresistance, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
Head, Immunology Section, Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre

### Submitter
Bhavani Shankar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Bhavani Shankar
Head, Immunology Section, Radiation Biology & Health Sciences Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre


