### Accession
PXD005012

### Title
Identifying SAM-binding proteins in D.melanogaster

### Description
The aim of the project is to identify proteins the ustilize S-adenosyl methionine as cofactor for performing methylation of target molecules in D. melanogaster S2 cells. For this purpose, we applied a small-molecule capturing protocol using a SAH-capture compound with UV-activated crosslinker and biotin immobilization groups. We tested the protein affinity with and without crosslinking for two different photo-activatable crosslinkers benzophenone and nitrobenzene, respectively, as well as different concentrations of the capture compound. As control we incubated the cell lysate with the streptavidin beads without adding the capture compound. Two specific capture compounds containing a S-adenosyl homocysteine as capturing functionality and either benzophenone or azo-benzene as reactive crosslinkers as well as a biotin group for affinity purification were tested in this protocol.  One sample representing a HeLa cell lysate (Waters) under equal conditions was added to the dataset.

### Sample Protocol
1.5 ug protein extract of D. melanogaster S2 cells were incubated with 5 uM SAH-capture compound and crosslinked by UV irradiation for 5 min. Subsequently, proteins were immobilized to strepavidin beads via the biotin-group of the capturing compound. Aftrer washing of unspecific binders, proteins were eluted with Lämmli-buffer and separated via SDS-PAGE. The gel lanes for each sample were cut into 8 regular slices which were treated as individual fractions of each IP experiment. Proteins were digested in gel using trypsin as protease, as described elsewhere. Three IP experiment were digested directly on the beads using trypsin digestion, to compare different sample preparation protocols. All samples were desalted on C18-stage tips. All samples were analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS on a Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system with 15 cm reversed phase column (Dr Maisch Reprosil-AQ C18, 150x0.075 mm x 3 um, 100 A, packed in house) using a 120 min gradient. For mass spectrometry analysis, a data-depedent acquisition method consisting of one survey scan at high resolution from 300 to 1250 m/z and up to 30 MS/MS scans was applied. MS/MS experiments were conducted using collision-induced dissociation in a quadrupol on peptide precusor ions of 2+ to 5+ charge state with a signal abundance of more than 100 c/s. Fragmentation energies were optiized for each charge state by the vendor. Acquisition times were 250 ms for the survey scan and up to 150 ms for each MS/MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw Data were subjected to peptide identification and protein mapping by MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. against a D.melanogaster protein database from Flybase. Proteins were identified based on their flybase entry number (FBppX). For PSMs an FDR rate of 1% was selected, protein and site specific FDR-rates were 5%, respectively. Acetylation (Protein N-term.) and oxidation were set as variable modification, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
S-adenosyl methionine, Capture compound, Methylation, Fragmentation

### Affiliations
CECAD, University of Cologne, AG Krüger
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP LMU Munich, BioMedical Center Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 71804

### Submitter
Andreas Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Protein Analysis Unit ZfP LMU Munich, BioMedical Center Grosshaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried Tel. +49 89 2180 71804


