### Accession
PXD033887

### Title
Proteome of the wood decay fungus Fomitopsis pinicola is altered by substrate

### Description
The brown rot fungus, Fomitopsis pinicola strain FP-58527, was cultivated in media containing ground Populus tremuloides, Pinus taeda or Picea glauca wood as sole carbon source. Mass spectrometry analyses identified proteins likely involved in the degradation of lignocellulose. Patterns of enzymes detected varied with substrate.

### Sample Protocol
Two-liter flasks containing 250 ml of basal salt media were supplemented with 1.25 g of ground and sieved (#10 screen) quaking aspen (Populus tremuloides), loblolly pine (Pinus taeda) or white spruce (Picea glauca) wood as the sole carbon source. Media was inoculated with Fomitopsis pinicola strain FP-58527 and placed on a rotary shaker (150 RPM). After five days incubation at 22-24C, cultures were filtered through Whatman GF/C filters followed by Corning 0.22 um polystyrene filters (cat.430531). Filtrate proteins were precipitated with 10% (wt/vol) trichloroacetic acid. Three replicated cultures were harvested for each wood species. NanoLC-MS/MS was used to identify proteins. Equal amounts of total protein per sample were trypsin/LysC digested, OMIX C18 SPE purified (Agilent Technologies), and finally 2µg loaded for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an Agilent 1100 nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies) connected to a hybrid linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Elite™, ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source. Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 3µM, 100Å, 150x0.075mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) onto which 2µl of purified peptides was automatically loaded. NanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid , and B: 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.50 µL/min to load the peptides (over a 30 minute period) and 0.3µl/min to elute peptides directly into the nano-electrospray with gradual gradient from 3% (v/v) B to 20% (v/v) B over 154 minutes and concluded with 12 minute fast gradient from 20% (v/v) B to 50% (v/v) B at which time a 5 minute flash-out from 50-95% (v/v) B took place. As peptides eluted from the HPLC-column/electrospray source, survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, followed by MS2 fragmentation of 20 most intense peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 380 to 1800 m/z; redundancy was limited by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development) for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against forward and decoyed-reversed F. pinicola protein database via the JGI portal (https://mycocosm.jgi.doe.gov/Fompi3/Fompi3.info.html) with a list of common lab contaminants (available at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP ) to establish False Discovery Rate (37,222 total entries) using in-house Mascot search engine 2.2.07 [Matrix Science] with variable methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, plus fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for spectral based quantification and to validate MS/MS peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spruce, Fomitopsis pinicola proteome, Pine, Wood decay, Aspen substrate

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, USDA Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, WI

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel Cullen
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, USDA Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, WI


