### Accession
PXD020858

### Title
Mass spectrometry characterization of light chain fragmentation sites in cardiac AL amyloidosis: insights into the timing of proteolysis

### Description
Amyloid fibrils are polymeric structures originating from aggregation of misfolded proteins. In vivo, proteolysis may modulate amyloidogenesis and fibril stability. In light chain (AL) amyloidosis, fragmented light chains (LCs) are abundant components of amyloid deposits; however, site and timing of proteolysis are debated. Identification of the N- and C-termini of LC fragments is instrumental to understanding involved processes and enzymes. We investigated the N- and C-terminome of the LC proteoforms in fibrils extracted from the hearts of two AL cardiomyopathy patients, using a proteomic approach based on derivatization of N- and C-terminal residues, followed by mapping of fragmentation sites on the structures of native and fibrillar relevant LCs. We provide the first high-specificity map of proteolytic cleavages in natural AL amyloid. Proteolysis occurs both on the LCs’ variable and constant domains, generating a complex fragmentation pattern. The structural analysis indicates extensive remodeling, by multiple proteases, largely taking place on poorly folded regions of the fibril surfaces. This study adds novel important knowledge on amyloid LCs processing: although our data do not exclude that proteolysis of native LC dimers may destabilize their structure and favor fibril formation, they show that LC deposition largely precedes the proteolytic events documentable in mature AL fibrils.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of amyloid fibrils from diseased cardiac tissue followed by derivatization of the free terminal carboxyl and amino groups of the LC, followed by MS-based identification of the labeled residues.LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC RSLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-spray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using the Sequest HT-based search engine contained in the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software, version 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloid fibrils are polymeric structures originating from aggregation of misfolded proteins. <i>In vivo</i>, proteolysis may modulate amyloidogenesis and fibril stability. In light chain (AL) amyloidosis, fragmented light chains (LCs) are abundant components of amyloid deposits; however, site and timing of proteolysis are debated. Identification of the N and C termini of LC fragments is instrumental to understanding involved processes and enzymes. We investigated the N and C terminome of the LC proteoforms in fibrils extracted from the hearts of two AL cardiomyopathy patients, using a proteomic approach based on derivatization of N- and C-terminal residues, followed by mapping of fragmentation sites on the structures of native and fibrillar relevant LCs. We provide the first high-specificity map of proteolytic cleavages in natural AL amyloid. Proteolysis occurs both on the LC variable and constant domains, generating a complex fragmentation pattern. The structural analysis indicates extensive remodeling by multiple proteases, largely taking place on poorly folded regions of the fibril surfaces. This study adds novel important knowledge on amyloid LC processing: although our data do not exclude that proteolysis of native LC dimers may destabilize their structure and favor fibril formation, the data show that LC deposition largely precedes the proteolytic events documentable in mature AL fibrils.

### Keywords
Proteolysis, Cardiomyopathy, Proteomics, Amyloid fibrils, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Amyloidosis Treatment and Research Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo and University of Pavia, Italy
Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo

### Submitter
Giulia Mazzini

### Lab Head
Dr Giovanni Palladini
Amyloidosis Treatment and Research Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo and University of Pavia, Italy


