### Accession
PXD041119

### Title
O-GlcNAc crosstalks with ADP-ribosylation via PARG

### Description
O-GlcNAc glycosylation is a prevalent protein post-translational modification (PTM) that occurs intracellularly. Previous investigations have demonstrated that O-GlcNAcylation crosstalks with phosphorylation and ubiquitination, but it is unclear whether it interplays with other PTMs. Here we studied its relationship with ADP-ribosylation, which involves decorating target proteins with the ADP-ribose moiety. We discovered that one ADP-ribosylation “eraser”- ADP-ribose glycohydrolase (PARG)- is O-GlcNAcylated at Ser26. O-GlcNAcylation of PARG is essential to maintain its nuclear localization and chromatin association. In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, PARG O-GlcNAcylation enhances DNA damage-binding protein 1 (DDB1) poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) and attenuates its ubiquitination. DDB1 is thus stabilized and degrades its downstream targets, such as c-Myc. We further utilized mouse xenograft models and demonstrated that PARG-S26A promoted HCC. Our study thus revealed that PARG O-GlcNAcylation inhibits HCC, and we propose that O-GlcNAc glycosylation may crosstalk with many other PTMs.

### Sample Protocol
The gel band pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, incubated in 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56 oC for 40 min, incubated in 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at ambient temperature for 1 hr in the dark, and dehydrated again. Then the gel pieces were digested in-gel with 2 ng/μL sequencing grade trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were extracted twice with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile, then vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. All samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA in water prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using a SwissProt homo sapiens database (TaxID=9606 and subtaxonomy, 42253 protein sequences).  Carbamidomethyl (Cys) were chosen as static modification, and oxidation (Met) was chosen as variable modification. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Maximum missed cleavages was set as 2. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using the Percolator algorithm, based on q-values at a 1% FDR at both peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) glycosylation, a prevalent protein post-translational modification (PTM) that occurs intracellularly, has been shown to crosstalk with phosphorylation and ubiquitination. However, it is unclear whether it interplays with other PTMs. Here we studied its relationship with ADP-ribosylation, which involves decorating target proteins with the ADP-ribose moiety. We discovered that the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation "eraser", ADP-ribose glycohydrolase (PARG), is O-GlcNAcylated at Ser26, which is in close proximity to its nuclear localization signal. O-GlcNAcylation of PARG promotes nuclear localization and chromatin association. Upon DNA damage, O-GlcNAcylation augments the recruitment of PARG to DNA damage sites and interacting with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, PARG O-GlcNAcylation enhances the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of DNA damage-binding protein 1 (DDB1) and attenuates its auto-ubiquitination, thereby stabilizing DDB1 and allowing it to degrade its downstream targets, such as c-Myc. We further demonstrated that PARG-S26A, the O-GlcNAc-deficient mutant, promoted HCC in mouse xenograft models. Our findings thus reveal that PARG O-GlcNAcylation inhibits HCC, and we propose that O-GlcNAc glycosylation may crosstalk with many other PTMs.

### Keywords
Parg, Poly(adp-ribosyl)ation, Hepatocellular carcinoma, O-glcnacylation, C-myc

### Affiliations
Peking University

### Submitter
Wen Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Zhou
Peking University


