### Accession
PXD041756

### Title
Cryphonectria parasitica mitochondria LC-MS/MS

### Description
Here we report a comprehensive and comparative study comprising mitochondrion quantification, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and respiratory efficiency, and quantitative mitochondrial proteomics of the wild-type and virus-infected strains of the chestnut blight fungus. Our data show that hypovirus infection increases the total number of mitochondria, lowers the general ROS level, but increases the mitochondrial respiratory efficiency. Quantification of mitochondrial proteomes revealed that a set of proteins functioning in energy metabolism and mitochondrial morphogenesis as well as virulence were regulated by the virus.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of mitochondria Fungal mitochondrial samples were extracted and purified following the method described by Meisinger et al with modifications. Briefly, funPreparation of mitochondria Fungal mitochondrial samples were collected from EP liquid medium and ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. One gram of powder was mixed with 5 ml of homogenate buffer (600 mM sorbitol, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF) and vortexed with pre-cold glass beads of 1 mm diameter for 8 min on ice. The mixture was centrifuged at 1,500 g for 5 min at 4 °C, and then the supernatant was centrifuged at 3,000 g for another 5 min to remove insoluble debris. The fungal mitochondria were pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C and dissolved in SEM buffer (250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM MOPS, pH 7.2). The crude mitochondrial preparation could be stored at -80°C or used for sucrose gradient centrifugation immediately. For purification, an amount of 400 μl of crude mitochondrial preparation was loaded onto a 15% to 60% (w/v) sucrose gradient in EM buffer (10 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 1 mM EDTA) and subject to ultracentrifugation at 134,000 g for 1 h using SW41 rotor (Beckman Coulter, USA). The purified mitochondria were recovered from the interface, diluted with two volumes of SEM buffer, and pelleted by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in SEM buffer for electron microscopy or protein labeling for TMT analysis. The concentration of purified mitochondrial proteins was measured using Bradford method. Preparation of mitochondrial total, membrane-associated and matrix proteins An amount of 20 mg of sucrose gradient-purified mitochondria was used to extract proteins. The resultant protein samples were dissolved in SEM buffer and kept at -20 °C. The membrane and matrix proteins of mitochondria were separated by membrane and cytosol protein extraction kit (Beyotime, China). For matrix proteins extraction, purified mitochondrial preparation was mixed with Buffer A (10% m/v) and kept on ice bath for 10 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 700 g for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was collected and further centrifuged at 1,4000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove debris. The mitochondrial matrix protein-containing supernatant was collected and stored at -80 °C for future use. The pellet which contains membrane protein, was vortexed with Buffer B (25% m/v) for 10 min at 4 °C and then centrifuged at 1,4000 g for 5 min at4 °C. The membrane protein-containing supernatant was collected and stored at -80 °C for future use. Labeling and fractionation of protein peptides Reduction, alkylation, trypsin digestion, and labeling of mitochondrial samples were performed according to the instruction of the manufacture (Tandem Mass Tag Reagents, Thermo Scientific, USA). The peptides were labeled with TMT-labeled peptide samples were pooled and subject to fractionation by using a PolyLC polysulfoethyl aspartamide column (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 5 μm, 300A pore size) on Waters 2695 HPLC system. The SCX fractions were further separated by reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RPLC) and the gradient elution was carried out on a RP-C18 column with buffer A (0.1% methanoic acid) and buffer B (0.1% methanoic acid, 84% acetonitrile) . LC-MS/MS analysis The mixed peptides were analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific, USA) using data-dependent mode (MS scan range from m/z 350 to 1800)

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, USA) software was used to analyze the raw data with SEQUEST search engine against C. parasitica database v2.0 (26 genome scaffolds totaling 43.9 MB, 11,609 gene models) download from JGI website (https://mycocosm.jgi.doe.gov/Crypa2/Crypa2.home.html). Search parameters were set as followed: precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.8 Da, maximum 2 missed cleavages using trypsin as endoprotease, lysine residues as fixed modification, peptide N-termini as variable modification, and false discovery rate (FDR) for maximum 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Cryphonectria parasitica, Lc-ms/ms, Hypovirus

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources and College of Life Science and Technology, Guangxi University
Guangxi Minzu University

### Submitter
Jinzi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Baoshan Chen
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources and College of Life Science and Technology, Guangxi University


