### Accession
PXD030540

### Title
SRSF1 as a novel interacting partner for IFITM1/3 unravels the emergent role of IFITM1/3 mediating protein expression

### Description
IFITM proteins play a role in cancer cell progression through undefined mechanisms. Recent data demonstrated that interferon induced transmembrane 1 and 3 (IFITM1/3) proteins are required for the interferon gamma (IFNγ) stimulated synthesis of a subset of IFN-stimulated proteins; including human leukocyte antigen B (HLA-B).  SBP-tagged IFITM1 protein was used to identify an association of IFITM1 protein with the cytosolic isoform of serine and arginine rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1). This cytosolic association was confirmed in situ using proximity ligation assays for SRSF1 and IFITM1/3 suggesting a role associated with translation. Accordingly, IFITM1/3 were shown to interact with HLA-B mRNA in response to IFNγ stimulation using RNA-protein proximity ligation assays. In addition, shotgun RNA sequencing in IFITM1/IFITM3 null cells and wt-SiHa cells indicated that reduced HLA-B gene expression does not account for lowered HLA-B protein synthesis in response to IFNγ. Furthermore, ribosome profiling by using sucrose gradient sedimentation identified a reduction in 80S ribosomal fraction an IFITM1/IFITM3 null cells compared to their wild-type counterpart, partially reverted by IFITM1/3 complementation. Taking all together, these data link the binding of IFITM1/3 proteins to HLA-B mRNA and SRSF1 as a mechanism to catalyze the synthesis of target proteins suggesting an RNA chaperonin role for IFITM1/3 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins eluted after SBP pull down were processed by the filter-aided sample preparation protocol method (FASP) according to a workflow described in Gómez-Herranz et al. Briefly, protein concentration was determined using the RC-DC protein assay (Bio-rad, USA). Approximately 100 µg of protein dissolved in 20 mM HEPES pH 8, 2 mM DTT, and 8 M Urea was added to a 10 kDa spin filter column (Microcon, Merck-Millipore, USA), on-filter reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested to peptides. Tryptic peptides were then desalted using C18 micro-spin columns (Harvard Apparatus, USA). Tryptic peptides from isotopically labeled cells were separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (µ-precolumn, 30 µm i.d., 5 mm length, C18 PepMap 100, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and separated using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm i.d., length 500 mm, C18, particle size 2 µm, pore size 100 Å). The flow rate was 300 nl/min with a linear gradient as follows: 2 % B over 4 min, 2 – 40 % B over 64 min, 40 – 98 % B over 2 min, with A = 0.1% aq. formic acid and B = 80% AcN in 0.08% aq. formic acid. The peptides eluting from the column were injected into an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) operating in Top20 data dependent acquisition mode. Scanning was set to 400 – 2000 m/z performed at 120 000 resolution.  The AGC target was 1 x 106 with a 200 ms injection time and twenty data-dependent MS2 scans (1 microscan, 10 ms injection time and 10 000 AGC).

### Data Protocol
The SILAC data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and the Mascot search engine with the following search settings: a human database, Swiss-Prot (April 2016); enzyme- trypsin; 2 missed cleavage sites; a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da; modification included: carbamidomethyl [C], oxidation [M], acetyl [protein N-terminus]. The search results were used to generate the final report with a 1% FDR on both PSM and peptide groups. SILAC labels of R6 and K6 were chosen for heavy and R0 and K0 for light. The relative quantification value was represented as heavy/light ratio (Supplementary Table 1).

### Publication Abstract
The IFITM restriction factors play a role in cancer cell progression through undefined mechanisms. We investigate new protein-protein interactions for IFITM1/3 in the context of cancer that would shed some light on how IFITM1/3 attenuate the expression of targeted proteins such as HLA-B. SBP-tagged IFITM1 protein was used to identify an association of IFITM1 protein with the SRSF1 splicing factor and transporter of mRNA to the ribosome. Using in situ proximity ligation assays, we confirmed a predominant cytosolic protein-protein association for SRSF1 and IFITM1/3. Accordingly, IFITM1/3 interacted with HLA-B mRNA in response to IFN&#x3b3; stimulation using RNA-protein proximity ligation assays. In addition, RT-qPCR assays in IFITM1/IFITM3 null cells and wt-SiHa cells indicated that HLA-B gene expression at the mRNA level does not account for lowered HLA-B protein synthesis in response to IFN&#x3b3;. Complementary, shotgun RNA sequencing did not show major transcript differences between IFITM1/IFITM3 null cells and wt-SiHa cells. Furthermore, ribosome profiling using sucrose gradient sedimentation identified a reduction in 80S ribosomal fraction an IFITM1/IFITM3 null cells compared to wild type. It was partially reverted by IFITM1/3 complementation. Our data link IFITM1/3 proteins to HLA-B mRNA and SRSF1 and, all together, our results begin to elucidate how IFITM1/3 catalyze the synthesis of target proteins. IFITMs are widely studied for their role in inhibiting viruses, and multiple studies have associated IFITMs with cancer progression. Our study has identified new proteins associated with IFITMs which support their role in mediating protein expression; a pivotal function that is highly relevant for viral infection and cancer progression. Our results suggest that IFITM1/3 affect the expression of targeted proteins; among them, we identified HLA-B. Changes in HLA-B expression could impact the presentation and recognition of oncogenic antigens on the cell surface by cytotoxic T cells and, ultimately, limit tumor cell eradication. In addition, the role of IFITMs in mediating protein abundance is relevant, as it has the potential for regulating the expression of viral and oncogenic proteins.

### Keywords
Isoform of serine and arginine rich splicing factor 1, Ribosome, Crispr/cas, Interferon, Interferon induced transmembrane 1 and 3, Mrna, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institutre, Zluty kopec 7, Brno 656 53, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Lenka Hernychova

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Ted Hupp
The University of Edinburgh


