### Accession
PXD007601

### Title
Comparison of targeted mass spectrometry techniques with an immunoassay: a case study for HSP90 alpha, part 2

### Description
We developed 2D-LC-MS/MS-based SRM and PRM assays to measure HSP90 alpha in serum and compared the results to a commercially available immunoassay (ELISA). Serum samples were trypsin-digested and fractionated by SCX chromatography prior to SRM and PRM measurements. PRM data obtained by high-resolution mass spectrometry correlated better with ELISA measurements than SRM data measured on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. While all three methods (SRM, PRM, ELISA) were able to quantify HSP90 alpha in serum at the ng/mL level, the use of PRM on a high-resolution mass spectrometer reduced variation. To rule out that the observed differences in SRM and PRM are due to different mass spectrometry systems, the SCX fractions were measured on the same high-resolution instrument (Orbitrap) in the ion trap mode (IT-PRM); such measurements showed that intense co-eluting signals were present in the SRM method, but these interfering peaks were eliminated in the high-resolution PRM mode. Thus, this report shows that it is possible to measure ng/mL levels of HSP90 alpha in a reproducible, selective and sensitive way using PRM. This opens up the possibility to quantify low levels of multiple proteins in complex samples based on a fractionation strategy on tryptic peptides followed by SRM and PRM.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative measurements of HSP90 in the 43 SCX-fractionated serum digests was performed targeting the two proteotypic peptides YIDQEELNK and DQVANSAFVER. The peptides were selected after analyzing a tryptic digest of recombinant HSP90 alpha (Genway Biotech Inc, San Diego, CA) by LC-MS/MS, since they generated the most intense fragment ions. The tryptic digest was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) online coupled to a hybrid linear ion trap / Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five microliter digest were loaded onto a C18 trap column (C18 PepMap, 300µm ID x 5mm, 5µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Dionex, The Netherlands) and desalted for 10 minutes using a flow rate of 20 µL /min. The trap column was switched online with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 μm ID x 150 mm, 3 μm particle and 100 Å pore size; Dionex, The Netherlands) and peptides were eluted with the following binary gradient: 0% - 50% eluent B in 60 min, where eluent A consisted of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in ultra-pure water and eluent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in water. The column flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. For MS/MS analysis a data dependent acquisition method was used: a high resolution survey scan from 400 – 1800 m/z was performed in the Orbitrap (automatic gain control (AGC) 106, resolution 30,000 at 400 m/z; lock mass set to 445.120025 m/z). Based on this survey scan the 5 most intense ions were consecutively isolated (AGC target set to 104 ions) and fragmented by collision-activated dissociation (CAD) applying 35% normalized collision energy in the linear ion trap. Once a precursor had been selected, it was excluded for 3 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and assigned to proteins by exporting features, for which MS/MS spectra were recorded, using the Bioworks software package (version 3.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific; peak picking by Extract_msn, default settings). Resulting. mgf file was submitted to Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK) and applied to the human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, version 151112, 20194 entries) for protein identifications. The following parameters were used: fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da, parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, maximum number of missed cleavages of two. In the Mascot search engine oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, Scx, Serum, Prm, Srm, Elisa

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology Neurology Clinical & Cancer Proteomics the Netherlands

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology Neurology Clinical & Cancer Proteomics the Netherlands


