### Accession
PXD035622

### Title
Mitochondrial interactome quantitation reveals structural changes in metabolic machinery in the failing murine heart

### Description
Advancements in cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) for structural analysis of proteins bridge the gap between purified systems and native tissue environments. Here, isobaric quantitative protein interaction reporter technology (iqPIR) was utilized to further extend XL-MS to the first system-wide comparative study of mitochondrial proteins from healthy and diseased murine hearts.  The failing heart interactome includes 588 statistically significant cross-linked peptide pairs altered in the disease condition. Structural insight into ketone-oxidation metabolons, OXPHOS machinery, and nucleotide transporter hybrid-conformations support mitochondrial remodeling in failing hearts while bringing forth new hypotheses for pathological mechanisms. The application of quantitative cross-linking technology in tissue provides molecular-level insight into complex biological systems challenging to model in cell culture, thus providing a valuable resource for studying human diseases.

### Sample Protocol
100 µg of mitochondria pellet from each of 6 TAC animals and sham animals were solubilized in 8 M Urea 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0 buffer, followed by reduction with 5mM TCEP, alkylation with 10 mM IAA, 1:4 dilution with 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0, and then overnight digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptide samples were desalted and analyzed in technical duplicate by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry using an Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).   Each analysis used a 1 μL injection of sample using 120 min LC gradient as described in the session above.  The resulting raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant (Ver 2.0.1.0) with searching against mouse sequence database downloaded from Uniprot on 09/23/2019 and 2 minimum LFQ ratio count used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative cross-linking; heart failure; cardiac hypertrophy; mitochondria; protein interactions; interactome; mass spectrometry; systems structural biology

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

### Submitter
Xiaoting Tang

### Lab Head
Dr James E Bruce
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


