### Accession
PXD037264

### Title
Pig liver postnatal vs adult proteome analysis

### Description
During the perinatal period, unique metabolic adaptations support energetic requirements for rapid growth. To gain insight into perinatal adaptations, quantitative proteomics were performed comparing the livers of yorkshire pigs at postnatal day seven and adult. These data revealed differences in the metabolic control of liver function including significant changes in lipid and carbohydrate metabolic pathways.  Newborn livers showed an enrichment of proteins in lipid catabolism and gluconeogenesis concomitant with elevated liver carnitine and acylcarnitines levels.  Sugar kinases were some of the most dramatically differentially enriched proteins comparing neonatal and adult pigs including galactokinase 1 (Galk1), ketohexokinase (KHK), hexokinase 1 (HK1) and hexokinase 4 (GCK).  Interestingly, hexokinase domain containing 1 (HKDC1), an enigmatic  fifth hexokinase associated with glucose disturbances in pregnant women was highly enriched in the liver during the prenatal and perinatal periods and continuously declined throughout postnatal development in pigs and mice.  These changes were confirmed via Western blot and mRNA expression. These data provide new insights into the developmental and metabolic adaptations in the liver during the transition from the perinatal period to adulthood in multiple mammalian species.

### Sample Protocol
Liver protein was extracted from liver with equal masses using RIPA buffer with protease inhibitors.  TCA/Acetone Precipitation: 50ug of proteins were reduced with 50mM Dithiothreitol in 10 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) at 60°C for 45min. Then, 100 mM Iodoacetamide in 10 mM TEAB was added to the samples and kept in the dark at room temperature for 15 minutes. 50 ug of protein were precipitated by adding eight volumes of 10% trichloroacetic acid in cold acetone at -20°C for 2 hours to remove the MS interfering reagents. The pellet was centrifuged at 4°C at 16,000 g for 10 minutes, and the TCA/acetone supernatant was removed. Then, the pellet was washed with 8 volumes of acetone for 10 minutes at -20°C previous to centrifuging at 16,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C.  The acetone supernatant was removed from the protein pellet.  Isobaric Mass Tag Labeling: 100 uL100 mM TEAB with five ug Trypsin/Lys-C was used to resuspend and digest the ten pellets (50 ug each); these were kept at 37°C overnight. TMT 10-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher, LOT # TJ268848) was used to label each sample according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Afterward, the 10 TMT-labeled peptides were mixed and dried by vacuum centrifugation.   Peptide fractionation: 100 µL 200mM TEAB buffer was used to re-constitute the 500ug of TMT-labeled peptides. Then, the samples were filtered through Pierce Detergent removal columns (Fisher Scientific PN 87777) to eliminate the excess lipids, small molecules, and TMT label. Peptides in the flow through were diluted in 2 mL in 10 mM TEAB in water and then loaded on an XBridge C18 Guard Column (5 µm, 2.1 x 10 mm, Waters) at 250 µL/min for 8 min. Then, peptides in the flow through were diluted to 2 mL in 10 mM TEAB in water and loaded on an XBridge C18 Guard Column (5 µm, 2.1 x 10 mm, Waters) at 250 µL/min for 8 min. Subsequently, a 0 to 90% acetonitrile in 10 mM TEAB gradient was used for fractionation on an XBridge C18 Column (5 µm, 2.1 x 100 mm column (Waters) over 85 min at 250 µL/min on an Agilent 1200 series capillary HPLC with a micro-fraction collector. Twenty-four fractions were linked together from eight-four 250 ul fractions according to Wang et al. 2011 (Proteomics 11: 2019-2026. PMC3120047) and then dried.   Mass Spectrometry analysis:      An Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an Easy-nLC1100 UPLC by reversed-phase chromatography was used to analyze the peptides in each of the 24 fractions. A 2%–90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid gradient was used for 110 min at 300 nl/min on an in-house packed 75 µm x 150 mm ReproSIL-Pur-120-C18-AQ column 3 µm, 120 Å (Dr. Albin Maisch, Germany). Eluting peptides were sprayed through a 1 µm emitter tip (New Objective) at 2.4 kV into the mass spectrometer. Then, survey scans (MS) of precursor ions were obtained from 350-1400 m/z at 120,000 resolution at 200 m/z. Data-dependent monitoring and 15s dynamic exclusion were utilized to isolate precursor ions within 0.7 m/z. Afterward, the ions were fragmented using HCD activation collision energy 35. The 1e5 automatic gain control (AGC), 250 ms maximum injection time (IT) at 50,000 resolution, was used to acquire the fragmentation spectra (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (PD2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to process the fragmentation spectra, and Mascot v.2.8.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) was utilized to search against the RefSeq Sus scrofa database. The search considered various criteria as 3 ppm precursor mass tolerance, one missed cleavage, trypsin enzyme, 0.01 Da fragment mass tolerance, with TMT 6Plex on N-terminus and carbamidomethylation on C as fixed and TMT 6Plex on K, oxidation on M, deamidation on N or Q as variable modifications. Mascot searches recognized peptides processed with PD2.4 utilizing  Percolator at a 5% False Discovery Rate confidence threshold, based on an auto-concatenated decoy database search. The Isolation Interference <30% filtered the peptide spectral matches (PSMs). Afterward, the relative protein abundances of recognized proteins were identified in PD2.4 from the normalized median ratio of TMT reporter ions, which have a signal-to-noise ratio>1.5, in all PSMs from the same protein. In the mass spectrometry analysis, the technical variation in ratios is less than 10%  (Herbrich et al. 2013 J Proteome Res 12: 594).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver, Perinatal, Tmt, Metabolism, Pig

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Michael Wolfgang

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J. Wolfgang
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine


