### Accession
PXD028322

### Title
Transcriptome and proteome analysis in LUHMES cells overexpressing alpha-synculein

### Description
LUHMES cells share many characteritics with human dopamingeric neurons in the substantia nigra, the cells whose demise is responsible for the motor symptoms in Parkinson’s disease (PD). LUHMES cells can therefore be used bona fide as a model to study pathophysiological processes involved in PD. Previously, we showed that LUHMES cell degenerate after six days upon overexpression of wild type alpha-synuclein.  In the present study we performed a transcriptome and proteome expression analysis in alpha-synuclein-overexpressing cells and GFP-expressing control cells in order to identify genes and proteins that are differentially regulated upon overexpression of alpha-synuclein. The analysis was performed four days after the initiation of alpha-synuclein or GFP overexpression, before the cells died in order to identify processes that preceded cell death.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lysis and Protein Extraction  The cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS followed by addition of ice-cold RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with protease inhibitors (cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland)). The cells were collected in 1.5 ml vials (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Followed by homogenization with a stainless steel pistil in lysis buffer (30 mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.5), 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea) and treatment in an ice-cooled ultrasonic bath (six rounds, each 10 seconds). To remove cell debris and crude impurities the lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 16.000 x g. Protein concentrations of the supernatants were determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).  Protein Digestion 10 µg proteins per sample were used for tryptic digestion. The urea concentration was lowered to 1.5 M by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were digested with 1:28 (w/w) trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) for 14 h at 37 °C. Finally, the peptide concentrations were determined by quantitative amino acid analysis (AAA).  LC−MS/MS Analysis LC−MS/MS analysis was performed on a QExactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All peptide samples were diluted in 15 μL of 0.1% TFA and 200 ng per proteome sample was loaded and concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap, 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) within 7 min at a flow rate of 30 μL/min with 0.1% TFA. Peptide separation was performed on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a 135 min segmented linear gradient, with monotonic increase, adapted to the quantity of eluting peptides, from 5 to 52% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% acetonitrile). Peptides eluting from the column were ionized at 1.55 kV in the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Proxeon Biosystems A/S, Odense, Denmark). Survey scans were acquired from 350 to 1100 m/z at a resolution of 120 000. Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra was performed with higher-energy collisional dissociation for the 10 highest abundant precursor peptide ions with a resolution of 30 000 and isolation window = 1.6 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. The normalized stepped collision energy (NCE) and fixed first mass were set to 24, 27, 30 and 100.0 m/z, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw Data Processing, Peptide Identification and Protein Quantification The generated *.raw files were converted to *.mzML files using the msconvert tool from ProteWizard (v3.0.0002) and processed with an in-house openMS (v2.6.0) workflow implemented in the free and open-source KNIME data analytics plattform (v4.3.1). The openMS workflow using PIA in combination with quantification was adapted from KNIME hub repository (https://hub.knime.com/julianu/spaces/PIA/latest/02-PIA_and_quant~tjlaE-J0RnMY2LrA). In brief, MS/MS spectra were searched with the database search engine node MS-GF+ against a combined target-decoy database including the complete human UniProtKB set, potential contaminants (cRAP) and GFP sequences. For the database search, precursor mass tolerance was set to 10.0 ppm with Trypsin/P and full digestion as enzyme set up. Methionine (M) oxidation was included as variable modification. Maximum number of missed cleavages were set to one. Protein inference was performed using the advanced protein inference alghorithm (PIA) (PMID: 25938255, PMID: 30474983) implemented in the corresponding PIA node. The inference method was set to spectrum extractor with a PSM score filter set to 0.01. The scoring method was set to multiplicative scoring and only the best PSM score per peptide was used. For quantification, individual peptide features (MS1 level) were determined using the FeatureFinderMultiplex node in label-free mode. Identified peptides were combined and mapped to the peptide features using the PIA node on peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) level and the IDMapper node respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds were set to 0.01 on peptide and protein level using IDFilter and PIA node respectively. Mapped features were aligned by a retention time correction between feature maps using within the MapAlignerIdentifications node. Groups of corresponding features from multiple maps were linked via the FeatureLinkerUnlabeledQT node and subsequently quantile normalized with the ConsensusMapNormalizer node. Ambiguous annotations with features with peptide identifications were resovled using the IDConflictResolver node. Finally, protein and peptide abundances were computed using the ProteinQuantifier node considering all charge states and all peptides assigned to a protein based on the PIA results. Here, protein abundance were computed based on median abundances of the three most abundant proteotypic peptides. Results were exportet as text files and further processed using R.  Proteomics Data Analysis  Data analysis was performed using KNIME and R. In brief, contaminants and decoy hits were filtered out for proteomics data. Only protein groups (in the following referred to as proteins) with ≥2 peptides in total were considered for analysis. Intensity values containing zeros were replaced with NA. Remaining intensities were log2-transformed. Protein groups with at least one valid value in at least one sample were considered as identified and in the following used to construct the proteome background set. To allow a comparison and integration with the transciptome data, UNIPROT ACCESSIONS listed within each protein group were mapped to ENTREZ and GENE SYMBOL IDs using the bioconductor homo sapiens annotation package org.Hs.eg.db (3.12.0). ENTREZ IDs were used as primary mapping identifier. Subsequentially protein groups were updated as follows: first UNIPROT ACCESSIONS with no matching ENTREZ ID were removed as well as any resulting empty protein group. In addition, 33 UNIPROT ACCESSIONS, which had GENE SYMBOLS mappable to multiple ENTREZ IDs were removed. No entries were found were an ENTREZ ID was mappable to multiple GENE SYMBOLS. However, there was one ENTREZ ID found which were mappable to two different protein groups. Both protein groups and the corresponding ENTREZ ID were consequentially removed from the data. For furter statistical data analysis only entries (protein groups), which had at least two valid intensity values in each experimental group were considered. Analogously to transcriptome data analysis both experimental groups for each protein groups were compared using a two-sided unpaired t-test. In order to control the rate of type I errors, when conducting multiple t-tests, p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Features with an adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 were considered as differently expressed between both groups.

### Publication Abstract
LUHMES cells share many characteristics with human dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, the cells, the demise of which is responsible for the motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD). LUHMES cells can, therefore, be used <i>bona fide</i> as a model to study pathophysiological processes involved in PD. Previously, we showed that LUHMES cells degenerate after 6 days upon overexpression of wild-type alpha-synuclein. In the present study, we performed a transcriptome and proteome expression analysis in alpha-synuclein-overexpressing cells and GFP-expressing control cells in order to identify genes and proteins that are differentially regulated upon overexpression of alpha-synuclein. The analysis was performed 4 days after the initiation of alpha-synuclein or GFP overexpression, before the cells died, in order to identify processes that preceded cell death. After adjustments for multiple testing, we found 765 genes being differentially regulated (439 upregulated, 326 downregulated) and 122 proteins being differentially expressed (75 upregulated, 47 downregulated). In total, 21 genes and corresponding proteins were significantly differentially regulated in the same direction in both datasets, of these 13 were upregulated and 8 were downregulated. In total, 13 genes and 9 proteins were differentially regulated in our cell model, which had been previously associated with PD in recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS). In the gene ontology (GO) analysis of all upregulated genes, the top terms were "regulation of cell death," "positive regulation of programmed cell death," and "regulation of apoptotic signaling pathway," showing a regulation of cell death-associated genes and proteins already 2 days before the cells started to die. In the GO analysis of the regulated proteins, among the strongest enriched GO terms were "vesicle," "synapse," and "lysosome." In total, 33 differentially regulated proteins were associated with synapses, and 12 differentially regulated proteins were associated with the "lysosome", suggesting that these intracellular mechanisms, which had been previously associated with PD, also play an important role in our cell model.

### Keywords
Luhmes cells, Neurodegenerative diseases, Transcriptome, Parkinson’s disease (pd), Proteome, Alpha-synculein, Snca

### Affiliations
Medical Bioinformatics, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
Ruhr University Bochum - Medizinisches Proteom-Center

### Submitter
Markus Stepath

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. Martin Eisenacher
Medical Bioinformatics, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Faculty, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany


