### Accession
PXD002764

### Title
A combined proteomic and targeted analysis unravels new toxic mechanisms for  zinc oxide nanoparticles in macrophages

### Description
The cellular responses of the J774 macrophage cell line to zinc oxide and zirconium oxide nanoparticles have been studied by a comparative quantitative, protein level based proteomic approach. The most prominent results have been validated by targeted approaches. These approaches have been carried out under culture conditions that stimulate mildly the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, thereby mimicking conditions that can be encountered in vivo in complex environments. The comparative approach with two nanoparticles allows to separate the common responses, which can be attributed to the phagocytosis event per se, from the response specific to each type of nanoparticles. The zinc-specific responses are the most prominent ones and include mitochondrial proteins too, but also signaling molecules such as MyD88, proteins associated with methylglyoxal detoxification (glyoxalase 2, aldose reductase) and deoxyribonucleotide hydrolases. The in cellulo inhibition of GAPDH by zinc  was also documented, representing a possible source of methylglyoxal in the cells, leading to an increase in methylglyoxal-modified DNA bases. These observations may be mechanistically associated with the  genotoxic effect of zinc and its selective effects on cancer cells

### Sample Protocol
The mouse macrophage cell line J774A1 was purchased from the European Cell Culture Collection (Salisbury, UK). The cells were cultured in DMEM (containing 1mM pyruvate) + 10% fetal bovine serum.  For treatment with nanoparticles, the following scheme was used: cells were first seeded at 500,000 cells/ml in T175 flasks (50 ml per flask). They were exposed to nanoparticles on the following day and harvested after a further 24 hours in culture. Phagocytosis activity measurement: The phagocytic activity was measured after treatment with either zinc oxide and zirconium oxide nanoparticles using fluorescent latex beads and flow cytometry. Mitochondrial transmembrane potential measurement, GAPDH assay, D gel and Proteomics study

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the MS/MS data were interpreted using a local Mascot server with MASCOT 2.4.1 algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK) against UniProtKB/SwissProt (version 2014_11, 547,085 sequences). The research was carried out in all species. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 15 ppm for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS data, allowing a maximum of one trypsin missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as variable modifications. Protein identifications were validated with at least two peptides with Mascot ion score above 30.

### Publication Abstract
Two different zinc oxide nanoparticles, as well as zinc ions, are used to study the cellular responses of the RAW 264 macrophage cell line. A proteomic screen is used to provide a wide view of the molecular effects of zinc, and the most prominent results are cross-validated by targeted studies. Furthermore, the alteration of important macrophage functions (e.g. phagocytosis) by zinc is also investigated. The intracellular dissolution/uptake of zinc is also studied to further characterize zinc toxicity. Zinc oxide nanoparticles dissolve readily in the cells, leading to high intracellular zinc concentrations, mostly as protein-bound zinc. The proteomic screen reveals a rather weak response in the oxidative stress response pathway, but a strong response both in the central metabolism and in the proteasomal protein degradation pathway. Targeted experiments confirm that carbohydrate catabolism and proteasome are critical determinants of sensitivity to zinc, which also induces DNA damage. Conversely, glutathione levels and phagocytosis appear unaffected at moderately toxic zinc concentrations.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles; macrophages; zinc oxide; zirconium dioxide; proteomics; glutathione biosynthesis; phagocytosis; dna damage; heme oxygenase; methyglyoxal; mitochondria

### Affiliations
CEA Grenoble, iRTSV/CBM, Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals, Grenoble, France
CNRS

### Submitter
Jean-Marc STRUB

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Rabilloud
CEA Grenoble, iRTSV/CBM, Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals, Grenoble, France


