### Accession
PXD003156

### Title
Gel-free/label-free proteomic analysis of developing rice grains under heat stress

### Description
High temperature markedly reduces the yields and quality of rice grains. To identify the mechanisms underlying heat stress-induced responses in rice grains, proteomic technique was used. Khao Dawk Mali 105 rice grains at the milky, doughy, and mature stages of development after flowering were treated at 40 °C for 3 days. Aromatic compounds were decreased in rice grains under heat stress. The protein abundance involved in glycolysis and tricarboxylic acid cycle, including glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase, was changed in milky and doughy grains after heat treatment; however, no changes in mature grains. The abundance involved in amino acid metabolism was increased in doughy grains, but decreased in milky grains. In addition, the abundance involved in starch and sucrose metabolism, such as starch synthase, ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase, granule-bound starch synthase, and alpha amylase, was decreased in milky grains, but increased in doughy grains. A number of redox homeostasis-related proteins, such as ascorbate peroxidase and peroxiredoxin, were increased in developing rice grains treated with heat stress. These results suggest that in response to heat stress, the abundance of numerous proteins involved in redox homeostasis and carbohydrate biosynthetic pathways may play a major role in the development of KDML105 rice grains.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of rice (Oryza sativa L. cv KDML105) were grown in pots and maintain in greenhouse where average day/night temperature was 36/26oC, average light intensity during a day was 76,982 LUX and a 12-h photoperiod. Once they reached their grain filling stage, which lasted 90-120 days after germination, the plants were subjected to heat treatment. protein was extracted with Tris-Hcl buffer, the extracted protein was purified with chloroform and methanol to remove any detergent from the sample solutions. Alkylated proteins were digested using trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID×5 mm, Dionex, Germering, Germany). The peptides were eluted from the trap column with a linear acetonitrile gradient (8–30% in 150 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min, and then loaded onto a C18 nano HPLC capillary tip column (75 µm ID×120 mm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) using a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the MS over 400–1500 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used for high mass accuracy (Olsen et al., 2005). The 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for collision induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 90 sec to prevent the repetitive selection of peptides. Protein identification was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) and a rice protein database (50,253 sequences and 15,266,515 residues) obtained from The Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB, http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp), including protein sequences supported by FL-cDNA and EST data (IRGSP-1.0_protein_2015-6-22) and protein sequence predicted computationally (IRGSP-1.0_protein_2015-6-22) (Kawahara et al., 2013; Sakai et al., 2013). The acquired raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The parameters used in the Mascot searches were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot results were filtered with Mascot Percolator to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. False discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were less than 1.0%. Peptides with a percolator ion score of more than 13 (p < 0.05) were used for protein identification. The mascot search result were exported in the XML format for analysis using SIEVE software (version 2.1.377, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Developing rice grain, Proteomics, Heat stress, Rice

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


