### Accession
PXD003283

### Title
Oviductal fluid  LC-MS/MS -  The Wilms tumor protein Wt1 contributes to female fertility by regulating oviductal proteostasis

### Description
After fertilization the developing mammalian embryo migrates through the oviduct before it implants in the uterus. In order to prevent tubal pregnancy or failed implantation, development and migration of the embryo has to be tightly coordinated1. The precise molecular basis for the regulation of this maternal-embryonic interaction is largely unknown. Here we show that the Wilms tumor suppressor protein Wt1 is a critical regulator of the interaction between the maternal environment and the early embryo. Our results indicate that subfertility in Wt1ko/+ females is a maternal effect caused by the Wt1-dependent de-regulation of Prss29, encoding a serine protease. Notably, blocking Prss29 activity was sufficient to rescue subfertility in Wt1ko/+ female mice indicating Prss29 as a critical factor in female fertility. Furthermore, we have identified a missense mutation in a patient with idiopathic infertility leading to an amino acid exchange within the zinc finger domain of WT1 and resulting in reduced DNA binding. We demonstrate that Wt1 represses expression of Prss29 and that its de-repression and precocious expression in the oviduct interferes with pre-implantation development. Our study reveals a novel role for Wt1 in early mammalian development and identifies proteases as critical mediators of the maternal-embryonic crosstalk. We believe that our data regarding the importance of a proteostatic environment in the oviduct are also relevant for female fertility in humans. We anticipate that our findings will form the basis for the identification of further causes of idiopathic infertility.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were washed several times with Ammonium bicarbonate buffer, proteins were reduced by DTT and alkylated by IAA. A 12 ng/µL Trypsin solution was used to digest proteins in-gel overnight. Generated peptides were extracted by an increasing content of Acetonitrile. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were desalted by the Stop-and-Go technique.  Liquid Chromatography and mass spectrometer instrumentation consisted out of a nanoLC (Proxeon, now Thermo Scientific) coupled via a nan-electrospray ionization source to an ion-trap based LTQ Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on an in-house packed 20 cm column with 3.0 µm C18 beads (Dr Maisch GmbH) using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.5% acetic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. Linear gradients from 7–38% B in 130 min were applied with a following increase to 80% B within 5min and a re-equilibration to 5% B. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z after accumulation of 1E6 ions (AGC target) within a maximal injection time of 60 ms. Top 15 method was applied for MS/MS spectra at a resolution of 7,500 at 400 m/z. AGC target and maximal injection time were set to 1E4 and 30 ms, respectively. The isolation window was 2 m/z and activation time was set to 10 ms. A normalized collision energy of 35 was used for CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant (1.4.1.2) and the implemented Andromeda Search engine. MS/MS spectra were correlated to the reference mouse database. Mass tolerance settings were set as by default, the minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids and the FDR was controlled by the decoy database approach at the peptide-spectrum-match and protein level to 1%. In total, a maximum of two miss cleavages were allowed under tryptic conditions. Match between runs, label free quantification and re-quantification algorithms were enabled. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and the ratio of Wt1+/+ /Wt1ko/+) was calculated as the difference of log2 LFQ intensities means for each replicate. A two-tailed t-test was applied to identify significant changed proteins. Proteins showing a greater absolute fold-change of 2 and a smaller p-value than 0.05 were considered as significant. To include proteins that are exclusively for one of the genotypes, missing data were replaced by random data from a down-shifted Gaussian distribution (width=0.5, downshift: 1.8) mimicking the detection limit of the mass spectrometer. Note that only proteins that were quantified at least 2 times in one the genotypes were included and Gaussian distribution was verified by histogram analysis of log2 LFQ intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Although the zinc finger transcription factor Wt1 has been linked to female fertility, its precise role in this process has not yet been understood. We have sequenced the WT1 exons in a panel of patients with idiopathic infertility and have identified a missense mutation in WT1 in one patient out of eight. This mutation leads to an amino acid change within the zinc finger domain and results in reduced DNA binding. We utilized Wt1+/- mice as a model to mechanistically pinpoint the consequences of reduced Wt1 levels for female fertility. Our results indicate that subfertility in Wt1+/- female mice is a maternal effect caused by the Wt1-dependent de-regulation of Prss29, encoding a serine protease. Notably, blocking Prss29 activity was sufficient to rescue subfertility in Wt1+/- mice indicating Prss29 as a critical factor in female fertility. Molecularly, Wt1 represses expression of Prss29. De-repression and precocious expression of Prss29 in the oviduct of Wt1+/- mice interferes with pre-implantation development. Our study reveals a novel role for Wt1 in early mammalian development and identifies proteases as critical mediators of the maternal-embryonic interaction. Our data also suggest that the role of Wt1 in regulating fertility is conserved in mammals.

### Keywords
Wt1, Lc-ms/ms, Oviductal fluid, Prss29

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and CECAD, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krueger
Institute for Genetics and CECAD, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


