### Accession
PXD021687

### Title
Iron and Copper induce proteomic changes related to the expression of virulence factors in clinical isolates of Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
Minerals are essential for proper cell function. In infectious processes where both cells of the causative agent and the host itself are involved, competition for their acquisition is necessary. In this context, pathogenic fungi have developed machinery to ensure the acquisition of minerals and at the same time have perfected strategies that protect them from intoxication by excess of them. In eukaryotic cells, minerals are involved both in the respiratory chain and in cellular metabolisms, which in microorganisms are related to the expression of virulence factors, while in the host, they are related to the activation and regulation of the immune system In the activation of phagocytic cells, in addition, the host can regulate the availability of minerals, which has been called nutritional immunity.  Cryptococcosis is an opportunistic mycosis, acquired by inhaling fungal propagules present in the environment; it is a potentially fatal infection that affects the lungs and the central nervous system, both in immunosuppressed and immunocompetent people. The infection is caused by two species, namely: Cryptococcus neoformans (var. grubii (serotype A), var. neoformans (serotype D) and a hybrid corresponding to serotype AD) and Cryptococcus gattii (serotypes B and C). These species present phenotypic, genotypic and epidemiological differences, as well as in their geographical distribution.  In recent years, mechanisms for the acquisition of iron and copper, among other micronutrients, have been described in C. neoformans, as well as their relationship, both with the expression of genes associated with virulence factors, the interaction with different intracellular signaling pathways. , especially in routes involved in adaptation to environmental changes and stress conditions. The regulation of the acquisition of these minerals is mediated by several signaling pathways, as the Rim 101 pathway in C. neoformans is essential in adapting to the change in pH and is particular to fungal cells. Iron and copper have been related to the induction of virulence through the production of melanin, capsules and the formation of titan cells, as well as enzymes related to oxidation-reduction phenomena and other virulence factors, which can be regulated by the factor of RIM101 transcription, this pathway induces the expression of genes that encode an iron transporter and a permease (SIT1 and CFT1, respectively) and a copper transporter (CTR4). This enables the yeast to survive in the host because it can rapidly transition from a slightly acidic environment in the phagolysosome to a slightly alkaline environment such as cerebrospinal fluid and serum.  For mycoses in general, alternative therapies have been proposed, where the regulation of the acquisition of minerals in the tissue environment during the establishment of the mycosis could be a mechanism to control the growth of the fungus. Therefore, the compression of the signaling networks will allow exploring new alternatives for the development of novel antifungal drugs as well as biological biomarkers, both for the diagnosis and for possible combined therapies at the nutritional immunology level that help prevent and anticipate management. Taking these antecedents into account, we consider it important to evaluate the effect of iron and copper in Colombian clinical isolates of C. neoformans for the prediction of new antifungal targets.

### Sample Protocol
Biological Material A total of 2 clinical isolates of C. neoformans var. grubii molecular type VNI, were selected from the strain of the Microbiology group at the Instituto Nacional of Salud in Colombia.  Cytoplasmic proteins extraction The isolates were cultured in 50mL of 2% SDB at 30 °C and 150rpm for 15 hours, at the end of the time an 1.5x108 UFC/mL was adjusted inoculum and it was cultured in 600 mL minimum medium supplemented with 50 and 500 µM of iron and copper respectively, it was incubated at 30 °C and 150rpm for 15 hours. Each culture was centrifuged at 1300 rpm for 20 minutes at 4 °C, the supernatant was discarded and three washes were carried out with PBS, the pellet obtained was stored for 15 hours at -20 °C.  At the end of this time, the pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (200-400 µL) composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA, 150mM NaCl, 1mM DTT* (dithiothreitol) and protease inhibitors: 0.5mM PMSF* (phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride) (Fluka) and 100 µL of a mixture of protease inhibitors. The same volume of 0.4-0.6 mm diameter glass beads was added to mechanically break the cells in a Fast-Prep device (Bio101, Savant) applying 21 second pulses. This step was repeated for 12 cycles, cooling the eppendorf tubes between pulse and pulse for 5 minutes in ice. The eppendorf with the total extract were centrifuged for 60 minutes at 13000 rpm at 4 °C and the supernatant was recovered, the amount of protein present in the samples was determined following the Bradford method, the absorbance of each of the samples was measured at 595 nm in a Beckman DU 640 spectrophotometer, the protein extracts were adjusted to 32 µg/mL and a two-dimensional electrophoresis was performed, the protein staining was performed with silver nitrate. The samples were stored at -80 °C. Four biological replicates of the previous procedure were made.  Protein cleaning  Each of the samples was loaded on a concentrator gel for cleaning, before digestion. The band was visualized with colloidal Coomassie stain and cut out for later digestion with Trypsin. For this, the proteins were resuspended with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 minutes and then transferred with 55 mM Iodacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark. Finally, 1 µg of sequencing grade recombinant bovine trypsin (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted from each of the samples with 80% Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA for 15 minutes. The peptides obtained from each digestion were dried by vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac, Savant), reconstituted in 12 µL of 2% ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid (AF). The peptides were frozen at -20ºC until the moment of analysis. LC-MSMS analysis The peptides were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography (nano Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF high resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were concentrated ¨on-line¨ by reverse phase chromatography using an Acclaim PepMap 100 guard column (Thermo Scientific, 20 mm x 75 µm ID, C18 of 3 µm particle diameter and 100 Å pore size) and separated into a C18 Picofrit reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Spray Column, PepMap RSLC C18 of 500 mm x 75 µm ID, 2 µm particle diameter, 100Å pore size) with integrated spray tip, operating at a flow rate of 250 nl/minutes. Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 2% to 40% buffer B in 240 minutes. They were used, as buffer A, 0.1% of AF in water and as buffer B, 0.1% of formic acid in ACN. The entry of the peptides was done by electrospray ionization using the tip integrated in the analytical column. The data acquisition was performed with a voltage of 1.8 Kv for the electrospay and the "ion transfer tube" that guides the ions from the spray to the interior of the mass spectrometer had a temperature of 270 ºC. The peptides were detected with a resolution of 60,000 in Full scan MS mode in a mass range m/z of 350-2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra acquired in the samples were analyzed through the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Scientific) using MASCOT as a search engine on the Cryptococcus neoformans database of 7430 sequences. The parameters used in the searches were: tolerance of the precursor peptide of 10 ppm, tolerance of the fragment of 0.02 Da, up to 2 lost cut points for trypsin allowed, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and as variable modifications: methionine oxidation. The percolator algorithm was used to estimate the false positive rate and filtered by a q-value <0.05 for the proteins identified with high confidence. The relative quantification of the proteins was carried out using the proteome discoverer 2.2 software.  The FungiDB site (https://fungidb.org/fungidb), STRING (https://string-db.org), Revigo (http://revigo.irb.hr/) and KEGG (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/) were used for protein analysis. For Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, the identified and quantified proteins were selected in the four biological replicates and by condition. In each analysis, the following options were selected: q value <0.05, p reading corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg. Hypothetical proteins, which constitute 20-30% of the proteins scored, were not represented. The Venn diagram was generated using Jvenn (http://jvenn.toulouse.inra.fr).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptococcus neoformans, Clinical, Iron, Minerals, Copper, Protein, Cryptocosis

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


