### Accession
PXD018157

### Title
Determination of neuropeptide Y Y1 receptor antagonist BIBP 3226 and evaluation of receptor expression based on liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry

### Description
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a peptide widely distributed throughout the body that is involved in various physiological processes, including the regulation of feeding behavior and energy homeostasis and, as recently reported, the regulation of bone homeostasis. The Y1 receptors have been identified as major contributors to this latter biological effect. 5 - Carbamimidamido- 2 - (2,2 - diphenylacetamido) – N - [(4- hydroxyphenyl)methyl] pentanamide (BIBP 3226) is a selective NPY Y1 receptor antagonist with recognized potential as therapeutic agent in bone regeneration and its quantification in cellular internalization assays was aimed in the present work. Using high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to triple quadrupole-tandem mass spectrometry, BIBP 3226 determination was attained with a reversed phase column, isocratic elution, detection in positive ionization mode and data acquisition in selected reaction monitoring mode. Calibration curves were linear for concentrations ranging from 0.25 to 30 ng mL-1 with LOD and LOQ values as low as 0.1 and 0.3 pg in cell extracts and 16 and 48 pg in supernatant culture media, respectively. BIBP 3226 was successfully quantified in cell extracts and supernatants obtained from internalization assays using bone marrow cells (Wt C57/Bl6 mice) and also breast cancer cells (MCF7), which overexpress the NPY Y1 receptor. Therefore, the determined amount of BIBP 3226 was related to the levels of NPY Y1 receptor, demonstrating the method suitability to measure NPY Y1 receptor expression indirectly as an alternative to antibody-based fluorescence microscopy.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro assays and cell extracts preparation Cellular internalization assays of BIBP 3226 were conducted in microplate format using bone marrow cells from Wt C57/Bl6 mice and breast cancer cells MCF7 as positive control. After washing with PBS to remove culture medium, cells were resuspended in 2×PBS buffer with fetal bovine serum to a final concentration of 4.0 × 106 or 0.5 × 106 cells in bone marrow or MCF7 cells suspension, respectively. Each cell suspension was transferred to a 96 well microplate and an aqueous solution of BIBP 3226 was added in order to reach a final concentration of ca. 100 nM per well. As control, a second set of assays were prepared using the same volume of cell suspension and water instead of BIBP 3226 solution. Six replicates were prepared for each assayed condition followed by incubation at room temperature for 45 min. Subsequently, assays and controls were centrifuged to pelletize cells. Supernatants were collected and stored at -20 ºC until further use. Cells were sequentially washed with PBS buffer (pH 7.4), cold hypertonic acid solution (0.2 M acetic acid, 0.5 M sodium chloride, pH 3.5) for 3 min, and again PBS buffer (pH 7.4). Finally, washed cells were resuspended in 100 µL of acetonitrile and briefly sonicated on ice to promote cell lysis. The resultant cell extracts were stored at -20 ºC until use.  Sample preparation Prior to analysis, the cell extracts from the 6 replicates of each condition (6 × 100 µL) were pooled, evaporated to dryness under a gentle stream of nitrogen and reconstituted in 50 µL of acetonitrile-water (40:60, v/v) containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. After vigorous vortexing for 30 s, the extracts were sonicated during 1 min, vortexed again for 30 s, and centrifuged at 18000 × g for 10 min at 4 ºC. Supernatants were collected and directly analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS.  The supernatant in FBS buffer obtained from each assay (60 µL) was treated with acetonitrile (240 µL) to precipitate proteins and salts. After vortexing for 30 s and centrifuging at 18000 × g for 10 min at 4 ºC, 150 μL of clear supernatant was mixed with 150 μL of water containing 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in order to match the same solvent composition of standards and cell extracts. These solutions were also vortexed for 30 s, centrifuged at 18000 × g for 10 min at 4 ºC and the supernatant was analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS.  HPLC-MS/MS analysis Chromatographic separation was achieved using a reversed phase Kinetex core-shell C8 column (150 × 2.1 mm; 2.6 µm particle size; 100 Å) (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) maintained at 30 ºC. Elution was performed in isocratic mode using a mixture of acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (30:70, v/v), at a flow rate of 0.25 mL min-1. Total run time was 5.0 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode (ESI+) and data were acquired in selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode. The m/z transition 474.25 > 167.15 was employed for quantification whereas the m/z transition 474.25 > 107.10 was used for identity confirmation. Collision energy values of -45 and -49 V were applied for quantifier and qualifier SRM transitions, respectively, and the selected dwell time was 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peak detection and quantification were performed using LabSolutions software version 5.60 SP2 (Shimadzu Corporation). Before submitting the dataset to PRIDE database, raw data files (CDF) obtained from LabSolutions software were processed using MZmine 2 software for mass detection and feature lists creation (mzTab files).

### Publication Abstract
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a peptide widely distributed throughout the body that is involved in various physiological processes, including the regulation of feeding behavior and energy homeostasis. 5-Carbamimidamido-2-(2,2-diphenylacetamido)-N-[(4-hydroxyphenyl)methyl]pentanamide (BIBP 3226) is a selective NPY Y1 receptor antagonist with recognized application in bone regeneration studies, requiring quantification at picogram levels. Hence, BIBP 3226 determination is proposed here by a validated HPLC-MS/MS method, based on a reversed-phase Kinetex&#xae; core-shell C8 column (2.6&#xa0;&#x3bc;m, 150&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;2.1&#xa0;mm) at 30&#xa0;&#xb0;C, elution in isocratic mode using a mixture of acetonitrile and water (30:70, v/v), containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, at 0.25&#xa0;mL&#xa0;min<sup>-1</sup>, detection in positive ionization mode, and data acquisition in selected reaction monitoring mode. Calibration curves were linear for concentrations ranging from 0.25 to 30&#xa0;ng&#xa0;mL<sup>-1</sup> with LOD and LOQ values as low as 0.1 and 0.3&#xa0;pg in cell extracts and 16 and 48&#xa0;pg in supernatant culture media, respectively. BIBP 3226 was successfully determined in cell extracts and supernatants obtained from internalization assays. Using similar exposure conditions, the amount of BIBP 3226 found in breast cancer cells (MCF7) was 72 to 657 times higher than that found in bone marrow cells (Wt C57BL/6 mice), providing an indirect indicator of NPY Y1 receptor expression.

### Keywords
Neuropeptide y; y1 receptor antagonist; bibp 3226; mass spectrometry; receptor expression

### Affiliations
LAQV, REQUIMTE, Department of Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal
LAQV, REQUIMTE, Department of Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy of University of Porto, Porto, Portugal

### Submitter
Luisa Barreiros

### Lab Head
Dr Luisa Barreiros
LAQV, REQUIMTE, Department of Chemical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal


