### Accession
PXD002147

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the wheat pathogenic fungus Zymoseptoria tritici

### Description
Z. tritici is a fungal pathogen causing the disease septoria tritici blotch, one of the most economically devastating foliar diseases in wheat. The molecular basis underlying Z. tritici growth, development and pathogenicity is not fully understood yet. Compared to the genomic investigations in this fungus, little is known about the protein expression at a systematic level. The aim of the project is to construct a comprehensive protein database of Z. tritici growing in nutrient-limiting and rich media and in vivo at a late stage of wheat infection by using 1D gel-based and SCX-based proteomics and subproteomics (intracellular and extracellular) approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Fungal culture grown in either nutrient-limiting Czapek-Dox Broth (CDB) or nutrient-rich Potato Dextrose Broth (PDB) and 25-d-Z. tritici-infected wheat leaves were prepared. Protein was extracted from culture supernatant, fungal tissue and infected leaves in the lysis buffer. One biological replicate of protein extracts was resolved in SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. The other replicate was subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion and fractionated by SCX chromatography. The digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra data were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2, Thermo Fisher). Peptide identification was performed with MASCOT (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science, London, UK), searching against the DOE Joint Genome Institute gene index for Zymoseptoria tritici. FDR was estimated for protein identification by using target-decoy search strategy. Only peptide sequences with a Mascot ion score ≥ 17 and FDR ≤ 1% were considered for further analysis. Protein annotation was conducted by BLAST against NCBI and Uniprot databases.

### Publication Abstract
Zymoseptoria tritici causes Septoria tritici blotch disease of wheat. To obtain a comprehensive protein dataset of this fungal pathogen, proteomes of Z. tritici growing in nutrient-limiting and rich media and in vivo at a late stage of wheat infection were fractionated by 1D gel or strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. A total of 5731, 5376 and 3168 Z. tritici proteins were confidently identified from these conditions, respectively. Of these in vitro and in planta proteins, 9 and 11% were predicted to contain signal peptides, respectively. Functional classification analysis revealed the proteins were involved in the various cellular activities. Comparison of three distinct protein expression profiles demonstrates the elevated carbohydrate, lipid and secondary metabolisms, transport, protein processing and energy production specifically in the host environment, in contrast to the enhancement of signaling, defense, replication, transcription and cell division in vitro. The data provide useful targets towards a better understanding of the molecular basis of Z. tritici growth, development, stress response and pathogenicity.

### Keywords
Zymoseptoria tritici, Scx, In planta, Fungal proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen
KU

### Submitter
Fen Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Fen Yang
Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen


