### Accession
PXD027100

### Title
RagG interactome analysis in human breast MDA-MB-231 cells

### Description
RagC was immunoprecipitated from human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells treated or not with the Arp2/3 complex inhibitor, CK666, and the RagC interactome was analyzed by mass-spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
For anti-RagC imunoprecipitation, 2 × 106 MDA-MB-231 cells were plated in 10cm round dishes, one day prior to the experiment. Cells from eight-ten 10-cm dishes were grown in culture for each condition. On the day of the experiment, replenish all the dishes with complete medium and proceed with the treatment with CK666. After 1 hour, cells were rinsed once with ice-cold 1X-PBS (on ice/or in cold room) and immediately lysed with ice-cold Chaps lysis buffer (0.3% Chaps, 10 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 10 mM pyrophosphate, 40 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 1 tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche) per 25 ml and protease inhibitor). All the lysates from different dishes for each condition were pooled together in 400µl of cell lysis buffer. (All the Above steps are strictly performed at 4°C on ice or in cold room). The soluble fractions of cell lysates were isolated by centrifugation at 19,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured with the BCA protein assay kit (Reference to be added). Primary antibodies (IgG or RagC) were added to the lysates and incubated with rotation overnight at 4 °C. Next day, the samples were spun down at ultra-low speed and kept on ice. 60 μl of a 50% slurry of protein G-agarose beads (Reference to be added) were washed and equilibrated in cell lysis buffer (at least three times beads were washed with triple the volume of buffer). Cell lysates from different conditions were added to the equilibrated protein G agarose beads in separate eppendorf tubes and incubated for 4 hours at 4 °C. After 4 hours, the samples were spun down at very low speed. Immunoprecipitates were washed three times (5 min each at 4 °C by centrifugation 2500 x g for 5minutes at 4°C) with lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaC and 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, beads were resuspended in 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and digested by adding 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips packed by stacking one AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) and 2mg beads (#186004521 SepPak C18 Cartridge Waters) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 MeCN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in injection buffer (2:98 MeCN:H2O + 0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens UP000005640 database using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (v.2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS [PMID: 17610305] v.3.9.2 (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms). False-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator [PMID: 27572102] and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Label-free quantification was performed using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ [PMID: 21751374] v.2.2.21. For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization at peptide level was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=3). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysosomes, Ragc, Breast cancer cells, Mtor

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Victor Laigle

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


