### Accession
PXD012242

### Title
Proteogenomics uncovers critical elements of host response in bovine soft palate epithelial cells following in vitro infection with foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV)

### Description
: Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) is the most devastating disease of cloven-hoofed livestock, with a crippling economic burden in endemic areas and immense costs associated with outbreaks in free countries. Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), a picornavirus, will spread rapidly in naïve populations, reaching morbidity rates of up to 100% in cattle. Even after recovery, over 50% of cattle remain subclinically infected and infectious virus can be recovered from the nasopharynx. The pathogen and host factors that contribute to FMDV persistence are currently not understood. Using for the first time primary bovine soft palate multilayers in combination with proteogenomics, we analyzed the transcriptional responses during acute and persistent FMDV infection. During the acute phase viral RNA and protein was detectable in large quantities and in response hundreds of interferon-stimulated genes (ISG) were overexpressed, mediating antiviral activity and apoptosis. Although the number of pro-apoptotic ISGs and the extent of their regulation decreased during persistence, some ISGs with antiviral activity were still highly expressed at that stage. This indicates a long-lasting but ultimately ineffective stimulation of ISGs during FMDV persistence. Furthermore, downregulation of relevant genes suggests an interference with the extracellular matrix that may contribute to the skewed virus-host equilibrium in soft palate epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Following infection and thereafter at a maximum interval of 3 days, the upper compartments were washed with 500 µl cell culture medium containing 10% FCS and, similarly, but only from 2 days post infection (dpi), the medium in the lower compartments was changed. For each experiment, at days 0, 1 and 28, SP cells from 2 inserts were lysed with 750 μl of TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and frozen separately at -80 °C for transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. Proteins were extracted from the organic TRIzol phase following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 0.3 mL of 100% ethanol (Carl Roth) were added and DNA was pelleted by centrifugation. To the supernatant, 1.5 mL of isopropanol (Carl Roth) were added and proteins were pelleted by centrifugation. Protein pellets were washed three times with 0.3 M guanidine hydrochloride (Carl Roth) in 95% ethanol (Carl Roth). After a final washing step using 95% ethanol, proteins were air-dried and the pellet was resuspended in freshly prepared 1% SDS (Carl Roth) by ultrasonication. Quality and quantity of the isolated proteins were checked using a 12% polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) and a colorimetric bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Thirty µg of the extracted proteins were separated by 1D SDS PAGE, stained with Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 and afterwards lanes were cut into ten equidistant pieces. In-gel digestion using trypsin and purification of tryptic peptides using Ziptips (C18, Millipore) prior to MS analysis were done as described previously [25]. LC-MS/MS were conducted using an EASY-nLC II coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min using a binary 76 min gradient from 5% B to 75% B 99.9% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid). Survey scans in the Orbitrap were recorded with a resolution of 60.000 in a m/z range of 300 – 1700. The 20 most intense peaks per scan cycle were selected for CID fragmentation in the LTQ. Ions with unknown charge state, as well as singly charged ions were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions for 30 sec was enabled. Internal calibration (lock mass 445.120025) was enabled as well.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, resulting spectra were searched against a database containing sequences of Bos taurus including reverse sequences and common laboratory contaminants (44,376 entries). Database searches using Sorcerer-SEQUEST (version v.27, rev.11; Sage-N Research, Inc.) and Scaffold (version v.4.8.4; Proteome Software) were done as described by López-Mondéjar et al., 2016: arent ion tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance: 1.00 Da, up to two missed cleavages were allowed and methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) was set as variable modification. For protein identification, a stringent SEQUEST filter for peptides was used (Xcorr versus charge state: 2.2, 3.3 and 3.8 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides, respectively, and deltaCn value greater than 0.10), and at least two peptides per protein were required.  In order to identify differentially expressed proteins we imported the raw NSAF values into R workspace and created an ExpressionSet using the Biobase package (version 2.38.0; [27]). We then used the “Power Law Global Error Model” (PLGEM) as implemented in the "plgem" package (version 1.50.0; [28]) and first fitted it to the dataset using default settings and “FMDV infection” (samples from 24 hours post infection (hpi) and 28 dpi) as fitting condition. After computation of observed and resampled signal-to-noise ratios, p-values for each detected protein were calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) is the most devastating disease of cloven-hoofed livestock, with a crippling economic burden in endemic areas and immense costs associated with outbreaks in free countries. Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), a picornavirus, will spread rapidly in na&#xef;ve populations, reaching morbidity rates of up to 100% in cattle. Even after recovery, over 50% of cattle remain subclinically infected and infectious virus can be recovered from the nasopharynx. The pathogen and host factors that contribute to FMDV persistence are currently not understood. Using for the first time primary bovine soft palate multilayers in combination with proteogenomics, we analyzed the transcriptional responses during acute and persistent FMDV infection. During the acute phase viral RNA and protein was detectable in large quantities and in response hundreds of interferon-stimulated genes (ISG) were overexpressed, mediating antiviral activity and apoptosis. Although the number of pro-apoptotic ISGs and the extent of their regulation decreased during persistence, some ISGs with antiviral activity were still highly expressed at that stage. This indicates a long-lasting but ultimately ineffective stimulation of ISGs during FMDV persistence. Furthermore, downregulation of relevant genes suggests an interference with the extracellular matrix that may contribute to the skewed virus-host equilibrium in soft palate epithelial cells.

### Keywords
Foot-and-mouth disease virus (fmdv); bovine soft palate; nasopharynx; transcriptomics; proteomics; bioinformatics; virus-host interaction; innate immune system; interferon-stimulated genes (isg)

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald; Institute of Microbiology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald; Institute of Microbiology


