### Accession
PXD023075

### Title
Characterization of HAP-1 METTL9 KO cells

### Description
LAbel free quantitation of HAP1 WT and METTL9 KO cells. METTL9 is a recently established human histidine specific methyltransferase.

### Sample Protocol
A HAP-1 METTL9 knockout (product number HZGHC004343c010, Horizon Genomics) and a wild type control cell line (product number C631, Horizon Genomics) were propagated and maintained in IMDM Glutamax media (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as well as 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 U/ml streptomycin. The cells were lysed in a guanidine hydrochloride-based buffer and peptides were prepared for analysis using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer24  as previously described25. The LC-MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF orbitrap instrument. For each single shot proteome analysis, 500 ng peptide was separated using a 3 h chromatography gradient linearly ramped from 10% to 30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) during 170 minutes, whereafter the gradient was steeply ramped to 45% buffer B during 10 minutes, before column washing and equilibration. The mass spectrometer was set to continuously sample peptides through a Top12-based data dependent acquisition method. Target values for the full scan mass spectra were set to 3e6 charges in the m/z range 375-1500 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at a m/z of 200. Fragmentation of peptides was performed using higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 28 eV. Fragment scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at a m/z 200 with a AGC target value of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. To avoid repeated sequencing of peptides, a dynamic exclusion window was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.17i) as outlined above statistical analyses was performed using Perseus26. First, LFQ intensities were imported from the MaxQuant output file denoted “protein groups”. Common contaminants, proteins only identified as modified and proteins hitting the reverse decoy database were thereafter removed by filtering. The resulting data matrix was filtered for proteins detected in at least 70% of the replicates in one experimental condition. The data was then log-transformed and missing values were imputed from the lower tail of the abundance distribution using the default setting in Perseus26. Proteins displaying significance differences between the conditions were identified through a Student’s T-test (p < 0.05) with P-values corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. For cluster analysis, LFQ intensities for proteins displaying a significant difference between the conditions were z-scored and row and columns trees were generated using Euclidean distance and Pearson correlation, respectively. Gene ontology analysis of proteins over- and under-represented in METTL9 knockout cells, was performed using the embedded function in Perseus and P-values were corrected using the Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Cell

### Affiliations
Dept. of Immunotechnology
Lund University
Dept. of Immunotechnology Lund University Medicon Village (Building 406) S-223 81 Lund SWEDEN

### Submitter
Magnus E. Jakobsson

### Lab Head
Dr Magnus Jakobsson
Dept. of Immunotechnology Lund University Medicon Village (Building 406) S-223 81 Lund SWEDEN


