### Accession
PXD012175

### Title
Secretome analysis of Cx43 expressing cells

### Description
Extracellular matrix remodeling, degradation and glioma cell motility are critical aspects of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Despite being a rich source of potential biomarkers and targets for therapeutic advance, the dynamic changes within the extracellular environment that are specific to GBM cell motility have yet to be fully resolved. The gap junction protein connexin43 (Cx43) increases glioma migration and invasion in a variety of in vitro and in vivo models. In this study, the conditioned media of Cx43-expressing C6 rat glioma cells was found to increase the motility of the parental line. Demonstrating the selective engagement of ECM-remodelling pathways, secretome analysis revealed the near-binary expression of osteopontin and matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3).

### Sample Protocol
Bottom-up analysis of the glioma (C6) cells +/- Cx43 expression. Peptide were duplex (light:C6 & medium:C6-12) dimethylation was performed.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant, dimethylation (duplex: light, medium) trypsin digestion, Rat Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, degradation and glioma cell motility are critical aspects of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Despite being a rich source of potential biomarkers and targets for therapeutic advance, the dynamic changes occurring within the extracellular environment that are specific to GBM motility have yet to be fully resolved. The gap junction protein connexin43 (Cx43) increases glioma migration and invasion in a variety of <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> models. In this study, the upregulation of Cx43 in C6 glioma cells induced morphological changes and the secretion of proteins associated with cell motility. Demonstrating the selective engagement of ECM remodeling networks, secretome analysis revealed the near-binary increase of osteopontin and matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3), with gelatinase and NFF-3 assays confirming the proteolytic activities. Informatic analysis of interactome and secretome downstream of Cx43 identifies networks of glioma motility that appear to be synergistically engaged. The data presented here implicate ECM remodeling and matrikine signals downstream of Cx43/MMP3/osteopontin and ARK1B10 inhibition as possible avenues to inhibit GBM.

### Keywords
Connexin, Glioma, Secretome, Connexin43

### Affiliations
Brandon University
chenlab.ca Brandon University

### Submitter
Vincent  Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Chen
chenlab.ca Brandon University


