### Accession
PXD003178

### Title
Drosophila melanogaster proteome dynamics during embryogenesis - 1

### Description
In this study we use a combination of proteomics Label-Free quantification methods to monitor protein expression changes over a time course of more than 20 hours of embryo development in Drosophila melanogaster.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos from Drosophila melanogaster iso-1 strain were lysed in Tris 50mM pH 7.5, 4% SDS, protease inhibitor (Complete, Roche). Trypsin in gel digestion was used as the sample preparation method in this study. Injection replicates of a embryo sample were performed on a Triple-TOF 6600 or a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instruments in data dependent acquisition mode. A 1D gel SDS-PAGE fractionation follow by in gel digestion with trypsin of a embryo sample were performed and the peptides were injected a Triple-TOF 6600 in data dependent acquisition mode. A embryo developmental time course was realized over 22.5 hours and the embryos were lysed in Tris 50mM pH 7.5, 4% SDS, protease inhibitor (Complete, Roche) and a trypsin in gel digestion was performed. The peptides were injected a Triple-TOF 6600 in data dependent acquisition mode and SWATH mode or on a Q-Exactive with a PRM mode.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisition were analysed with MaxQuant. The library for the SWATH analysis was generated using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 and Spectronaut version 7. PRM data were analysed using Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
During embryogenesis, organisms undergo considerable cellular remodelling requiring the combined action of thousands of proteins. In case of the well-studied model Drosophila melanogaster, transcriptomic studies, most notably from the modENCODE project, have described in detail changes in gene expression at the mRNA level across development. Although such data are clearly very useful to understand how the genome is regulated during embryogenesis, it is important to understand how changes in gene expression are reflected at the level of the proteome. In this study, we describe a combination of two quantitative label-free approaches, SWATH and data-dependent acquisition, to monitor changes in protein expression across a timecourse of D. melanogaster embryonic development. We demonstrate that both approaches provide robust and reproducible methods for the analysis of proteome changes. In a preliminary analysis of Drosophila embryogenesis, we identified several pathways, including the heat-shock response, nuclear protein import and energy production that are regulated during embryo development. In some cases changes in protein expression mirrored transcript levels across development, whereas other proteins showed signatures of post-transcriptional regulation. Taken together, our pilot study provides a solid platform for a more detailed exploration of the embryonic proteome.

### Keywords
Drosophila melanogaster; label-free quantification; swath

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, U.K.

### Submitter
Bertrand Fabre

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, U.K.


