### Accession
PXD006069

### Title
Functional marker in glioblastoma

### Description
To identify receptors and pathways active in glioblastoma (GBM) stem like cells (GSCs), we generated and screened thousands of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) for preferential binding to primary cultures enriched in GSCs. This led to the identification of the integrin alpha 7 (ITGA7) as a major laminin receptor in GSCs and in primary high-grade glioma specimens. Analyses of mRNA profiles in comprehensive datasets revealed that high ITGA7 expression was negatively correlated with survival of patients with both low- and high-grade glioma. In vitro and in vivo analyses demonstrated a key biological function of ITGA7 in growth and invasion of GSCs. In addition, we showed that targeting ITGA7 by RNAi or blocking mAbs impaired laminin-induced signaling and led to a significant delay of tumor engraftment and strong reduction in size and invasion. Our data underline the potential value of ITGA7 as glioma biomarker and therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and mass spectrometry 1D PAGE gel pieces were washed with 150 μl water for 5 min at 37 °C. Proteins were reduced with DTT alkylated with 100 μl 55 mM iodoacetamide in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 25 °C, followed by three alternating washing steps each with 150 μl of water and water/acetonitrile. Gel pieces were then dehydrated with 100 μl neat acetonitrile for 1 min at room temperature, dried for 15 min and rehydrated with porcine trypsin (170 ng trypsin in 10 μL 40 mM NH4HCO3, sequencing grade, Promega). After overnight digestion at 37 °C the supernatant was collected while gel pieces were subjected to three alternating 0.1% TFA and acetonitrile/0.1% TFA 50:50 (v/v) extraction steps. The combined solutions were evaporated, and redissolved in 0.1% TFA for MS analysis. Peptides were separated using a nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters GmbH). Peptides were trapped on a nano Acquity C18 column, 180 μm x 20 mm, particle size 5 μm and separated on a C18 column (BEH 130 C18 100 μm x 100 mm, particle size 1.7 μm (Waters GmbH) with a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The chromatography was carried out using a 1h gradient of solvent A (98.9%) water, 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) and solvent B (99.9%) acetonitrile and 0.1% μl formic acid) in the following sequence: from 0 to 4% B in 1 min, from 4 to 40% B in 40 min, from 40 to 60% B in 5 min, from 60 to 85% B in 0.1 min, 6 min at 85% B, from 85 to 0% B in 0.1 min, and 9 min at 0% B. The nanoUPLC system was coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). The Orbitrap was operated with the following parameters: ESI voltage 2400V; capillary temperature 200°C, normalized collision energy 35 V.The Orbitrap scan resolution was set to 60000 and the mass range from m/z = 200 to 2000.

### Data Protocol
Data base search Six MS/MS scans of the most abundant precursor ions were acquired in the LTQ scan cycles. MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science), version 2.2) against SwissProt database 2017_02 (553655 sequences; 198177566 residues) was used for protein identification. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of C was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications included oxidation of M and deamidation of NQ. One missed cleavage site in case of incomplete trypsin hydrolysis was allowed. Proteins were considered as identified if more than one unique peptide had an individual ion score exceeding the MASCOT identity threshold (ion score cut-off of 22-23). Identification under the applied search parameters refers to False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 1.5% and a match probability of p<0.01, where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event.

### Publication Abstract
Functionally relevant markers of glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs) have potential for therapeutic targeting to treat this aggressive disease. Here we used generation and screening of thousands of monoclonal antibodies to search for receptors and signaling pathways preferentially enriched in GSCs. We identified integrin &#x3b1;7 (ITGA7) as a major laminin receptor in GSCs and in primary high-grade glioma specimens. Analyses of mRNA profiles in comprehensive datasets revealed that high ITGA7 expression negatively correlated with survival of patients with both low- and high-grade glioma. In&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo analyses showed that ITGA7 plays a key functional role in growth and invasiveness of GSCs. We also found that targeting of ITGA7 by RNAi or blocking mAbs impaired laminin-induced signaling, and it led to a significant delay in tumor engraftment plus a strong reduction in tumor size and invasion. Our data, therefore, highlight ITGA7 as a glioblastoma biomarker and candidate therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Glioblastoma; cancer stem cells; integrin alpha 7; glioma cell invasion; stem cell marker; high throughput antibody screening

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center Heidelberg, Clinical Cooperation Unit Neurooncology B320
Protein Analysis Core Facility German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Uwe  Warnken

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Schnoelzer
Protein Analysis Core Facility German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


