### Accession
PXD036107

### Title
Systematic mutagenesis of TFIIH subunit p52/Tfb2 identifies residues required for XPB/Ssl2 subunit function and genetic interactions with TFB6

### Description
TFIIH is an evolutionarily conserved complex that plays central roles in both RNA polymerase II (pol II) transcription and DNA repair. As an integral component of the pol II Pre-Initiation Complex (PIC), TFIIH regulates pol II enzyme activity in numerous ways. The TFIIH subunit XPB/Ssl2 is an ATP-dependent DNA translocase that stimulates promoter opening prior to transcription initiation. Crosslinking-mass spectrometry and cryo-EM results have shown a conserved interaction network involving XPB/Ssl2 and the C-terminal Hub region of the TFIIH p52/Tfb2 subunit, but the functional significance of specific residues is unclear. Here, we systematically mutagenized the HubA region of Tfb2 and screened for growth phenotypes in a TFB6 deletion background in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We identified six lethal and twelve conditional mutants. Slow growth phenotypes of all but three conditional mutants were relieved in the presence of TFB6, thus identifying a functional interaction between Tfb2 HubA mutants and Tfb6, a protein that dissociates Ssl2 from TFIIH. Our biochemical analysis of Tfb2 mutants with severe growth phenotypes revealed defects in Ssl2 association, with similar results in human cells. Further characterization of these tfb2 mutant cells revealed defects in GAL gene induction, and reduced occupancy of TFIIH and pol II at GAL gene promoters, suggesting that functionally competent TFIIH is required for proper pol II recruitment to PICs in vivo. Consistent with recent structural models of TFIIH, our results identify key residues in the p52/Tfb2 HubA domain that are required for stable incorporation of XPB/Ssl2 into TFIIH, and for pol II transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Bead-bound material was also evaluated by LC-MS. Immunoprecipitated proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated in 5% (w/v) SDS, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethylphosphine) (TCEP), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 boiling for 10 minutes. Proteins were then digested using the SP3 method (48). Carboxylate-functionalized speedbeads (Cytiva Life Sciences) were added, the addition of acetonitrile to 80% (v/v) caused the proteins to bind to the beads. The beads were washed twice with 80% (v/v) ethanol and twice with 100% acetonitrile. Proteins were digested in 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.5, with 0.5 ug Lys-C/Trypsin (Promega) incubated at 37˚C overnight rotating to mix. Tryptic peptides were desalted using the carboxylatefunctionalized speedbeads with the addition of 95% (v/v) acetonitrile twice and then eluted with 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, and dried in a speedvac. Tryptic peptide samples were suspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and directly injected onto a reversed-phase C18 1.7µm, 130Å, 75 mm X 250 mm M-class column (Waters), using an Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermos Scientific). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/minute using a gradient from 2% to 20% acetonitrile over 40 min into a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Precursor mass spectra (MS1) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 from 380 to 1580 m/z with an AGC target of 3E6 and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 seconds with a mass tolerance of + /– 10 ppm. Precursor peptide ion isolation width for MS2 fragment scans was 1.4 Da, and the top 12 most intense ions were sequenced. All MS2 sequencing was performed using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 27% normalized collision energy. An AGC target of 1E5 and 100 ms maximum injection time was used.

### Data Protocol
Rawfiles were searched against the Uniprot Human database (UP000005640) using Maxquant version 1.6.14.0 with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable modifications. All peptides and proteins were thresholded at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and iBAQ values reported. For visualization, the Log2 of the iBAQ values was displayed after normalizing to p52 abundance to account for sample concentration variability. Statistical analysis of the IP-MS was performed with GraphPad Prism9 multiple t-tests Holm-Sidak method, α=0.05 with p-adjusted values reported (47).

### Publication Abstract
TFIIH is an evolutionarily conserved complex that plays central roles in both RNA polymerase II (pol II) transcription and DNA repair. As an integral component of the pol II preinitiation complex, TFIIH regulates pol II enzyme activity in&#xa0;numerous ways. The TFIIH subunit XPB/Ssl2 is an ATP-dependent DNA translocase that stimulates promoter opening prior to transcription initiation. Crosslinking-mass spectrometry and cryo-EM results have shown a conserved interaction network involving XPB/Ssl2 and the C-terminal Hub region of the TFIIH p52/Tfb2 subunit, but the functional significance of specific residues is unclear. Here, we systematically mutagenized the HubA region of Tfb2 and screened for growth phenotypes in a TFB6 deletion background in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We identified six lethal and 12 conditional mutants. Slow growth phenotypes of all but three conditional mutants were relieved in the presence of TFB6, thus identifying a functional interaction between Tfb2 HubA mutants and Tfb6, a protein that dissociates Ssl2 from TFIIH. Our biochemical analysis of Tfb2 mutants with severe growth phenotypes revealed defects in Ssl2 association, with similar results in human cells. Further characterization of these tfb2 mutant cells revealed defects in GAL gene induction, and reduced occupancy of TFIIH and pol II at GAL gene promoters, suggesting that functionally competent TFIIH is required for proper pol II recruitment to preinitiation complexes in&#xa0;vivo. Consistent with recent structural models of TFIIH, our results identify key residues in the p52/Tfb2 HubA domain that are required for stable incorporation of XPB/Ssl2 into TFIIH and for pol II transcription.

### Keywords
Tfiih p52/tfb2 xpb/ssl2 tfb6

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Boulder
Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA

### Submitter
Christopher Ebmeier

### Lab Head
Dr Dylan J Taatjes
Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA


