### Accession
PXD024556

### Title
PROTEOMIC PROFILE OF MESOTHELIAL EXOSOMES ISOLATED FROM PERITONEAL DIALYSIS EFFLUENT OF CHILDREN WITH FOCAL SEGMENTAL GLOMERULOSCLEROSIS

### Description
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is the worldwide recognized preferred dialysis treatment for children affected by end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). However, due to the unphysiological composition of PD fluids, the peritoneal membrane (PM) of these patients may undergo structural and functional alterations, which may cause fibrosis. Several factors may accelerate this process and primary kidney disease may have a causative role. In particular, patients affected by corticoresistant primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis), a rare glomerular disease leading to nephrotic syndrome and ESKD, seem more prone to develop peritoneal fibrosis. The mechanism causing this predisposition is still unrecognized.  To better define this condition, we carried out, for the first time, a new comprehensive comparative proteomic mass spectrometry analysis of mesothelial exosomes from peritoneal dialysis effluent (PDE) of 6 pediatric patients with focal segmental glomerular sclerosis (FSGS) versus 6 patients affected by other primary renal diseases (No FSGS). Our omic study demonstrated that, despite the high overlap in the protein milieu between the two study groups, machine learning allowed a complete distinction of the whole proteomic exosome mesothelial content of FSGS versus No FSGS (with 100% accuracy). Out of the 2490 identified proteins, 40% (995) were involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)/fibrosis and in the transforming growth factor-β pathway. Additionally, the Weight Gene Co-expression Network Analysis algorithm identified that some of the discriminative proteins (TIMP1, CTHRC1, SPARC, CHMP4B, COL5A2, ANXA13, FNC2 and CENP-E) were also highly correlated to PD vintage, fibrosis, EMT and non-neoplastic PM disease. All together our data demonstrated that mesothelial cells of FSGS patients are more prone to activate a pro-fibrotic machinery with exosomes having a primary role in this process. Moreover, they indicated that identified FSGS-associated elements in mesothelial exosome protein could be employed as potential new biomarkers of mesothelial integrity. Finally, our results highlighted that in FSGS patients particular attention should be paid to use more biocompatible dialysis solution, reduce the length of time on PD and personalize PD regimens to minimize the risk of rapid loss of PM function or development of encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
The method is based on the capture of a specific subset of exosomes from peritoneal dialysis effluent using a biotinylated antibody and streptavidin magnetic beads.  Enriched exosomes fractions were mixed with polyclonal biotin-conjugated anti-human mesothelin (MSLN) antibody (LifeSpan BioSciences, Seattle, WA, USA) and gently rotated for 4 h at RT. Then, streptavidin Dynabeads (ThermoFisher) were added according to the procedure of the manufacturer. Briefly, exosome-antibody-dynabeads complexes were incubated for 30 minutes at RT with gentle rotation, placed on the magnet and rinsed five times to remove unspecific exosomes and unbound antibodies. Then, sample was removed from the magnet and bound exosomes collected by adding 250 µl of elution buffer. Finally, supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000×g for 120 min at 16°C in order to pellet the exosomes, and rinsed. Such rinse/centrifugation cycle was carried out five times to obtain a clean anti-human mesothelin-positive exosome fraction. Size and purity of the isolated exosomes were assessed by Dynamic Light scattering (DLS). Samples were lysed, reduced and alkylated in 50 ul of iST-LYSE buffer (PreOmics) for 10 min at 95°C and then digested over night at 37°C with 0,7 ug Trypsin and 0,3 ugLysC. Digested samples were processed by iST protocol (27). Elution of the digested samples was performed witha 200 cm uPAC C18 column (PharmaFluidics) maintained at 40°C in the thermostatic column compartment of an Ultimate 3000 RSLC. The peptides were separated with increasing organic solvent at a flow rate of 350 nl/min using a non-linear gradient of 5-45 % solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in 155 min. MS data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). MS1 was performed with Orbitrap detection at a resolving power of 120K, while MS2 was performed with Ion Trap detection with Rapid Ion Trap Scan Rate.Top speed mode with a 2 sec. cycle time was performed for data dependent MS/MS analysis, during which precursors detected within the range of m/z 375−1500 were selected for activation in order of abundance. Quadrupole isolation with a 1.6 m/z isolation window was used, and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30s.Automatic gain control targets was set at 4 × 10E5 for MS1 and at 1 × 10E4 for MS2 with 50 and 45 ms maximum injection times respectively. The signal intensity threshold for MS2 was 1 × 10E4 . HCD was performed using 28% normalized collision energy. One microscan was used for both MS1 and MS2 events

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant (28) software version 1.6.10.0. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match). For peptide identification a minimum length of 6 amino acids was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database (release UP000005640_9606 April 2019). In the processing the Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M) and Deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications and the fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C).After normalization, mass spectrometry data were analyzed by unsupervised hierarchical clustering using multidimensional scaling (MDS) with k-means and Spearman’s correlation, in order to identify outliers and dissimilarity between samples.  Then, the normalized data were used to construct a co-expression network using the weight gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) package in R (14). A weighted adjacency matrix was constructed using the power function. After choosing the appropriate β parameter of power (with the value of independence scale set to 0.8) the adjacency matrix was transformed into a topological overlap matrix (TOM), which measures the network connectivity of all proteins.   To classify proteins that display co-expression profiles into protein modules, hierarchical clustering analysis was conducted according to the TOM dissimilarity, with a minimum size of 20 proteins per module. To identify the relationship between each module and each clinical trait, we used module eigengenes (MEs) and calculated the Spearman’s correlation between MEs and the clinical traits, namely: dialysis vintage; PET values; D/D0 glucose and D/P creatinine; FSGS and No FSGS patients. A heatmap was then used to visualize each degree of relationship.  To identify the hub proteins of modules that maximize the discrimination between FSGS and No FSGS samples, we applied T-test, machine learning methods such as non-linear support vector machine (SVM) learning, and partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA). For the T-test, proteins were considered to be significantly differentially expressed between two conditions with power of 80% and an adjusted P-value ≤0.05 after correction for multiple interactions (Benjamini-Hochberg) and a fold change of ≥2. In addition, the proteins needed to show at least 70% identity in the samples in one of two conditions and area under the curve (AUC) in the received operating characteristic (ROC) analysis >0.8. Volcano plots were used to visualize the expression fold change differences between FSGS and No FSGS samples.   In SVM learning, a fourfold cross-validation approach was applied to estimate the prediction and classification accuracy. Besides, the whole matrix was randomly divided into two parts: one for learning (65%) and the other (35%) to determine the prediction accuracy.   Finally, gene set enrichment analysis was done to build a functional proteins network based on their Gene Ontology (GO) annotations extracted from the Gene Ontology Consortium (http://www.geneontology.org/). The protein profile expression data were loaded in the dataset and a ranked list was assigned to each GO annotation/pathway. These ranks take into account the number of proteins associated with each gene signature with respect to all proteins, their mean of fold change and the P value after FDR correction. These ranks are confined between -1 and 1, corresponding to minimal and maximal enrichment in each group. In the two-dimensional scatter plot utilized to visualize this analysis, the points located on the straight line passing through the coordinates (1x,1y) and (-1x, -1y) represent the equally enriched signatures. The distance from this line is proportional to the increase in signature enrichment in one of the two groups (over or under the straight line are the GO annotation/pathway positively enriched in FSGS or No FSGS samples respectively). Two sides p-values ≤ 0.05 were considered as significant. All statistical tests were performed using Origin Lab V9 and the latest version of software package R available at the time of the experiments.

### Publication Abstract
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is the worldwide recognized preferred dialysis treatment for children affected by end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). However, due to the unphysiological composition of PD fluids, the peritoneal membrane (PM) of these patients may undergo structural and functional alterations, which may cause fibrosis. Several factors may accelerate this process and primary kidney disease may have a causative role. In particular, patients affected by steroid resistant primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, a rare glomerular disease leading to nephrotic syndrome and ESKD, seem more prone to develop peritoneal fibrosis. The mechanism causing this predisposition is still unrecognized. To better define this condition, we carried out, for the first time, a new comprehensive comparative proteomic mass spectrometry analysis of mesothelial exosomes from peritoneal dialysis effluent (PDE) of 6 pediatric patients with focal segmental glomerular sclerosis (FSGS) versus 6 patients affected by other primary renal diseases (No FSGS). Our omic study demonstrated that, despite the high overlap in the protein milieu between the two study groups, machine learning allowed to identify a core list of 40 proteins, with ANXA13 as most promising potential biomarker, to distinguish, in our patient population, peritoneal dialysis effluent exosomes of FSGS from No FSGS patients (with 100% accuracy). Additionally, the Weight Gene Co-expression Network Analysis algorithm identified 17 proteins, with PTP4A1 as the most statistically significant biomarker associated to PD vintage and decreased PM function. Altogether, our data suggest that mesothelial cells of FSGS patients are more prone to activate a pro-fibrotic machinery. The role of the proposed biomarkers in the PM pathology deserves further investigation. Our results need further investigations in a larger population to corroborate these findings and investigate a possible increased risk of PM loss of function or development of encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis in FSGS patients, thus to eventually carry out changes in PD treatment and management or implement new solutions.

### Keywords
Peritoneal dialysis (pd) kidney disease (eskd) peritoneal membrane (pm) glomerular sclerosis (fsgs)

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Ist. G. Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Ist. G. Gaslini


