### Accession
PXD034530

### Title
Chlorhexidine promotes psl in Pseudomonas aeruginosa that enhances cell aggregation with preserved pathogenicity demonstrates an adaptation against antiseptic

### Description
Because Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common pathogen that frequently contacts with Chlorhexidine digluconate (a regular antiseptic), then adaptations against Chlorhexidine were tested. In com-parison with the parent strain, the Chlorhexidine-adapted strain formed smaller colonies with the downregulation of several metabolic pathways (proteomic analysis) and increased resistance against colistin (an antibiotic for the current antibiotic-resistant bacteria), partly through the modification of L-Ara4N in the lipopolysaccharide at the outer membrane (proteomic analysis). Chlorhexidine-adapted strain formed dense liquid-solid interface biofilm with cell aggregation partly due to the Chlorhexidine-induced overexpression of psl (exopolysaccharide-encoded gene) through LadS/GacSA pathway (c-di-GMP-independence) in 12 h biofilms and maintained the ag-gregation with SiaD-mediated c-di-GMP dependence in 24 h biofilms as evaluated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The addition of Ca2+ in the Chlorhexidine-adapted strain facilitated several Psl-associated genes, indicating an impact of Ca2+ in Psl production. The sessile Chlorhexi-dine-treated bacteria demonstrated a lower expression of IL-6 and IL-8 on fibroblasts and mac-rophages than the parent strain, indicating less inflammatory reactions from the Chlorhexidine use. However, the Chlorhexidine-treated bacteria induces similar severity in 14 days of mouse wounds as indicated by wound score and bacterial burdens. In conclusion, Chlorhexidine induced psl over-expression and colistin cross-resistance that might be clinically important.

### Sample Protocol
The 24-h biofilms of PACL and C_PACL were prepared in glass flasks and removed using cell scrapers. The biofilm pellets were collected by centrifugation at 4500 rpm at 4 ̊C for 30 min. The pellets were lysed with 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB followed by sonication. After centrifugation, 200 µl of supernatant was incubated with 4 times the sample volume of cold acetone overnight at -20oC. The protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. One hundred micrograms of each sample were reduced and alkylated by dithiothreitol (DTT) treatment for 30 min at 37 °C and iodoacetamide (IA) treatment for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, respectively. The mixtures were incubated with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C overnight. Peptides from C_PACL and PACL were labeled with light (CH2O and NaBH3CN) and medium (CD2O and NaBH3CN) dimethyl labeling reagents, respectively, for an hour at room temperature before quenching the reaction with ammonia solution and formic acid. After mixing, the pooled labeled-peptides were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge at room temperature. Next, these labeled peptides were separated into 9 fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. Eluates of each fraction were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge before LC-MS/MS analysis. The fractionated samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and then analyzed via an EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo). The peptides were eluted in 5–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 60 min followed by 40–95% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 32%. An MS scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z was selected and precursor ions with unassigned charge states, a charge state of +1, or a charge state of greater than +8 were excluded. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used.

### Data Protocol
The peaklist-generating software used in this study was Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.1 (Thermo). The SEQUEST-HT search engine was employed in data processing. MS raw data files were searched against the Pseudomonas aeruginosa (strain ATCC 15692 / DSM 22644 / CIP 104116 / JCM 14847 / LMG 12228 / 1C / PRS 101 / PAO1) Database (1,435 proteins, March 2022) and a list of common protein contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap/). The following parameters were set for the search: (1) digestion enzyme: trypsin; (2) maximum allowance for missed cleavages: 2; (3) maximum of modifications: 4; (4) fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da), as well as light and medium dimethylation of N termini and lysine (+28.031300 and +32.056407 Da); (5) variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.99491 Da). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Known contaminant ions were excluded. The Proteome Discoverer decoy database together with the Percolator algorithm were used to calculate the false positive discovery rate of the identified peptides based on Q-values which were set to 1%. The Precursor Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer™ Software was employed to quantify the relative MS signal intensities of dimethyl labeled-peptides. The control channels were used as denominators to generate abundance ratios of C_PACL/PACL. Log2 of the normalized ratio was used to calculate the mean and standard deviation of fold change across all three biological replicates. When these ratios were not found in one experiment, the relevant proteins were excluded. Significantly differentially regulated proteins were determined by unpaired t-tests with p value < 0.05 considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Because <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is frequently in contact with Chlorhexidine (a regular antiseptic), bacterial adaptations are possible. In comparison with the parent strain, the Chlorhexidine-adapted strain formed smaller colonies with metabolic downregulation (proteomic analysis) with the cross-resistance against colistin (an antibiotic for several antibiotic-resistant bacteria), partly through the modification of L-Ara4N in the lipopolysaccharide at the outer membrane. Chlorhexidine-adapted strain formed dense liquid-solid interface biofilms with enhanced cell aggregation partly due to the Chlorhexidine-induced overexpression of <i>psl</i> (exopolysaccharide-encoded gene) through the LadS/GacSA pathway (c-di-GMP-independence) in 12 h biofilms and maintained the aggregation with SiaD-mediated c-di-GMP dependence in 24 h biofilms as evaluated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The addition of Ca<sup>2+</sup> in the Chlorhexidine-adapted strain facilitated several <i>Psl</i>-associated genes, indicating an impact of Ca<sup>2+</sup> in <i>Psl</i> production. The activation by Chlorhexidine-treated sessile bacteria demonstrated a lower expression of <i>IL-6</i> and <i>IL-8</i> on fibroblasts and macrophages than the activation by the parent strain, indicating the less inflammatory reactions from Chlorhexidine-exposed bacteria. However, the 14-day severity of the wounds in mouse caused by Chlorhexidine-treated bacteria versus the parent strain was similar, as indicated by wound diameters and bacterial burdens. In conclusion, Chlorhexidine induced <i>psl</i> over-expression and colistin cross-resistance that might be clinically important.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa; chlorhexidine digluconate; chlorhexidine; cross-resistance; biofilm; psl; cell aggregate; persistence; wound infection

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330
Translational Research in Inflammation and Immunology Research Unit (TRIRU), Department of Mi-crobiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 1873 Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand

### Submitter
Jiradej Makjaroen

### Lab Head
Dr Asada Leelahavanichkul
Translational Research in Inflammation and Immunology Research Unit (TRIRU), Department of Mi-crobiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 1873 Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


