### Accession
PXD000402

### Title
Thermococcus gammatolerans shotgun analysis

### Description
We monitored the Thermococcus gammatolerans proteome dynamics by nanoLC-MS/MS after a 5.0 kGy irradiation. For this, two cell samples were subjected to irradiation (samples 3 & 4) and compared to two others (samples 1 & 2) which were not irradiated.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble protein extracts were prepared from the four samples and in solution proteolyzed with trypsin after microwave denaturation of the hyperthermophilic and trypsin recalcitrant proteins. The resulting peptides were resolved by their isoelectric point by OFFGEL electrophoresis in 12 peptide pools.

### Data Protocol
The resulting 48 peptide samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS with a high resolution mass spectrometer. A total of 221,368 MS/MS spectra were recorded and 63,108 were assigned with confidence to peptide sequences. A total of 6,907 peptide sequences could be observed validating the detection of 852 proteins based on the “two peptides” rule.

### Publication Abstract
ORFans are hypothetical proteins lacking any significant sequence similarity with other proteins. Here, we highlighted by quantitative proteomics the TGAM_1934 ORFan from the hyperradioresistant Thermococcus gammatolerans archaeon as one of the most abundant hypothetical proteins. This protein has been selected as a priority target for structure determination on the basis of its abundance in three cellular conditions. Its solution structure has been determined using multidimensional heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy. TGAM_1934 displays an original fold, although sharing some similarities with the 3D structure of the bacterial ortholog of frataxin, CyaY, a protein conserved in bacteria and eukaryotes and involved in iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis. These results highlight the potential of structural proteomics in prioritizing ORFan targets for structure determination based on quantitative proteomics data. The proteomic data and structure coordinates have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000402 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000402) and Protein Data Bank under the accession number 2mcf, respectively.

### Keywords
Irradiation; whole-proteome

### Affiliations
jean.armengaud@cea.fr
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
jean.armengaud@cea.fr


