### Accession
PXD013987

### Title
U2OS osteosarcoma cells LC-MSMS

### Description
In order to identify the targets of miR-193a-5p in osteosarcoma U2OS cell line, we used a lentivirus-mediated expression system to overexpressing miR-193a precusor, miR-193a-5p target sequence and non-target sequence, respectively, in osteosarcoma cell line U2OS. A tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic strategy was employed to identify the global profile of miR-193a-5p-regulated proteins. order to identify the targets of miR-193a-5p, we used a lentivirus-mediated expression system to overexpressing miR-193a precusor, miR-193a-5p target sequence and non-target sequence, respectively, in osteosarcoma cell line U2OS. A tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic strategy was employed to identify the global profile of miR-193a-5p-regulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
1.Sample Preparation SDT buffer was added to the sample. The lysate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The sample was stored at -80 °C. 2. SDS-PAGE Separation 20 µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. 3. Filter-aided sample preparation  200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 100 mM TEAB buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl TEAB buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. 4.TMT Labeling 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using TMT reagent [7] according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 5.Peptide Fractionation with High pH reversed-phase  Pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo scientific) was used to fractionate TMT-labeled digest samples into 10 fractions by an increasing acetonitrile step-gradient elution according to instructions.  6.Mass Spectrometry 7.HPLC Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology.  8.LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17500 at m/z 200 (TMT 6plex), 35000 at m/z 200 (TMT 10plex), and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4. The following parameters were set. Enzyme: Tryprsin Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C): TMT6/10plex (N-term), TMT6/10plex (K) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M) Peptide Mass Tolerance: ± 20 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.1Da Database: https://www.uniprot.org/ Database pattern: Decoy Peptide FDR: ≤0.01 Protein Quantification: The protein ratios are calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein Experimental Bias: Normalizes all peptide ratios by the median protein ratio. The median protein ratio should be 1 after the normalization.

### Publication Abstract
MiR-193a-5p has been observed to have oncogenic or tumor suppressive functions in different kinds of cancers, but its role and molecular mechanism in osteosarcoma are elusive. Na<sup>+</sup>/Ca<sup>2+</sup> exchangers (NCX1, NCX2 and NCX3) normally extrude Ca<sup>2+</sup> from the cell, and deregulation of the intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> homeostasis is related to several kinds of diseases, including cancer. The present study demonstrated that miR-193a-5p was upregulated in osteosarcoma tissues compared with the corresponding adjacent noncancerous tissues, and promoted colony formation, migration, invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in osteosarcoma cells (SaOS-2 and U-2OS), as well as metastasis in a murine xenograft model. Tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics analysis identified NCX2 as a potential target of miR-193a-5p. Luciferase activity assays and Western blotting further confirmed that miR-193a-5p recognized the 3'-untranslated region of NCX2 mRNA, and negatively regulated NCX2 expression. NCX2 was downregulated in osteosarcoma tissues, and its expression was negatively correlated with miR-193a-5p levels. Ectopic expression of NCX2 in osteosarcoma cells could reverse the oncogenicity of miR-193a-5p, indicating that miR-193a-5p exerted its effects by targeting NCX2. Further study demonstrated that NCX2 suppresses Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent Akt phosphorylation by decreasing intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentration, and then inhibited EMT process. Treatment with the antagomir against miR-193a-5p sensitized osteosarcoma to the Akt inhibitor afuresertib in a murine xenograft model. In conclusion, a miR-193a-5p/NCX2/AKT signaling axis contributes to the progression of osteosarcoma, which may provide a new therapeutic target for osteosarcoma treatment.

### Keywords
Mir-193a-5p, Lc-msms, Osteosarcoma, U2os

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University
Hunan Normal University

### Submitter
Jianlin Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jianlin Zhou
College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University


