### Accession
PXD014797

### Title
Insight into the Human Pathodegradome of the V8 protease from Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
The major human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus possesses ten extracellular proteases that are central to the virulence process. While some host targets of these and other bacterial proteases are known, a major bottleneck to the study of their function is the low-throughout nature of substrate identification. Rapid identification of proteolytic cleavage events in complex substrates has, however, been rendered possible by recent developments in the proteomics sub discipline of N-terminomics. Thus, herein we perform the first study of bacterial protease-host interactions, combining the S. aureus V8 protease and the infection relevant substrate human serum. In so doing, we identified ~90 host-protein targets of V8, including previously known and novel targets. Amongst these were complement components (C1r, C1s, C3,C4b, C4BPA, C5, C6, C8G, C9, CfB, CfH, and ficolin), iron sequestration and transport proteins (ceruloplasmin, serotransferrin, hemopexin, haptoglobin), clotting cascade proteins (plasminogen, kallikrein proteins, prothrombin, factors X and XII), and multiple host protease inhibitors (α2M and members of the ITIH and SERPIN families). N-terminomics also provided insight into the disruption of host protein function by highlighting specific target regions of host proteins, where V8 cleaved within peptidase and sushi domains of complement proteins, and, in the case of host protease inhibitors, cleavage occurred predominantly outside their protease-trapping motifs. Collectively, our data highlight the potential for further application of N-terminomics for the discovery of bacterial protease substrates in other host niches, and provides unique insight into the role of the V8 protease in S. aureus pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Human serum, albumin depletion, and V8 protease treatment: Human serum purchased from Fisher Scientific. S. aureus V8 protease purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Albumin depletion was performed using a kit supplied by Fisher Scientific. Serum or albumin depleted (AD) serum was incubated at 37 °C in the presence or absence of V8 protease (5 µg/ml for N-terminomics) for 16 hours. N-terminomics-aminobiotinylation: Aminobiotinylation was performed (Timmer and Salvesen, 2011): 200 µl of serum or AD serum was incubated in the presence or absence of 5 µg V8. GuHCl (6 M final concentration) was added to inactivate proteases following incubation. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubation for 10 minutes at 95 °C, cooled to room temperature, alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide, 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Treated with dry O-methylisourea hemisulfate (0.5 M final concentration) at pH 11 (adjusted with NaOH) for 16 hours at 4 °C. Samples desalted using PD-10 columns (GE Healthcare) and urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 100 mM NaCl). Samples incubated with 5 mM NHS-SS-sulfobiotin (Fisher Scientific) for 1 hour at 37°C, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8 was added. Hydroxylamine hydrochloride (40 mM) added. Samples desalted with PD-10 columns as above and diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 2 M urea. Samples digested with 4 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 18 hours at 37 °C (ratio of trypsin: protein for AD serum and serum was 1:500 and 1:2500). High capacity neutravidin resin, 500 µl, was added for 30 minutes at 4 °C, with rocking. Samples loaded onto 2 ml polystyrene columns, washed with 10 column volumes of urea buffer, and three column volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8), transferred to microfuge tubes, reduced using 5 mM TCEP-HCl, and loaded onto micro-bio chromatography columns (BioRad) then centrifuged at 500 g for 30 s. Resin was washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and centrifuged at 10000 g was performed, flowthrough collected. Peptides desalted using commercially available Sep-Pak C18 desalt columns (Waters). N-terminomics, TAILS: TAILS method (Kleifeld et al., 2010, 2011) as follows: Serum or AD serum was incubated in the presence or absence of V8 (see above), and standardized to 600 µg/ml. Samples were incubated with 10 mM DTT for 60 minutes at 37 °C, pH adjusted to 6, and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature (22 °C). Reactions were quenched by adding 20 mM DTT, and samples were concentrated by chloroform-methanol precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 mM NaOH, 50 mM HEPES pH 8, and guanidium hydrochloride added to 4 M. N-terminal dimethylation was performed using either light formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride (light demethylation, used for untreated conditions), or 13C1 formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborodeuteride (heavy dimethylation, used for V8 treated conditions), enabling diplexing during mass spectrometry. Samples were incubated with 40 mM formaldehyde and 20 mM sodium cyanoboro- reagents for 16 hours at 37 °C. Dimethylation reagents were added again, for 2 hours. Addition of 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 6.8, and incubation at 37 °C for 1 hour. Heavy and light dimethylated samples combined, 5 µg sequencing grade trypsin was added (1: 200 trypsin: protein ratio) and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. HPG-ALD was purchased from flintbox (http://www.flintbox.com/public/project/1948/). Trypsin-digested peptides were added to HPG-ALD polymer at a polymer:peptide mass ratio of 5:1, in the presence of sodium cyanoborohydride, and incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C.  10 kDa centrifugal filters were equilibrated by washing once with 100 mM NaOH and three times with HPLC grade water. Samples were loaded onto centrifugal filters with 100 mM Tris, and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 12000 g, flowthrough containing N-terminal peptides retained. Filters were rinsed with HPLC grade water, and placed upside down in collection tubes, and centrifuged at 12000 g for 1 minute to improve recovery of hydrophobic peptides. Peptides were desalted using commercially available Sep-Pak C18 desalt columns (Waters), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Mass Spectrometry: Following either aminobiotinylation or TAILS, and desalting, N-terminal enriched peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid, with 5 µl aliquots separated on a 50cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Ultimate3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 180 min gradient (2 to 32 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were analyzed on a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition in which the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) was used to process raw files, assigning MS/MS spectra to the human proteome (UniProt ID UP000005640) with the included Andromeda search engine. For aminobiotinylation experiments, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification (57.021464), and methionine oxidation (15.994915), lysine guanidination (42.021798) and the N-terminal biotin linker stub (reduced EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin, 87.998285) set as variable modifications. For TAILS, cysteine carbamidomethylation and peptide N-terminal and lysine dimethylation were set as fixed modifications (heavy or light modifications were assigned in separate searches), whilst methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. An additional pair of searches were performed where dimethylation of N-termini was substituted for N-terminal peptide acetylation or N-terminal glutamine or glutamic acid converted to pyroglutamate (cyclization). In both methods, peptide tolerance and MS/MS tolerance were set at 5 p.p.m. and 0.5 Da, respectively, and the scoring scheme used was ESI-TRAP. Spectra were not matched between repeats. The resulting peptide and modification specific peptide .txt files were processed further using Perseus, as follows: Files were opened as separate matrices in Perseus, and peptides present in at least two of three separate experiments (biological repeats) in any one condition (untreated serum, V8 treated serum, untreated AD serum, or V8 treated AD serum) were included for further processing. Peptide intensity values were transformed (log2), and missing values imputed using Perseus’ default parameters. Aminobiotinylation produced only four matrices, one for each condition, while TAILS produced eight, due to the separate heavy and light dimethylation MaxQuant searches, and for N-terminal acetylation and pyroglutamation. For TAILS analysis, matrices were further processed by summing the intensities of matched peptides between N-terminal dimethylation and N-terminal acetylation/pyroglutamation, in both the heavy and light searches. For statistical analysis, log2 intensities were used in unpaired T-tests with Welch’s correction to assess statistical differences between peptides in the untreated and V8 treated conditions. At this point, reverse peptides, and peptides identified as originating from non-human serum proteins, i.e. contaminants (a total of 8 peptides originating from porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumin, and S. aureus V8) were excluded across all conditions. Pre-TAILS analysis, i.e. peptides that underwent mass spectrometry without enrichment with HPG-ALD polymer to quantify protein in the untreated and V8 treated conditions for normalization of peptide to protein intensities in the V8-treated and untreated conditions, was not performed. Accordingly, the data presented contains peptides with intensities that are significantly different (unpaired T-test with Welch’s correction) between the treated and untreated conditions, and that are unique to either condition, highlighting Neo-N-termini resulting from protease treatment. This method of analysis differs from previously described analyses due to its emphasis on unique N-terminal peptides, but highlights putative cleavage sites for the exogenous protease (V8 in this study), and is thus useful for studies of pathogen proteases in the host.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunology, Microbiology, Degradomics, N-terminomics, Staphylococcus aureus, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Andrew Frey

### Lab Head
Dr Lindsey Neil Shaw
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA


