### Accession
PXD010885

### Title
Somatostatin-interacting human brain proteins

### Description
Somatostatin (SST) is a cyclic peptide that is understood to inhibit the release of hormones and neurotransmitters from a variety of cells by binding to one of five canonical G protein-coupled SST receptors (SSTR1 to SSTR5). Recently, SST was observed to also interact with the amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide and affect its aggregation kinetics, raising the question which other brain proteins it can bind to. Here we report on an SST interactome analysis that made use of human brain extracts as biological source material and incorporated advanced mass spectrometry workflows for the relative quantitation of binders.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated SST14, SST28, and a truncated 11 amino acid long SST peptide were captured on Streptavidin UltraLinkresin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) over 2 hours in PBS at room temperature while undergoing continuous agitation. Human frontal lobe extracts (150 mg each) derived from brains of three individuals who had died of non-dementia causes were added to aliquots of the SST-saturated affinity capture beads overnight at 4°C. The affinity capture media were extensively washed then treated with 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and 20% acetonitrile to release bound protein.  Eluates were dried under vacuum, diluted in 9 M deionized urea, treated with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 60°C then with 4-vinylpyridine.  The urea was diluted to 1.25 M in 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate then trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added and the samples were held at 37°C overnight.  Trypsin treated samples were covalently modified with 8plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) (Sciex) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, then mixed. Data were acquired during four hour runs on an EASY-nLC 1000-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer platform (Thermo). The analytical column was a 25 cm long Acclaim PepMap RSLC 100 of 75 micrometer inner diameter with 2 micrometer, 100 Å pore C18 particles operated at 300 nl/minute over an acetonitrile gradient. Each run was divided into scan cycles up to 3 seconds long, each starting with an Orbitrap precursor ion MS scan and as many linear ion trap product ion (MS2) scans and Orbitrap MS3 scans as possible.  Collision induced dissociation (CID) and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) were used for MS2 and MS3 respectively. The Orbitrap resolution was set to 60,000 for both MS and MS3.

### Data Protocol
The Uniprot canonical and isoform human database (October 29, 2017 version, downloaded January 3, 2018) which was queried with Mascot (version 2.4.1; Matrix Science Ltd) and Sequest HT search engines within Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the affinity capture eluate data. Cut off scores were estimated by the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Somatostatin (SST) is a cyclic peptide that is understood to inhibit the release of hormones and neurotransmitters from a variety of cells by binding to one of five canonical G protein-coupled SST receptors (SSTR1 to SSTR5). Recently, SST was also observed to interact with the amyloid beta (A&#x3b2;) peptide and affect its aggregation kinetics, raising the possibility that it may bind other brain proteins. Here we report on an SST interactome analysis that made use of human brain extracts as biological source material and incorporated advanced mass spectrometry workflows for the relative quantitation of SST binding proteins. The analysis revealed SST to predominantly bind several members of the P-type family of ATPases. Subsequent validation experiments confirmed an interaction between SST and the sodium-potassium pump (Na+/K+-ATPase) and identified a tryptophan residue within SST as critical for binding. Functional analyses in three different cell lines indicated that SST might negatively modulate the K+ uptake rate of the Na+/K+-ATPase.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Amyloid beta, Biotinylation, Alzheimer disease, Neuroendocrine, Interactome, Endocrine, Somatostatin, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto


