### Accession
PXD008825

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis of the livers of spontaneous obese and diabetic rhesus monkeys

### Description
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (TM) is a severely metabolic disorder that affects above 10% worldwide population. Obesity is a major cause of insulin resistance and contributes to the development of TM. Liver is an essential metabolic organ that plays crucial roles in the pathogenesis of obesity and diabetes. However, the underlying mechanisms of liver in the transition of obesity to diabetes are not fully understood. Nonhuman primate (NHP) rhesus monkey is an appropriate animal for research of human diseases. Here, we first screened and selected three individual spontaneous and diabetic rhesus monkeys. Interestingly, the diabetic monkeys were obese with high BMI at beginning, but gradually lost their body weight during one-year observation. Furthermore, we performed a SILAC-based quantitative proteomics to identify proteins and signaling pathways with altered expression in the liver of obese and diabetic monkeys. Totally, 3509 proteins were identified and quantified, and of which 185 proteins displayed altered expression level. GO analysis revealed that the expression of proteins involved in fatty acids β-oxidation and galactose metabolism was increased in obese monkeys; while proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and branched chain amino acid (BCAA) degradation was upregulated in diabetic monkeys. In addition, we observed a mild impaired mitophagy and apoptosis in the liver of diabetic monkeys, suggesting a dysfunction of mitochondria and liver injury in the late onset of diabetics. Taken together, our liver proteomics may reveal a distinct metabolic transition from fatty acids β-oxidation in obese monkey to BCAA degradation in diabetic monkeys.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and fractionation  Human cell lines HEK 293, Huh7 and HCT cells were SILAC-labeled by culturing them in DMEM, in which the natural lysine and arginine were replaced by Lys-8 and Arg-10, and supplemented with 10％ (vol/vol) dialyzed serum. Liver tissue of each sample (100 mg) was homogenized in 1 mL SDT buffer using a beads beating blender (Biheng Biotech, Shanghai, China) at 120 rpm for 2min. The lysate was heated at 95℃ for 5 min, and then centrifuged at 15,000g for 10 min. Equal amount proteins of the tissue lysate and the SILAC mix (1:1) were combined creating of the super-SILAC mix. Individual sample (140 μg) was loaded on a 10k Microcon filtration devices (Millipore), and digested by the FASP procedure as previously described (51). Peptide mixture from biological replicates was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 2.1 × 150 mm column as previous described (41). The total number of fraction concatenated was set to 14 throughout all experiments. LC-MS/MS for fractionation experiments and data analysis The reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) separation was achieved on the Easy nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a self-packed column (75 μm × 150 mm; 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase A of RP-HPLC was 0.1% formic acid in water, and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The peptides were eluted using a gradient (2–90% mobile phase B) over a 2 hr period into a nano-ESI orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with each full MS scan (m/z 350 - 1600) followed by MS/MS for the 20 most intense ions with the parameters: ≥ +2 precursor ion charge, 1 Da precursor ion isolation window and 35 normalized collision energy of CID. Dynamic Exclusion™ was set for 15 s. The full mass and the subsequent MS/MS analyses were scanned in the Orbitrap analyzer with R = 60,000 and 15,000, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed using the software MaxQuant (10) (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.5.1.0). The proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a Rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta) proteome database from Uniprot (35546 proteins, 2015.01.26 downloaded, European Bioinformatics Institute). Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Peptides of minimum six amino acids and maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed for the analysis. For peptide and protein identification, false discovery rate was set to 0.01. Coefficient of variation was determined by comparing proteins rations in the replicates. Proteins were considered as changed between experimental groups if they displayed ≥ 1.5 fold changes in their corresponding mean of SILAC rations as well as P value ≤ 0.05 by a student t-test. Hierarchical clustering of proteins was performed using Euclidean distance and Ward clustering method by Package of ‘pheatmap’ in language R protein network and pathway analysis. Pathway analysis was performed using the STRING database (https://string-db.org/, version 10.5) (Supplementary Table 1-4) (44).

### Publication Abstract
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a severe metabolic disorder that affects more than 10% of the population worldwide. Obesity is a major cause of insulin resistance and contributes to the development of T2DM. Liver is an essential metabolic organ that plays crucial roles in the pathogenesis of obesity and diabetes. However, the underlying mechanisms of liver in the transition of obesity to diabetes are not fully understood. The nonhuman primate rhesus monkey is an appropriate animal for research of human diseases. Here, we first screened and selected three individuals of spontaneously diabetic rhesus monkeys. Interestingly, the diabetic monkeys were obese with a high body mass index at the beginning, but gradually lost their body weight during one year of observation. Furthermore, we performed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture-based quantitative proteomics to identify proteins and signaling pathways with altered expression in the liver of obese and diabetic monkeys. In total, 3,509 proteins were identified and quantified, of which 185 proteins displayed an altered expression level. Gene ontology analysis revealed that the expression of proteins involved in fatty acids &#x3b2;-oxidation and galactose metabolism was increased in obese monkeys; while proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation and branched chain amino acid (BCAA) degradation were upregulated in diabetic monkeys. In addition, we observed mild apoptosis in the liver of diabetic monkeys, suggesting liver injury at the late onset of diabetes. Taken together, our liver proteomics may reveal a distinct metabolic transition from fatty acids &#x3b2;-oxidation in obese monkey to BCAA degradation in diabetic monkeys.

### Keywords
Spontaneous type 2 diabetes; liver; rhesus monkey; silac-based quantitative proteomics.

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Science
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Jing Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhou Hu
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China


