### Accession
PXD039032

### Title
Proteome changes of fibroblasts and endothelial cells upon incubation with human cytomegalovirus dense bodies

### Description
A mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis was performed to study the proteome changes upon treatment with dense bodies derived from human cytomegalovirus infection.

### Sample Protocol
Dense bodies (DB) derived from human cytomegalovirus infection were irradiated with ultra-violet light and then applied to human fibroblasts or endothelial cells. The proteins of the treated cells and their corresponding controls were digested in-gel by trypsin. The resultant peptides the treated and control cells were then dimethyl labelled and combined accordingly. Peptides were measured by a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by MaxQuant software package (version 2.1.3.0) using Andromeda search engine. Spectral data were searched against a target-decoy database consisting of the forward and reverse sequences of UniProt proteomes downloaded on 10th August 2022 listed for the specific Taxon IDs (ID 9606, H. sapiens,  79759 entries; ID 10359, HCMV,  17993 entries; ID 10363, HCMV Town strain, 304 entries) and a list of 246 common contaminants. Corresponding labels were selected for “Light” (DimethLys0 and DimethNter0), “Medium” (DimethLys4 and DimethNter4) and “Heavy” (DimethLys8 and DimethNter8) labels. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein levels. The “re-quantify” function was switched on.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hcmv, Fibroblasts, Dense bodies, Endothelial cells, Dimethyl-labelling

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology
Institute for Virology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Jia-Xuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Bodo Plachter
Institute for Virology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany


