### Accession
PXD000556

### Title
E. coli BW25113 and knock-out mutants (delta-pka, delta-arcA and delta-pka_arcA) LC MS/MS

### Description
1ml of WT, delta-pka, delta-arcA and delta-pka delta-arcA culture broth was harvested at u=0.4 h-1, centrifuged (14000 x g for 1 min at 4 degrees C), pellet washed once with PBS, flash frozen with liquid N2 and kept at -80 degrees C until further processing. Frozen pellets were melted on ice after which 100 ug of sample biomass was mixed with 100 ug of SILAC-labeled E. coli biomass (internal standard) and frozen at -80 degrees C.  Cell pellets were suspended in 100 uL SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS/100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8/100 mM DTT) and heated at 95  degrees C for 15 min. Cell lysates were sonicated with ultrasound for a few pulses and pelleted by centrifugation. Cell lysates were digested with trypsin according to Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al. 2009) and purified with C-18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Agilent 1200 series nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies) connected to a LTQ Orbitrap mass-spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptides were separated with a 240-minute gradient from 2 to 40% B (A: 0.5% acetic acid, B: 0.5% acetic acid/80% acetonitrile) using a flow-rate of 200 nl/min. Data analysis of raw MS-files was performed by the MaxQuant software package version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann 2008). Peak lists were searched using the Andromeda search engine (built into MaxQuant) against an E. coli database (downloaded 09.04.2013 from http://www.uniprot.org/) which was supplemented with common contaminants (e.g human keratin, trypsin). Full tryptic specificity, a maximum of two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions was specified in the MaxQuant search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The required false discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to six amino acids. “Match between runs” option with a time window of 1.5 min was allowed.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Elimination of acetate overflow in aerobic cultivation of Escherichia coli would improve many bioprocesses as acetate accumulation in the growth environment leads to numerous negative effects, e.g. loss of carbon, inhibition of growth, target product synthesis, etc. Despite many years of studies, the mechanism and regulation of acetate overflow are still not completely understood. Therefore, we studied the growth of E. coli K-12 BW25113 and several of its mutant strains affecting acetate-related pathways using the continuous culture method accelerostat (A-stat) at various specific glucose consumption rates with the aim of diminishing acetate overflow. Absolute quantitative exo-metabolome and proteome analyses coupled to metabolic flux analysis enabled us to demonstrate that onset of acetate overflow can be postponed and acetate excretion strongly reduced in E. coli by coordinated activation of phosphotransacetylase-acetyl-CoA synthetase (PTA-ACS) and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycles. Fourfold reduction of acetate excretion (2 vs. 8&#xa0;% from total carbon) at fastest growth compared to wild type was achieved by deleting the genes responsible for inactivation of acetyl-CoA synthetase protein (pka) and TCA cycle regulator arcA. The &#x394;pka &#x394;arcA strain did not accumulate any other detrimental by-product besides acetate and showed identical &#x3bc; max and only ~5&#xa0;% lower biomass yield compared to wild type. We conclude that a fine-tuned coordination between increasing the recycling capabilities of acetate in the PTA-ACS node through a higher concentration of active acetate scavenging Acs protein and downstream metabolism throughput in the TCA cycle is necessary for diminishing overflow metabolism of acetate in E. coli and achieving higher target product production in bioprocesses.

### Keywords
Delta-pka, Delta-arca, Delta-pka_arca, E. coli

### Affiliations
Center of Food and Fermentation Technologies

### Submitter
Karl Peebo

### Lab Head


