### Accession
PXD001262

### Title
Affinity capture of S. cerevisiae protein after glutaraldehyde stabilization

### Description
It remains extraordinarily challenging to elucidate endogenous protein-protein interactions and proximities within the cellular milieu. The dynamic nature and the large range of affinities of these interactions augment the difficulty of this undertaking. Among the most useful tools for extracting such information are those based on affinity capture of target bait proteins in combination with mass spectrometric readout of the co-isolated species. Although highly enabling, the utility of affinity-based methods is generally limited by difficulties in distinguishing specific from non-specific interactors, preserving and isolating all unique interactions including those that are weak, transient or rapidly exchanging, and differentiating proximal interactions from those that are more distal. Here, we have devised and optimized a set of methods to address these challenges. The resulting pipeline involves flash-freezing cells in liquid nitrogen to preserve the cellular environment at the moment of freezing; cryomilling to fracture the frozen cells into intact sub-micron chunks to allow for rapid access of a chemical reagent and to stabilize the intact endogenous subcellular assemblies and interactors upon thawing; and utilizing the high reactivity of glutaraldehyde to achieve sufficiently rapid stabilization at low temperatures to preserve native cellular interactions. In the course of this work, we determined that relatively low molar ratios of glutaraldehyde to reactive amines within the cellular milieu were sufficient to preserve even labile and transient interactions. This mild treatment enables efficient and rapid affinity capture of the protein assemblies of interest under non-denaturing conditions, followed by bottom-up MS to identify and quantify the protein constituents. For convenience, we have termed this approach Stabilized Affinity Capture Mass Spectrometry (SAC-MS). Here, we demonstrate that SAC-MS allows us to stabilize and elucidate local, distant and transient protein interactions within complex cellular milieux, many of which are not observed in the absence of chemical stabilization.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast Culture — All yeast strains were harvested in the mid-log phase (2-3×10000000 cells/mL) by centrifugation. The cell pellet was immediately flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C. Flash-frozen yeast cell pellets were subjected to mechanical cell disruption in the planetary ball mill in 3-minute cycles at the liquid nitrogen temperature. Cycles were repeated until complete cell wall disruption was achieved as assessed by light microscopy after each grinding cycle. Affinity Isolation of Protein A-tagged Complexes from the Yeast Cell Lysate — The frozen yeast powder ( 196°C) was mixed with the extraction buffer at RT in 1 to 4 (wt/wt) ratio in combination with glutaraldehyde (see below). The resulting solution was shaken until completely homogenized and kept on ice. After 5 min, 1M Tris buffer (pH 8) was added to a final concentration of 100mM. Undissolved material was removed by centrifugation at 20,000×g for 5min at 4°C. Magnetic beads with the conjugated antibody were added to the supernatant and the vial containing the suspension was incubated at 4°C with a gentle tumbling motion. After 1h, the beads were removed from the cell lysate and washed five times with the extraction buffer. Affinity-isolated protein complexes were eluted from the beads using a solution of 1%(wt/v) SDS and 20mM Tris, pH 8.  Glutaraldehyde Stabilization — Glutaraldehyde can undergo rapid aldol condensation at room temperature when exposed to pH 7–8. To minimize the effect of proteins being modified by oligomeric glutaraldehyde in the stabilization experiments, we stored the stabilizing reagent frozen and added it to the extraction buffer just before addition to the frozen yeast powder. The concentration of glutaraldehyde was optimized by monitoring the efficiency of affinity capture of the bait protein in association with its interactors. Trypsin Proteolysis — Disulfide bonds in the denatured, affinity-isolated proteins were reduced by treatment with 20mM DTT at 60°C for 1h. Free cysteinyl residues were alkylated for 40 min at room temperature and in the dark with freshly prepared 50mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were separated from detergents and other small molecules by methanol-chloroform precipitation. An aliquot of 20µl of 8M urea solution in 100mM Tris pH 8 was added to the protein pellet, and the solution was subjected to an ultrasonic bath for 5 min. The solution obtained was diluted with 140µl of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. An aliquot containing 100ng of trypsin was added to each sample, and the solution was incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptide mixture was desalted using a C18 Stage tip.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS — Liquid chromatography was performed using an Ultimate HPLC equipped with a FAMOS auto sampler. The system consisted of a trap column—5mm (L) × 0.3mm (ID), 10µm particle size, PepMap C18-resin (LC Packings)—and an in-house packed PicoFrit column—13cm (L) × 75µm (ID), 3µm particle size, C18 Reprosil Pur C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The system was operated with a measured flow rate of 200nl/min and the column eluate was electrosprayed at 1.8 kV into the heated ion transfer capillary (275°C) of the mass spectrometer (ESI/ETD-LTQ XL-Orbitrap, Thermo). Peptide mixtures were separated using a linear 1-hour acetonitrile gradient. Solvent A consisted of 5%v acetonitrile and 0.1%v formic acid in water, and solvent B of 5%v water and 0.1%v formic acid in acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were MS analyzed using either a method for fragmentation of the ten most abundant ions measured from an MS1 scan (top 10) or using an MS1-only method. Precursor masses were measured on the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 60,000. MS/MS experiments were performed with CID activation, and fragment ions were analyzed in the linear ion trap analyzer. For label-free quantification, each sample was subjected to five LC-MS runs (two using the top-10 method for peptide identification and three with MS1-only method for more accurate intensity-based label-free quantification). We selected a 3-minute window of retention time to match peaks between chromatographic runs. Protein identifications were performed using both X!Tandem (version SLEDGEHAMER) and MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2) against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database, whereas label-free quantification was performed using the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
It remains extraordinarily challenging to elucidate endogenous protein-protein interactions and proximities within the cellular milieu. The dynamic nature and the large range of affinities of these interactions augment the difficulty of this undertaking. Among the most useful tools for extracting such information are those based on affinity capture of target bait proteins in combination with mass spectrometric readout of the co-isolated species. Although highly enabling, the utility of affinity-based methods is generally limited by difficulties in distinguishing specific from nonspecific interactors, preserving and isolating all unique interactions including those that are weak, transient, or rapidly exchanging, and differentiating proximal interactions from those that are more distal. Here, we have devised and optimized a set of methods to address these challenges. The resulting pipeline involves flash-freezing cells in liquid nitrogen to preserve the cellular environment at the moment of freezing; cryomilling to fracture the frozen cells into intact micron chunks to allow for rapid access of a chemical reagent and to stabilize the intact endogenous subcellular assemblies and interactors upon thawing; and utilizing the high reactivity of glutaraldehyde to achieve sufficiently rapid stabilization at low temperatures to preserve native cellular interactions. In the course of this work, we determined that relatively low molar ratios of glutaraldehyde to reactive amines within the cellular milieu were sufficient to preserve even labile and transient interactions. This mild treatment enables efficient and rapid affinity capture of the protein assemblies of interest under nondenaturing conditions, followed by bottom-up MS to identify and quantify the protein constituents. For convenience, we have termed this approach Stabilized Affinity Capture Mass Spectrometry. Here, we demonstrate that Stabilized Affinity Capture Mass Spectrometry allows us to stabilize and elucidate local, distant, and transient protein interactions within complex cellular milieux, many of which are not observed in the absence of chemical stabilization.

### Keywords
Budding yeast, Glutaraldehyde, Affinity capture

### Affiliations
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
Roman Subbotin

### Lab Head
Dr Brian T. Chait
The Rockefeller University


