### Accession
PXD021064

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of exosomes in cell culture supernatant of hBMEC infected by E. coli

### Description
Exosomes are small vesicles with a diameter of approximately 30-140nm. This double-layer phospholipid membrane encapsulates a variety of proteins, lipids and nucleic acids, which are produced and released by cells under specific conditions, participating in a large scale of regulatory processes. There is accumulating evidence indicating that exosomes also play an indispensable regulatory function in the central nervous system under physiological and pathological conditions, such as promoting communication between various cells in the blood-brain barrier. In our study, we attempted to obtain exosomes of human brain microvascular endothelial cells (hBMEC) infected by an extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia. coli strain as well as control cells, and mass spectrometry analysis was performed to study the role of encapsulated proteome in central nervous system inflammation caused by bacterial infection. The particle size analysis results show that the size of the exosomes we isolated is mainly distributed between 30-200nm. Tetraspanin TSG101, CD9, and cytoplasmic protein Alix that we selected as positive markers for exosomes were successfully detected, while the negative marker, the endoplasmic reticulum-specific expression protein GRP94, was not found. In summary, the proteomic identification results showed that 1162 common proteins were identified in the two groups of exosomes from control and infected hBMEC, including 59 differentially expressed proteins. (Proteins with expression change more than 2 times or less than 0.5 times and P value less than 0.05 are regarded as differentially expressed proteins). The bioinformatics analysis indicated that differentially expressed proteins are mainly classified into structural molecular activity and constituent of ribosome. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showed that many proteins are involved in ribosome-related pathways, pathogenic E. coli infections, and PI3K-Akt Signal pathways, etc. The present study laid an important foundation for the subsequent study of exosomal proteins in bacterial infections.

### Sample Protocol
An Escherichia. coli strain PCN033 was used to infect hBMEC for 1.5h (MOI=10), extracellular bacteria was killed after the medium was replaced by serum-free medium containing cefotaxime sodium, and intracellular bacteria continued to interact with cells for 24h. Cell culture supernatant from infect and control groups was obtained to ultracentrifugation for exosomes collection, and exoEasy Maxi kit was used to perform exosomes purification. The digestion was performed with a phase transfer surfactant aids procedure. Exosomes were solubilized in lysis buffer containing 12 mM sodium deoxycholate, 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate, and phosphatase inhibitor mixture in 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.5. Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM chloroacetamide at 95 °C for 5 min. Alkylated proteins were diluted to fivefold with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and digested with Lys-C in a 1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 h at 37 °C. Trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion. The digested peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, and 250 μL ethyl acetate was added to 250 μL digested solution. The mixture was shaken for 2 min and then centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 2 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. The aqueous phase was collected and desalted, using 100 mg Sep-pak C18 column. The in-house-constructed immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) tip was made by capping the end with a 20 μm polypropylene frits disk. Peptides were dissolved in 4 μL of 0.3% formic acid with 3% (vol/vol) acetonitrile and injected into an EasynLC 1000. Peptides were separated on a 45-cm in-house packed column (360 μm OD × 75 μm inner diameter) containing C18 resin (2.2 μm, 100 Å), with a 30-cm column heater, and the temperature was set at 50 °C. The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (buffer B) run with a linear 45- or 60-min gradient of 6–30% buffer B at flow rate of 250 nL/min. The EasynLC 1000 was coupled online with a hybrid high-resolution LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, in which a full-scan MS (from m/z 350 to 1,500 with the resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400), followed by MS/MS on the 10 most intense ions (normalized collision energy, 30%; automatic gain control 3E4, maximum injection time, 100 ms).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.3.0.5). The tandem mass spectra results were used to match with the Human UniProt database (uniprot_Human_159691_20170809.fasta; http://www.uniprot.org/). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance value for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. The FDR was set to less than 1%. Proteins were quantified using label-free quantification, and the relative protein abundances are presented as the Infect/Control ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic; exosomes; hbmec; infect; e. coli

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
The Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China

### Submitter
Dong Huo

### Lab Head
Dr Xiangru Wang
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China


