### Accession
PXD005895

### Title
A class of reactive acyl-CoA species reveals the nonenzymatic origins of protein acylation

### Description
The mechanisms underlying the formation of acyl protein modifications remain poorly understood. By investigating the reactivity of endogenous acyl-CoA metabolites, we found a class of acyl-CoAs that undergoes intramolecular catalysis to form reactive intermediates which non-enzymatically modify proteins. Based on this mechanism, we predicted, validated, and characterized the protein modification: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl(HMG)-lysine. In a model of altered HMG-CoA metabolism, we found evidence of two additional protein modifications: 3-methylglutaconyl(MGc)-lysine and 3-methylglutaryl(MG)-lysine. Using quantitative proteomics, we compared the ‘acylomes’ of two reactive acyl-CoA species, namely HMG-CoA and glutaryl-CoA, which are generated in different pathways. We found proteins that are uniquely modified by each reactive metabolite, as well as common proteins and pathways. We identified the tricarboxylic acid cycle as a pathway commonly regulated by acylation, and validated malate dehydrogenase as a key target. These data identify a fundamental relationship between reactive acyl-CoA species and proteins, and define a new regulatory paradigm in metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Non-quantitative proteomics. Pulverized flash frozen liver tissue (~15 mg) was solubilized in Urea lysis buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM Tris, (pH 8.0), 40 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, + 1x protease inhibitor tablet, 10 mM Nicotinamide, 10 µM TSA). Protein was quantified by BCA assay and adjusted to 2.5 mg/mL with lysis buffer. Samples were reduced, alkylated (iodoacetamide), digested (LysC/trypsin), acidified (0.5% TFA), subjected to solid phase extraction (SPE), and lyophilized. One hundred µg of concentrated rabbit pan-HMG-K antibody was coupled to 20 uL of Protein A/G agarose in PBS (pH 7.4) in a total volume of 500 µL overnight at 4°C on a rocker. The next day, antibody-coupled agarose was pelleted, the supernatant discarded, and the pellet washed three times in PBS. The lyophilized peptides were solubilized in 1 mL of IP buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.4), 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate) and incubated with the HMG-K antibody coupled agarose overnight at 4°C with rotating. Each sample was assessed initially using 2 mg of input material and a second time with 4.35 mg of input material. The next day, the antibody-peptide complexes were pelleted and washed 5 times in IP buffer. The peptides were eluted in 0.1% TFA, subjected to SPE, lyophilized, and re-suspended in 12 µL 0.1% formic acid. All proteomic analysis was performed using a nano-Acquity UPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Samples were first trapped on a Symmetry C18 20 mm × 180 µm trapping column (5 μL/min at 99.9/0.1 v/v water/acetonitrile), after which the analytical separation was performed using a 1.7 µm Acquity BEH130 C18 75 um × 250 mm column  using the indicated gradient with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/minute (nL/min) with a column temperature of 55ºC. For each sample, 4 µL of the IP eluate was injected and the peptides separated over a gradient of 3 to 30% acetonitrile. Each IP was analyzed in duplicate (90 min gradients for the 2 mg IP and 210 min for the 4.35 mg IP) by DDA collecting MS/MS spectra for the top 10 ions with a charge greater than 1, with dynamic exclusion enabled for 20 seconds. MS1 (precursor) analysis was performed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x106 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. Precursor ions were filtered with a 2.0 m/z isolation window and fragmented with an NCE of 27. MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 5x104 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.  TMT-based quantitative proteomics. Mitochondrial pellets from livers of 10 week old Hmgcl KO (n=3) and control mice (n=3) were re-suspended in ice-cold 8M Urea Lysis Buffer (as above, but without TSA). Samples were solubilized by a combination of pipetting, vortexing, and sonication. Concentration of soluble protein was determined by BCA, and equal amount of protein (1500 µg, adjusted to 2.5 mg/mL with Urea Lysis Buffer) from each sample was reduced, alkylated (iodoacetamide), digested (trypsin), acidified to 0.5% TFA, subjected to SPE, and  lyophilized.  Each sample was re-suspended in 300 µL of 200 mM TEAB, mixed with a unique 6-plex TMT reagent (2.4 mg re-suspended in 150 µL100% acetonitrile), and shaken for 4 hrs at RT. After samples were quenched with 2.4 µL 50% hydroxylamine and shaken for 15 min at RT, all six samples were combined, lyophilized, and subjected to SPE. The eluate was vortexed and split into one aliquot containing ~ 5% of the total peptide mixture (450 µg) and a second aliquot containing ~ 95% (8.45 mg), both of which were lyophilized. Six mg of the 8.45 mg aliquot was re-suspended in 1.0 mL of 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.4 @ 4ºC), 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM sodium phosphate and pH adjusted to 7.4 with NaOH and IP’d with HMG-lysine antiserum as described above. The 450 µg aliquot of the “input” material was re-suspended in 450 uL of 20 mM ammonium formate at pH 10 and 1.5 uL was injected for analysis over a 90 minute LC gradient optimized for TMT 6plex labeled samples. The sample was separated into 5 fractions (300 ng/fraction) using online 5-step high-pH RP fractionation. All samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis as described above, with minor changes. The HMG enriched sample was analyzed with technical replicate runs, with 4.5 µL of sample injected. The 5 input material fractions were analyzed in singlicate, with 3 uL injections. Changes to the nano-LC-MS/MS methods from above included a 240 minute gradient, DDA top 20 MS2 analysis, and dynamic exclusion being enabled for 90 seconds. Precursor ions were filtered with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 1x105 ions and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.   Glutarylated peptides analysis used similar methods—minor changes include a dynamic exclusion setting of 30 seconds and a 1.2 m/z isolation window.  See Wagner et. al. Cell Metabolism 2017 for further details.

### Data Protocol
Non-quantitative proteomics. Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.1 with Service Pack 1 (PD2.1 SP1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), using both the Sequest HT and MS Amanda search engines. Data were searched against the UniProt mouse complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 51,414 sequences on the date of download (06/23/2016). Variable modifications include oxidation (M) and different acyl modifications—acetylation (K), succinylation (K), butyrylation (K), malonylation (K), glutarylation (K), hydroxymethylglutarylation (K, 144.0422587 Da), 3-methylglutarylation (K, 128.0473441 Da), and 3-methylglutaconylation (K, 126.0316941 Da) —searched one at a time based on the experiment. Fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C) was selected. Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 3 and enzyme specificity was trypsin. PSMs were filtered to a 1% FDR for each search engine separately using the Percolator node of PD2.1 and site localization probabilities were determined for all modifications using the ptmRS algorithm. PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR at the peptide level and using a 95% localization threshold for PTMs. Peptides were grouped to proteins using the rules of strict parsimony.  TMT-based quantitative proteomics. PD2.1 SP1 was used for raw data analysis as described above with modifications as follows—for TMT-labeled samples, default search parameters included oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMTplex (229.163 Da on peptide N-term and K) as fixed. HMGyl runs added HMGylation (144.04226 Da on K), changed TMT to a variable modification on K (remaining fixed on peptide N-term) and increased maximum missed trypsin cleavage sites to 4. Considering each data type (HMGyl, input) separately, PSMs from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% FDR and PTM site localization probabilities were determined as above. PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR at the peptide level and using a 95% localization threshold for PTMs. Peptides from all samples (HMGyl, input) were grouped to proteins using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using the Protein FDR Validator node of PD2.1. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs having co-isolation interference below 0.5 (50% of the ion current in the isolation window) and S/N>1 for all reporter ions were summed together at the peptide and protein level, but keeping quantification for each data type (HMGyl, input) separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations. Protein and peptide groups tabs in the PD2.1 results were exported as .txt. files, and analyzed in Microsoft EXCEL. First, peptide group reporter intensities from the input material were for each TMT channel were summed and divided by the average of the six summed values to calculate loading control normalization factors to correct for any deviation from equal protein/peptide input into the six sample comparison. Summed reporter intensities for peptide groups from the HMGyl fraction and for proteins from the input fraction were divided by the loading control normalization factors for each respective TMT channel. Analyzing the HMGyl peptide and protein datasets separately, all loading control-normalized TMT reporter intensities were converted to log2 space, and the average value from the six conditions was subtracted from each sample-specific measurement to normalize the relative measurements to the mean. For the WT and HMGCL KO comparison (n=3), condition average, standard deviation, p-value (two-tailed student’s t-test, assuming equal variance) and adjusted P-value (Padjusted, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction) were calculated. For protein-level quantification, only Master Proteins, or the most statistically significant protein representing a group of parsimonious proteins, identified at 1% protein-level FDR were used for quantitative comparison. PTM level measurements (HMGyl) were calculated both alone and with normalization to any change in the corresponding Master Protein, calculated by subtracting Log2 Master Protein values from PTM-containing peptide quantitation values on a sample-specific basis. Analysis of protein glutarylation was conducted similarly between WT and GCDH KO mice (n=1). See Wagner et. al. Cell Metabolism 2017 for further details.

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms underlying the formation of acyl protein modifications remain poorly understood. By investigating the reactivity of endogenous acyl-CoA metabolites, we found a class of acyl-CoAs that undergo intramolecular catalysis to form reactive intermediates that non-enzymatically modify proteins. Based on this mechanism, we predicted, validated, and characterized a protein modification: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl(HMG)-lysine. In a model of altered HMG-CoA metabolism, we found evidence of two additional protein modifications: 3-methylglutaconyl(MGc)-lysine and 3-methylglutaryl(MG)-lysine. Using quantitative proteomics, we compared the "acylomes" of two reactive acyl-CoA species, namely HMG-CoA and glutaryl-CoA, which are generated in different pathways. We found proteins that are uniquely modified by each reactive metabolite, as well as common proteins and pathways. We identified the tricarboxylic acid cycle as a pathway commonly regulated by acylation and validated malate dehydrogenase as a key target. These data uncover a fundamental relationship between reactive acyl-CoA species and proteins and define a new regulatory paradigm in metabolism.

### Keywords
Glutarylation, Nonenzymatic protein acylation, Hmgylation

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D. Hirschey
Assistant Professor Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University Medical Center


