### Accession
PXD027804

### Title
Antisense oligonucleotide activity in tumour cells is influenced by intracellular LBPA distribution and 6 extracellular vesicles recycling

### Description
Next generation modified antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are commercially approved new therapeutic modalities, yet poor productive uptake and endosomal entrapment in tumour cells limit their broad application. We compared intracellular traffic of anti KRAS antisense oligonucleotide (AZD4785) in good and poor productive uptake tumour cells, PC9 and LK2 respectively. We found that the majority of AZD4785 is rapidly delivered to CD63+ late endosomes (LE) in both cell lines. Importantly, lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA) that triggers ASO LE escape is presented in CD63+ LE in PC9 but not in LK2 cells. Moreover, both cells recycle AZD4785 in the extracellular vesicles (EVs) however AZD4785 quantification by advanced mass spectrometry and proteomic analysis revealed that LK2 recycles more AZD4785 and RNA-binding proteins. Finally, stimulating LBPA intracellular production or blocking EV recycling enhanced AZD4785 activity in LK2 but not in PC9 cells thus offering novel strategy to possibly enhance ASO potency in poor productive uptake tumour cells.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen pellets were resuspended in 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (Ambic, pH 8.0) to achieve a final concentration of approximate 2µg/µl. Aliquots of 25µl (~50µg protein) of each sample were added to tubes containing 25µl denaturation solution (8M urea/50mM AmBic, pH=8). The resolubilised pellet was then reduced using 1 µL of 500 mM DTT and incubated at 56°C for 45 minutes, followed by alkylation with 1 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide; incubated for 45 minutes at 25°C in the dark. All samples were diluted 4-fold with 50mM Ambic to reduce the urea concentration (<2M). Samples were digested overnight using Trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) of enzyme to protein. Trypsin reaction was stopped by adding 1.3µl TFA (0.5% to total volume) to each sample. Peptide purification was achieved with Waters Sep-Pak SPE cartridges. Cartridges were pre-conditioned and equilibrated with 100% Acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA, respectively. Trypsin digested sample (50µg) was loaded on to the cartridge and washed with 0.1% TFA (2 times) before eluting with 1ml of 70% Acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA solution. Eluted samples were than dried using SpeedVac and resuspended in 100µl 0.1%FA (~0.5µg/µl). Peptides were separated and detected on a Waters nano-Acquity UPLC (M Class) coupled with  Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive HF-X LC/MS system with nano-ESI source. 2µl was injected and trapped on a Waters C18 Trap column (5µm, 2G 18µm X 20mm) for 3 mins at 5µL/min, before being separated across a Waters peptide BEH C18 column, with a  flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Peptides were separated on a 120 minute gradient, from 3%-35% B (solvent A -  0.1% Formic Acid in water; solvent B – 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile). Peptides were acquired on a Thermo QExactive HF-X, operating in positive ion mode

### Data Protocol
data analysed in Proteome Discoverer v2.2.0.388. There were 3 biological replicates and 2 technical replicates for each Antisense-oligonucleotides (ASO) treated and non-treated LK2 and PC9 cells. Resulting data were searched against the Homo sapiens (Swissprot) database, with false discovery rate (FDR) strict and FDR relaxed set to 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. For selection criteria, two unique peptides were required for the positive identification of any master protein and the master protein must be present in all respective biological and technical replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antisense oligonucletides, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biopharmaceutical development, R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK
Astrazeneca

### Submitter
Nitin Rustogi

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas J Bond
Biopharmaceutical development, R&D, AstraZeneca, Cambridge, UK


