### Accession
PXD010177

### Title
Reconstitution of mammalian Cleavage Factor II

### Description
Cleavage factor II (CF II) is a poorly characterized component of the multi-protein complex catalyzing 3' cleavage and polyadenylation of mammalian mRNA precursors. We have reconstituted CF II as a heterodimer of hPcf11 and hClp1. The heterodimer is active in partially reconstituted cleavage reactions, whereas hClp1 by itself is not. Pcf11 moderately stimulates the RNA 5' kinase activity of hClp1; the kinase activity is dispensable for RNA cleavage. CF II binds RNA with nanomolar affinity. Binding is mediated mostly by the two zinc fingers in the C-terminal region of hPcf11. RNA is bound without pronounced sequence-specificity, but extended G-rich sequences appear to be preferred. We discuss the possibility that CF II contributes to the recognition of cleavage/polyadenylation substrates through interaction with G-rich far-downstream sequence elements.

### Sample Protocol
Protein were expressed recombinantly in Sf21 insect cells. A two step purification were applied.  For cross-linking, CF II was purified in buffers in which Tris was substituted by triethanolamine. 180 µl CF II (1 µM in column buffer) was mixed with 20 µl DSBU (12.8 mM in DMSO) [Müller, 2010] and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. The reaction was quenched with 200 µl of 2x SDS loading buffer containing Tris, and proteins were separated on a 4-12 % SDS-polyacrylamide gel. In-gel digestion of cross-linked protein complexes with trypsin, data acquisition and analysis were done as described [Götze, 2015 #105;Arlt, 2016 #101]. Three high molecular weight cross-linked bands were analyzed separately with at least three different collision energies (30% or 35% NCE or stepped HCD) during fragmentation. Cross-links above a FDR above 1 % were manually validated and cross-links identified at least twice were taken into account.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted into mgf files. For data analysis Merox (Version 1.6.6) were used. For identification cross-links from amine groups (lysines, n-termini) to amine and hydroxyl (serine, theronine, tyrosine) were considered. A standard data cut-off at a FDR of 5% were applied. Consecutive and intrapeptidal cross-links were ignored in the first analysis. In the second analysis (prefix: _dead) intrapeptidal and dead-end cross-links were allowed, but to reduce caluclation time, only amine to amine cross-links were considered. All identified cross-links were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Cleavage factor II (CF II) is a poorly characterized component of the multiprotein complex catalyzing 3' cleavage and polyadenylation of mammalian mRNA precursors. We have reconstituted CF II as a heterodimer of hPcf11 and hClp1. The heterodimer is active in partially reconstituted cleavage reactions, whereas hClp1 by itself is not. Pcf11 moderately stimulates the RNA 5' kinase activity of hClp1; the kinase activity is dispensable for RNA cleavage. CF II binds RNA with nanomolar affinity. Binding is mediated mostly by the two zinc fingers in the C-terminal region of hPcf11. RNA is bound without pronounced sequence-specificity, but extended G-rich sequences appear to be preferred. We discuss the possibility that CF II contributes to the recognition of cleavage/polyadenylation substrates through interaction with G-rich far-downstream sequence elements.

### Keywords
Human, Dsbu, Rna processing

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg
Interdisciplinary Research Center HALOmem, Charles Tanford Protein Center, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Kurt-Mothes-Straße 3a, Halle/Saale, Germany.

### Submitter
Christian Tüting

### Lab Head
Dr Elmar Wahle
Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg


