### Accession
PXD020875

### Title
An improved protocol to purify bacterial pili from Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG based on multimodal chromatography

### Description
Pili are polymeric proteins located at the cell surface of bacteria. These filamentous proteins are essential molecular actors playing pivotal role in bacterial adhesion with the surrounding environment. These proteins are found both in Gram-negative and positive bacteria but differ in structural organization. Purifying these high molecular weight proteins is challenging and certainly has slow down their characterization. Here, we proposed a chromatography-based protocol, mainly based on multimodal chromatography, to purify sortase-dependant SpaCBA pili from Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG). LGG is a Gram-positive bacterium that display probiotic properties notably through its SpaCBA pili. This protocol does not require specific antibodies nor complex laboratory equipment since all chromatography steps can be performed simply with a syringe, including the multimodal chromatography step. This simple protocol could be useful to numerous laboratories to purify easily pili from LGG. Therefore, the present work should boost specific studies dedicated to LGG SpaCBA pili and the characterization of the interactions occurring with their protein partners at the molecular level. Moreover, this straightforward purification process might be extended to the purification of sortase-dependant pili from other gram-positive bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
CWP digestion, MMC and IEX chromatographies, SDS-PAGE, LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
Data processed with Mascot server (v2.7) and Mascot DIstiller (v2.7)

### Publication Abstract
Pili are polymeric proteins located at the cell surface of bacteria. These filamentous proteins play a pivotal role in bacterial adhesion with the surrounding environment. They are found both in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria but differ in their structural organization. Purifying these high molecular weight proteins is challenging and has certainly slowed down their characterization. Here, we propose a chromatography-based protocol, mainly relying on multimodal chromatography (core bead technology using Capto Core 700 resin), to purify sortase-dependent SpaCBA pili from the probiotic strain <i>Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus</i> GG (LGG). Contrary to previously published methods, this purification protocol does not require specific antibodies nor complex laboratory equipment, including for the multimodal chromatography step, and provides high degree of protein purity. No other proteins were detectable by SDS-PAGE and the 260/280 nm ratio (&#x223c;0.6) of the UV spectrum confirmed the absence of any other co-purified macromolecules. One can obtain &#x223c;50 &#x3bc;g of purified pili, starting from 1 L culture at OD<sub>600nm</sub> &#x2248; 1, in 2-3 working days. This simple protocol could be useful to numerous laboratories to purify pili from LGG easily. Therefore, the present work should boost specific studies dedicated to LGG SpaCBA pili and the characterization of the interactions occurring with their protein partners at the molecular level. Moreover, this straightforward purification process might be extended to the purification of sortase-dependant pili from other Gram-positive bacteria.

### Keywords
Spacba pili, Purification, Light scattering, Afm, Multimodal chromatography, Lactobacillus rhamnosus gg

### Affiliations
Pr. Claire GAIANI - Directrice Adjointe du LIBio Membre de l'Institut Universitaire de France Université de Lorraine LIBio – Laboratoire d’Ingénierie des Biomolécules 2 avenue de la Forêt de Haye - BP 20163 54505 Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy - FRANCE
Université de Lorraine, LIBio, F-54000, Nancy, France

### Submitter
Raphael Dos Santos Morais

### Lab Head
Dr Claire GAIANI
Pr. Claire GAIANI - Directrice Adjointe du LIBio Membre de l'Institut Universitaire de France Université de Lorraine LIBio – Laboratoire d’Ingénierie des Biomolécules 2 avenue de la Forêt de Haye - BP 20163 54505 Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy - FRANCE


