### Accession
PXD025597

### Title
ALLOSTERIC ACTIVATION OF A PLANT IMMUNE RECEPTOR KINASE COMPLEX

### Description
Receptor kinases (RKs) play fundamental roles in extracellular sensing to regulate development and stress responses across kingdoms. In plants, leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases (LRR-RKs) function primarily as peptide receptors that regulate myriad aspects of plant development and response to external stimuli. Extensive phosphorylation of LRR-RK cytoplasmic domains is among the earliest detectable responses following ligand perception, and reciprocal transphosphorylation between a receptor and its co-receptor is proposed to activate the receptor complex. Originally conceived based on characterization of the brassinosteroid receptor, the prevalence of complex activation via reciprocal transphosphorylation across the plant RK family has not been tested. Using the LRR-RK ELONGATION FACTOR TU RECEPTOR (EFR) as a model RK, we set out to understand the steps critical for activating RK complexes. The EFR cytoplasmic domain is an active protein kinase in vitro and is phosphorylated in a ligand-dependent manner in vivo. Nevertheless, catalytically deficient EFR variants are functional in anti-bacterial immunity. These results reveal a non-catalytic role for the EFR cytoplasmic domain in triggering immune signaling and indicate that reciprocal transphoshorylation is not a ubiquitous requirement for LRR-RK complex activation. Rather, our analysis of EFR along with a detailed survey of the literature suggests a distinction between LRR-RK complexes with RD- versus non-RD-type protein kinase domains. Based on newly identified phosphorylation sites that regulate the activation state of the EFR complex in vivo, we propose that LRR-RK complexes containing a non-RD-type protein kinase may be activated by an allosteric mechanism triggered by activation segment phosphorylation and possibly involving conformational changes of the protein kinase domain of the ligand-binding receptor.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts containing GFP-tagged EFR or site-directed mutants were incubated with 20 µL of GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) or GFP-clamp beads (Hansen et al., 2017) as indicated in figure captions for 2 hours with gentle mixing at 4 °C to immuno-precipitate receptor complexes. The beads were sedimented by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 5 minutes at 4 °C and were subsequently suspended in 1 mL of extraction buffer (see above). The beads were sedimented at 1,000 x g for 1 minute and suspended in 1 mL of extraction buffer three more times for a total of four washes. After the last wash was removed, beads were suspended in 2X Laemmli SDS-PAGE loading buffer followed by heating at 80 °C for 10 minutes. For IP-kinase assays, beads were equilibrated in 1 mL kinase assay buffer containing 50 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.2, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM each MgCl2 and MnCl2, and 5 %(v/v) glycerol. The total volume of kinase assay buffer and beads was split in two and half was immediately prepared for SDS-PAGE by removal of the kinase assay buffer and heating of the beads at 80 °C for 10 minutes in 2X Laemmli SDS-PAGE loading buffer. The second half was used for an in vitro on-bead kinase assay. Samples were prepared and analysed by LC-MS/MS as previously described Ntoukakis et al (2009) https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1169430.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was peak picked with MS-convert, Searched by Mascot using the Arabidopsis proteome (TAIR 2010) and an inhouse contaminant database. Search data was imported into Scaffold 4 )Proteome Software

### Publication Abstract
Receptor kinases (RKs) are fundamental for extracellular sensing and regulate development and stress responses across kingdoms. In plants, leucine-rich repeat receptor kinases (LRR-RKs) are primarily peptide receptors that regulate responses to myriad internal and external stimuli. Phosphorylation of LRR-RK cytoplasmic domains is among the earliest responses following ligand perception, and reciprocal transphosphorylation between a receptor and its coreceptor is thought to activate the receptor complex. Originally proposed based on characterization of the brassinosteroid receptor, the prevalence of complex activation via reciprocal transphosphorylation across the plant RK family has not been tested. Using the LRR-RK ELONGATION FACTOR TU RECEPTOR (EFR) as a model, we set out to understand the steps critical for activating RK complexes. While the EFR cytoplasmic domain is an active protein kinase in vitro and is phosphorylated in a ligand-dependent manner in vivo, catalytically deficient EFR variants are functional in antibacterial immunity. These results reveal a noncatalytic role for EFR in triggering immune signaling and indicate that reciprocal transphoshorylation is not a ubiquitous requirement for LRR-RK complex activation. Rather, our analysis of EFR along with a detailed survey of the literature suggests a distinction between LRR-RKs with RD- versus non-RD protein kinase domains. Based on newly identified phosphorylation sites that regulate the activation state of the EFR complex in vivo, we propose that LRR-RK complexes containing a non-RD protein kinase may be regulated by phosphorylation-dependent conformational changes of the ligand-binding receptor, which could initiate signaling either allosterically or through driving the dissociation of negative regulators of the complex.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Innate immunity., Protein kinase, Receptor kinase, Pattern recognition receptor

### Affiliations
the Sainsbury laboratory
The Sainsbury Laboratory

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank L.H. Menke
The Sainsbury Laboratory


