### Accession
PXD037623

### Title
The RNA Binding Protein IGF2BP2 is Upregulated by Stress in the Heart and Causes Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Dilated Cardiomyopathy

### Description
The IGF2BP family of RNA binding proteins consists of three paralogs, IGF2BP1, 2, and 3, that regulate RNA function at many levels, including intracellular RNA localization, RNA stability, and translational control. Although IGF2BP1 and 3 are oncofetal proteins, IGF2BP2 expression is maintained in many tissues, including the heart, into adulthood. Several previous studies indicated that IGF2BP2 is upregulated in cardiomyocytes during cardiac stress and remodelling and returns to normal levels in recovering hearts. These results suggested that IGF2BP2 might play an adaptive role during cardiac stress and recovery. To investigate the role of IGF2BP2 in the heart, we made use of a conditional, inducible transgenic mouse line. Enhanced expression of the IGF2BP2 transgene in hearts of newborn or adult mice leads to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), with remodelling, fibrosis, and death occurring within 3-4 weeks. Turning off expression of the transgene after 2 weeks, however, rescues these mice, and they recover completely by 12 weeks. Proteomic analysis identified a downregulation of sarcomeric and mitochondrial proteins in hearts overexpressing IGF2BP2, and electron microscopy revealed fragmented mitochondria and elongated, thinner sarcomeres, suggesting a possible mechanism of action. Consistent with these results, IGF2BP2 is upregulated in patients with DCM or after myocardial infarction. These results show that cardiac stress upregulates IGF2BP2, and this upregulation causes remodelling and compensation of the heart. Prolonged IGF2BP2 expression, however, leads to heart failure and death, making it an attractive target for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissue lysates in RIPA buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors were clarified by centrifugation and the supernatant was subjected to protein precipitation by the chloroform/ methanol method (Wessel and Flugge, 1984). The precipitated proteins were solubilized in 100 μl of 8M urea, 10 mM DTT, 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and incubated for 30 min at 22°C. Iodoacetamide (55 mM) was added followed by incubation for 30 min (22°C, in the dark), followed by re-addition of DTT (10 mM). 25 μg of protein was transferred into a new tube, diluted by the addition of 7 volumes of 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and sequencing-grade modified Trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI) was added (0.4 μg/ sample)followed by incubation overnight at 37°C with agitation. The samples were acidified by addition of 0.2% formic acid and desalted on C18 home-made Stage tips. Peptide concentration was determine by Absorbance at 280 nm and 0.75 µg of peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer. MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument, Ultimate 3000 Dionex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA). Peptides dissolved in 0.1% formic acid were separated without a trap column over a 120 min acetonitrile gradient run at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min on a reverse phase 25-cm-long C18 column (75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo PepMapRSLC). The instrument settings were as described(Scheltema et al., 2014). Survey scans (300–1,650 m/z, target value 3E6 charges, maximum ion injection time 20 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 27). A resolution of 60,000 was used for survey scans and up to 15 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions, with “peptide preferable” profiles, were fragmented (isolation window 1.8 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (target value 1E5 charges, maximum ion injection times 25 ms). Dynamic exclusion was 20 sec. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). To avoid a carryover, the column was washed with 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 25 min between samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.6.5.0 searching against the Uniprot Mus musculus(Mouse)proteome.

### Publication Abstract
The IGF2BP family of RNA binding proteins consists of three paralogs that regulate intracellular RNA localization, RNA stability, and translational control. Although IGF2BP1 and 3 are oncofetal proteins, IGF2BP2 expression is maintained in many tissues, including the heart, into adulthood. IGF2BP2 is upregulated in cardiomyocytes during cardiac stress and remodeling and returns to normal levels in recovering hearts. We wondered whether IGF2BP2 might play an adaptive role during cardiac stress and recovery. Enhanced expression of an IGF2BP2 transgene in a conditional, inducible mouse line leads to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and death within 3-4 weeks in newborn or adult hearts. Downregulation of the transgene after 2 weeks, however, rescues these mice, with complete recovery by 12 weeks. Hearts overexpressing IGF2BP2 downregulate sarcomeric and mitochondrial proteins and have fragmented mitochondria and elongated, thinner sarcomeres. IGF2BP2 is also upregulated in DCM or myocardial infarction patients. These results suggest that IGF2BP2 may be an attractive target for therapeutic intervention in cardiomyopathies.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Igf2bp2, Lcms

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research,Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

### Submitter
Hanan Schoffman

### Lab Head
Dr Joel K. Yisraeli
Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research,Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel


