### Accession
PXD008288

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Fusobacterium nucleatum and Porphyromonas gingivalis biofilms and planktonic cultures when grown as mono- or dual-species models

### Description
Bacterial cells in biofilms adopt a profoundly different phenotype than their planktonic counterparts. The Gram-negative bacteria Fusobacterium nucleatum and Porphyromonas gingivalis are pathogens associated with oral biofilm and periodontal disease. In this study, we identified and functionally characterized the proteome of F. nucleatum and P. gingivalis cells grown either as biofilms or in planktonic cultures by high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. We used proteomic analysis for identification and label-free quantification of proteins, and sequence-based functional characterization for their classification. In F. nucleatum biofilm five proteins showed changes from planktonic condition, including proteins involved in vitamin B metabolic processes. Forty proteins were changed in P. gingivalis biofilm, 30 increased and 10 decreased. Putative cell division trigger factor and riboflavin biosynthesis proteins were the most increased in this biofilm. To describe interactions between the two species at the protein level, we grew the bacteria either individually or together. In the mixed species biofilm culture, 112 proteins showed significant changes, with 72 proteins derived from F. nucleatum and 40 proteins from P. gingivalis. By comparing dual-species to mono-species in biofilm and in planktonic growth conditions, P. gingivalis showed more proteins with decreased level in the dual species conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples containing protein extracts from biofilm and planktonic cells were arranged in three biological replicates and subjected to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method (18). The protein samples were mixed with a solution of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) [solution to total protein ratio (v/w) 1:10] and incubated for 45 min at 56°C. The Microcon device YM-10 filters (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) were first conditioned by adding 100 µl of urea buffer (8 M urea, 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 minutes. Aliquots of the samples containing 50 µg of protein were mixed with 200 µl urea buffer in the filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 15 min and this step was repeated one more time. The filtrate was discarded and 100 µl of 0.05 M iodoacetamide was added to each sample. The samples were mixed at 600 rpm for 1 min in a thermo-mixer and incubated without mixing in dark for 20 min, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, then three washes with 100 µl urea buffer and finally another three washes with 100 µl 40 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins retained on the filter were digested with trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) at 37°C for 16 h. The released peptides were collected by adding 50 µl of MS grade water followed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 15 min. This step was repeated twice. The samples were concentrated in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Filtration and desalting StageTips to be used for filtration and peptide samples desalting were prepared in-house according to the protocol developed by Rappsilber and colleagues (19). Shortly, 3M Empore C18 extraction disks (3M, Minnesota, USA) were packed in 200 µl pipet tips by a blunt ended needle and a plunger or metal rod that helped to fit the extracted disks in the pipet tips. The disks were then wetted by passing 20 µl of methanol, followed by 20 µl of elution buffer [80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA)]. The disks were conditioned and equilibrated with 20 µl of 0.1% FA just before the last residue of the previous buffer left the tip to avoid drying of the disks. The prepared peptide mixtures (volumes 20-40 µl) were loaded on top of the Stage Tip. The peptide samples were first desalted by washing with 20 µl of 0.1% FA and then eluted by adding 20 µl of the elution buffer two times. The collected samples were dried in the vacuum concentrator and stored at -80°C until further analyses. Peptide samples were resuspended by adding 1 µl of 100% FA and 19 µl of 2% ACN prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.  LC-MS/MS The MS/MS analysis was carried out at the Proteomics Unit, University of Bergen (PROBE), on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap) MS (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Briefly, 1 µg protein was loaded onto a pre-concentration column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm ×75 µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 5 min using an isocratic flow of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, vol/vol (TFA). Peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 270 nl/min) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 50cm x 75µm i.d. nanoViper column, packed with 3µm C18 beads). Solvent A and B was 0.1% FA (vol/vol) in water or ACN (vol/vol), respectively. Separated peptides were sprayed directly into the MS instrument during a 195 min LC run with the following gradient composition: 0-5 min 5% B, 5-6 min 8% B, 6-135 min 7–32% B, 135-145 min 33–40% B, and 145-150 min 40-90% B.  Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column was performed by isocratic elution with 90% B (150-170 min) and 5% B (175-195 min), respectively. Desolvation and charge production were accomplished by a nanospray Flex ion source.  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey of full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution of R = 240,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target of 1,000,000 charges in the LTQ). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to 10, depending on signal intensity) for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation at a target value of 10,000 charges. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 18s. General mass spectrometry conditions were as follows: electrospray voltage, 1.8 kV; no sheath; and auxiliary gas flow. Ion selection threshold was 1,000 counts for MS/MS, and an activation Q-value of 0.25 and activation time of 10 ms was also applied for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS raw data were processed by using the MaxQuant software (20), version 1.5.2.8, with default settings and the following additional options: Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) (21), match between runs, and 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein level. The MS spectra were searched against protein databases of F. nucleatum type strain ATCC 25586 and P. gingivalis type strain ATCC 33277, downloaded from the Universal Protein Knowledgebase on the 4th of February 2015. Normalized spectral proteins intensities (LFQ intensity), which are proportional to the quantity of a given protein in a sample, were derived by the MaxLFQ algorithms (21). The normalization ensures that one can compare LFQ scores between different samples. MaxQuant output data were analysed with the Perseus module (22), The post MaxQuant analysis included filtering of the generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table for contaminants, only identified by site and reverse hits. Each protein identified in at least two of the three replicates was considered valid.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial biofilms, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Biofilm phenotype, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Planktonic bacteria, Label-free quantitative proteomics.

### Affiliations
University of Sharjah, College of Dental Medicine, Department of Oral and Craniofacial Health Sciences
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Marwan Mansoor Ali Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Vidar Bakken
The Gade Research Group for Infection and Immunity, Department of Clinical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


