### Accession
PXD024661

### Title
A PROTAC Targets Splicing Factor 3B1

### Description
The proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC) is a new technology to degrade a target protein. However, its clinical application is limited currently by lack of chemical binders to target protein. For instance, it is still unknown, whether splicing factor 3B subunit 1 (SF3B1) is targetable by PROTACs. We recently identified a 2-aminothiazole derivative (herein O4I2) to promote the generation of human pluripotent stem cells. In the present work, proteomic analysis on the biotinylated O4I2 revealed that O4I2 targeted SF3B1 and positively regulated RNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM Chloroacetamide for 1h at room temperature followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5 and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay using BSA as standard. 100 µg of protein per sample was first diluted to 4M urea and digested with 2 µg LysC (Wako Chemicals) for 3h followed by dilution to 1M urea and the addition of 1 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Digests were acidified using TFA and tryptic peptides were purified by tC18 SepPak (50 mg, Waters), dried and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA. After determination of peptide concentration using a µBCA-assay, 10 µg peptides per sample were dried and resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (0.2M EPPS pH 8.2, 20% Acetonitrile). Peptides were mixed with TMTpro reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific) in a 1:2.5 (w/w) ratio (2.5µg TMTpro reagent per 1µg peptide) and incubated for one hour at RT. The reaction was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubation at RT for 15min. 0.5 µl of each reaction were pooled and purified using C18 stageTips, dried and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) using Sequest HT as the database searche engine. Spectra were searched against a human proteome database (UniProtKB, Taxonomy ID: 9606, one sequence per gene, 2020-03-12) and a common contaminants database (MaxQuant "contaminants.fasta") using fully tryptic cleavage allowing 2 missed cleavages. TMTpro at the N-terminus and lysines as well as carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues were set as static modifications and methionine oxidation and acetylation of the protein N-Terminus were set as dynamic modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da. Default Percolator settings were used to filter perfect spectrum matches (PSMs). Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (v 1.6.15.0). Reporter intensities were log2-transformed and significance was assessed using a two-sided, unpaired t-test assuming equal variance (Student`s t-test).

### Publication Abstract
The proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) are a new technology to degrade target proteins. However, their clinical application is limited currently by lack of chemical binders to target proteins. For instance, it is still unknown whether splicing factor 3B subunit 1 (SF3B1) is targetable by PROTACs. We recently identified a 2-aminothiazole derivative (herein O4I2) as a promoter in the generation of human pluripotent stem cells. In this work, proteomic analysis on the biotinylated O4I2 revealed that O4I2 targeted SF3B1 and positively regulated RNA splicing. Fusing thalidomide-the ligand of the cereblon ubiquitin ligase-to O4I2 led to a new PROTAC-O4I2, which selectively degraded SF3B1 and induced cellular apoptosis in a CRBN-dependent manner. In a Drosophila intestinal tumor model, PROTAC-O4I2 increased survival by interference with the maintenance and proliferation of stem cell. Thus, our finding demonstrates that SF3B1 is PROTACable by utilizing noninhibitory chemicals, which expands the list of PROTAC target proteins.

### Keywords
Hela, Orbitrap lumos, Protac, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany
Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main,Max-von-Laue-Strasse 15. R. 3.652, D-60438 Frankfurt amMain, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Xinlai Cheng
Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main,Max-von-Laue-Strasse 15. R. 3.652, D-60438 Frankfurt amMain, Germany


