### Accession
PXD013461

### Title
Fusion partners influence cellular and molecular phenotypes of oncogenic BRAF fusions

### Description
Fusion genes can be oncogenic drivers in a variety of cancer types and represent potential targets for targeted therapy. The BRAF gene is frequently involved in oncogenic fusions, with fusion frequencies of 0.2-3% throughout different cancers. However, BRAF fusions rarely occur in the same gene configuration, potentially challenging personalized therapy design. In particular, the influence that is imposed by the wide variety of fusion partners on the oncogenic role of BRAF during tumor growth and drug response is unknown. Here, we used patient-derived colorectal cancer organoids to functionally characterize and cross-compare previously identified BRAF fusions containing various partner genes (AGAP3, DLG1 and TRIM24) with respect to cellular behaviour, downstream signaling activation and response to targeted therapies. We demonstrate that 5’ partner choice of BRAF fusions affects their subcellular localization and intracellular signaling capacity. In particular the DLG1-BRAF fusion protein showed distinct localization to the plasma membrane and exhibited increased activation of downstream MAPK signaling under unperturbed conditions. Moreover, phosphoproteomics and RNA sequencing identified distinct subsets of affected signaling pathways and altered gene expression of BRAF fusions. The different BRAF fusions exhibited varying sensitivities to simultaneous targeted inhibition of MEK and the EGF receptor family. However, all BRAF fusions conveyed resistance to targeted monotherapy against the EGF receptor family, suggesting that BRAF fusions should be screened alongside other MAPK pathway alterations to identify mCRC patients to exclude from cetuximab treatment

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, HEK293 cells were cultured in high-glucose (10% dialyzed FBS (BioWest)) DMEM (Thermo) lacking lysine and arginine supplemented with Lys-0/Arg-0 or Lys-8/Arg-10 (Silantes). After 4 hours of doxycycline or ddH2O administration, cells were lysed in 8 M Urea, 1M Ammonium-BiCarbonate (ABC) containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 40mM 2-chloro-acetamide supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche, complete EDTA-free) and 1% (v/v) phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma, Cat. No. P5726 and Cat. No. P0044). After ultra-sonication, cell lysates were mixed 1:1 and proteins (20 mg total) were overnight in solution digested with trypsin (1:50) (Worthington). Peptides were desalted using SepPack columns (Waters) and eluted in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% Formic Acid (FA) (buffer B) after which TFA was added to 1%. To enrich phosphopeptides for, 50 mg titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (Sachtopore-NP, 5 µM, 300 Å, Zirchrom) were washed with 5% NH3 and equilibrated 3 times with 6% TFA in 80% ACN after which the phospho-peptides were allowed to bind at 37 ˚C for 5 minutes on a shaker. After centrifugation, remaining phospho-peptides were enriched from the supernatant sequentially. After loading the beads on an in-house made C8 stage-tip (Empore, 3M) they were washed 3 times with 1% TFA in 80% ACN. Peptides were eluted with 200 µl 5% NH3 into 40µl 20% FA followed by elution with 5 µl buffer B. Peptides were loaded on in-house made C18 stage-tips and divided with high PH elution into three fractions (100 mM NH3/FA PH=10 in 5%, 10% or 50% ACN).  LC-MS/MS analysis After elution from the stage tips, acetonitrile was removed using a SpeedVac and the remaining peptide solution was diluted with buffer A (0.1% FA) before loading. Peptides were separated on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with 1.9 µm aquapur gold C-18 material (dr. Maisch) using 240 gradient (7% to 80% ACN 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo), and electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The latter was set in data dependent Top speed mode with a cycle time of 1 second, in which the full scan over the 400-1500 mass range was performed at a resolution of 240000. Most intense ions (intensity threshold of 5000 ions) were isolated by the quadrupole and fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30%. The maximum injection time of the ion trap was set to 50 milliseconds with injection of ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.6.1.0 (Cox & Mann 2008) with phosphorylation of serine threonine and tyrosine as well as oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification. The Human protein database of Uniprot was searched with both the peptide as well as the protein false discovery rate set to 1%. The SILAC quantification algorithm was used in combination with the ‘match between runs’ tool (option set at two minutes). Peptides were filtered for reverse hits and standard contaminants. Forward and Reverse ratios were plotted in R (www.r-project.org).

### Publication Abstract
Fusion genes can be oncogenic drivers in a variety of cancer types and represent potential targets for targeted therapy. The <i>BRAF</i> gene is frequently involved in oncogenic gene fusions, with fusion frequencies of 0.2%-3% throughout different cancers. However, <i>BRAF</i> fusions rarely occur in the same gene configuration, potentially challenging personalized therapy design. In particular, the impact of the wide variety of fusion partners on the oncogenic role of <i>BRAF</i> during tumor growth and drug response is unknown. Here, we used patient-derived colorectal cancer organoids to functionally characterize and cross-compare <i>BRAF</i> fusions containing various partner genes (<i>AGAP3, DLG1</i>, and <i>TRIM24</i>) with respect to cellular behavior, downstream signaling activation, and response to targeted therapies. We demonstrate that 5' fusion partners mainly promote canonical oncogenic <i>BRAF</i> activity by replacing the auto-inhibitory N-terminal region. In addition, the 5' partner of BRAF fusions influences their subcellular localization and intracellular signaling capacity, revealing distinct subsets of affected signaling pathways and altered gene expression. Presence of the different BRAF fusions resulted in varying sensitivities to combinatorial inhibition of MEK and the EGF receptor family. However, all <i>BRAF</i> fusions conveyed resistance to targeted monotherapy against the EGF receptor family, suggesting that <i>BRAF</i> fusions should be screened alongside other MAPK pathway alterations to identify patients with metastatic colorectal cancer to exclude from anti-EGFR-targeted treatment. IMPLICATIONS: Although intracellular signaling and sensitivity to targeted therapies of <i>BRAF</i> fusion genes are influenced by their 5' fusion partner, we show that all investigated <i>BRAF</i> fusions confer resistance to clinically relevant EGFR inhibition.

### Keywords
Resistance, Signaling, Organoids, Crc, Braf, Fusion genes, Fusion partner

### Affiliations
Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, CX Utrecht, the Netherlands
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research




### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo Snippert
Molecular Cancer Research, Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, CX Utrecht, the Netherlands


