### Accession
PXD038764

### Title
Comparative and temporal characterization of LPS and blue light induced TLR4 signal transduction and gene expression in optogenetically manipulated endothelial cells

### Description
In endothelial cells (ECs), stimulation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) by the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces the release of diverse pro-inflammatory mediators beneficial in controlling bacterial infections. However, their systemic secretion is a main driver of sepsis and chronic inflammatory diseases. Since distinct and rapid TLR4 signaling induction is difficult to achieve by LPS due to its poorly controllable binding and non-specific affinity to other surface molecules and receptors, we engineered new light-oxygen-voltage-sensing (LOV) domain-based optogenetic endothelial cell lines (opto-TLR4-LOV LEC and opto-TLR4-LOV HUVEC) that allow precise temporal and reversible activation of TLR4 signaling pathways. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, RT-qPCR and Western Blot analysis, we show that pro-inflammatory proteins were not only expressed differently, but also had a different time course when the cells were stimulated with light or LPS. Additional functional assays demonstrated that light induction promoted chemotaxis of THP-1 cells, disruption of the EC-monolayer and transmigration. In contrast, ECs incorporating a truncated version of the TLR4 extracellular domain (opto-TLR4 ΔECD2-LOV LEC) revealed high basal activity with fast exploitation of cell signaling system upon illumination. We conclude that the established optogenetic cell lines are well suited to induce rapid and precise photoactivation of TLR4, allowing receptor-specific studies.

### Sample Protocol
Opto-TLR4-LOV LEC were seeded in T25 cell culture flasks (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany; 83.3910.002) and grown in complete medium until confluent. EC monolayers were subsequently washed twice with PBS and stimulated with LPS or blue light or left untreated as described in 2.4 in 3 mL huMEC medium (InSCREENex, Braunschweig, Germany; INS-ME-1012) without fetal calf serum. After incubation at 37 °C for 2 h, 6 h, or 16h, the medium was collected and contained proteins were precipitated using cold ethanol (ROTIPURAN® ≥99,8 %, p.a., Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany; 9065.1) and stored at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 3,500 g, 4°C for 30 min, the supernatant was discarded and the proteins were dried and dissolved in 80 µL lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 50 mM NH₄HCO₃). Subsequent further centrifugation at 2,000g for 10 min the supernatant was transferred and stored at -20°C until further use. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria; 71285-3) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 20 µg of protein per sample were reduced and alkylated using TCEP and IAA, and digested successively using Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals U.S.A. Corporation, Richmond, VA, USA; 125-05061) for one hour and Trypsin (Promega, Walldorf, Germany; V5113) for 16 h. Peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak tC18 1 cc Vac Cartridges (Waters, Vienna, Austria; WAT054960), dried and stored at -20 °C. For HPLC-MS/MS analysis, samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria). The dried samples were dissolved in 40 µL mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and measured in duplicates. 2 µL were injected onto a PepMap 100 (C18 0.3 x 5mm) TRAP column and analyzed using a PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray column (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific; ES903). Separation occurred at 300 nL min-1 with a flow gradient from 2-35% mobile Phase B (2% H2O, 98% ACN, 0.1% FA) within 60 min resulting in a total method time of 80 min. Mass spectrometer was operated with the FAIMS Pro System in positive ionization mode at CV-45. The scan range was 375-1500 m z-1 using a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m z-1 on MS1 level. Isolated peptides were fragmented using HCD at a collision energy of 30% NCE and fragments were analyzed in LIT using rapid scan mode.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification FragPipe (v18.0) was used selecting the LFQ-MBR workflow and employing MSFragger (v3.5) [18] and IonQuant (v1.8.0) [19]. For statistical evaluation Perseus (v2.0.6.0) [20] was used. Measurement duplicates were averaged and protein groups were filtered according to their treatment, demanding at least three out of 4 values to be valid in at least one group. Remaining missing values were replaced with a down shift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3 to allow statistical testing for all remaining protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
In endothelial cells (ECs), stimulation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) by the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces the release of diverse pro-inflammatory mediators, beneficial in controlling bacterial infections. However, their systemic secretion is a main driver of sepsis and chronic inflammatory diseases. Since distinct and rapid induction of TLR4 signaling is difficult to achieve with LPS due to the specific and non-specific affinity to other surface molecules and receptors, we engineered new light-oxygen-voltage-sensing (LOV)-domain-based optogenetic endothelial cell lines (opto-TLR4-LOV LECs and opto-TLR4-LOV HUVECs) that allow fast, precise temporal, and reversible activation of TLR4 signaling pathways. Using quantitative mass-spectrometry, RT-qPCR, and Western blot analysis, we show that pro-inflammatory proteins were not only expressed differently, but also had a different time course when the cells were stimulated with light or LPS. Additional functional assays demonstrated that light induction promoted chemotaxis of THP-1 cells, disruption of the EC monolayer and transmigration. In contrast, ECs incorporating a truncated version of the TLR4 extracellular domain (opto-TLR4 &#x394;ECD2-LOV LECs) revealed high basal activity with fast depletion of the cell signaling system upon illumination. We conclude that the established optogenetic cell lines are well suited to induce rapid and precise photoactivation of TLR4, allowing receptor-specific studies.

### Keywords
Transmigration, Mass spectrometry based proteomics, Optogenetic control, Toll-like receptor 4, Lipopolysaccharide, Pro-inflammatory proteins, Chemotaxis, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Institute Krems Bioanalytics, IMC University of Applied Sciences Krems, 3500 Krems, Austria

### Submitter
Benjamin Neuditschko

### Lab Head
Dr Franz Herzog
Institute Krems Bioanalytics, IMC University of Applied Sciences Krems, 3500 Krems, Austria


