### Accession
PXD004532

### Title
Proteomic analysis of T cell differentiation

### Description
T helper cells (Th) play an important role guarding, regulating and modulating immune responses. The different Th lineages fulfill different tasks in response to infections. The two best defined subtypes are Th1 (involved in cellular immunity) and Th2 (humoral immunity). The cytokine environment after activation determines the differentiation path of a Th cell. We defined a strategy to investigate the differentiation signature of T helper cells with a proteomics approach. Murine primary naïve CD4+ T-cells from spleen were differentiated and activated in vitro. After 3 days of differentiation proteins were analysed. The proteomic profile of the Th1 and Th2 cells will help understand these phenotypes better, which is important in finding therapeutic targets for disease and for the development of effective vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
Whole spleens, excised from Balb/C mice, were homogenized using 100 μm Cell Strainers (Falcon) in OpTimizer CTS medium (Gibco A10221-01) in four separate pools. Red blood cells were removed using RBC lysis buffer (Roche Diagnostics GmbH 11814389001). CD4+ T cells were isolated using a MACS CD4+ Cell Isolation Kit II (mouse, Miltenyi Biotech 130-095-248). Cells were activated using Dynabeads Mouse T-Activator CD3/CD28 (Gibco, 11452D) and were cultured in OpTimizer medium supplemented with 10ng/ml murine IL-2 (PeproTech Inc. Cat# 212-12, A2313) in 96-well plates (250k cells per well). CD4+ cells were skewed towards Th1 by adding in 25ng/ml IL-12 (PeproTech Inc. Cat# 210-12, G2111) and 1μg/ml αIL-4 antibody (FGP anti-mouse IL4, clone 11B11, dat# 16-7041-85) to the culture medium. CD4+ cells were skewed towards Th2 by adding 10ng/ml IL-4 (PeproTech Inc. Cat# 214-14, F2613) and 1μg/ml αIFNγ antibody (FGP anti-mouse IFNγ, clone XMG1.2, Cat# 16-7311-81) to the culture medium.  Cells were harvested from the plates and immediately washed with ice cold PBS, pelleted and stored at -80oC. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 x phosSTOP, 2x protease inhibitor tablets (both Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5). Cells were homogenized by vortexing 10’. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 20,000 g and 4°C. Supernatant was transferred into a new tube and the protein amount was determined with the Bio-Rad Protein assay (Biorad, The Netherlands). Next, proteins were digested according to de Graaf EL, Kaplon J, Zhou H, Heck AJR, Peeper DS, Altelaar AFM MCP 2014, 13(8): 2089–2100. Briefly, 20-100 μg of lysed proteins were reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively, and first digested with Lys-C (1ug enzyme per 50 ug of lysate) for 4 h and in a second step with trypsin (all Sigma) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1∶100. Resulting peptide mixtures were desalted using Seppak 1cc columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA). On the column the peptides were chemically labeled using stable isotope dimethyl labelling as described previously (Boersema PJ, Raijmakers R, Lemeer S, Mohammed S, Heck AJ. Nat Protoc. 2009;4(4):484-94.). While the individual samples were labeled either “medium” or “heavy”, a pool of all sample was created and labeled “light”. The samples were mixed in a 1:1:1 (L:M:H) ratio based on peptide intensities. Strong cation exchange chromatography was used as described earlier 25. We applied an improved SCX system to fractionate the 6-plex TMT labeled sample. Briefly, an Agilent 1100 HPLC (Aglilent, Santa Clara, USA) system was equipped with a Opti-Lynx (Optimized Technologies, Oregon, USA) trapping cartridge and a Zorbax Bio- SCX II column (0.8 mm i.d. × 50 mm length, 3.5 μm, Agilent). Solvent A consisted of 0.05% formic acid in 20% acetonitrile, while solvent B contained 0.05% formic acid and 0.5 M NaCl in 20% acetonitrile. 600 µg of labeled peptide mixture was loaded and a total of 50 fractions (1 min each, 50 µL elution volume) were collected and dried down in a vacuum concentrator. The salt gradient used for elution of the peptides was as follows: 0-0.01 min (0-2% B); 0.01-8.01 min (2-3% B); 8.01-14.01 min (3-8% B); 14.01-28 min (8-20% B); 28-38 min (20-40% B); 38-48 min (40-90% B); 48-54 min (90% B); 54-60 min (0% B). For proteome analysis, the 2+ and 3+ fractions from the SCX were reconstituted in 10% formic acid and analysed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to an Easy UHPLC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were eluted from the reverse phase column during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer with in house-made gold-coated silica emitters. The columns were made in-house from either Reprosil C18 (3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Germany; 20 mm × 100 μm inner diameter) for the trap column or Poroshell 120 EC-C18 (2.7 μm, Agilent; 40 cm x 50 μm inner diameter) for the analytical column. The gradient was: 7-30% ACN in 91 min, 30-100% ACN 3 min, 100% ACN 5min, 100-7% 1 min, 7% ACN 20 min, flow rate: 100 nl/min. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using the settings below. ESI voltage, 1.7 kV; inlet capillary temperature, 275 °C; full scan automatic gain control (AGC) target, 3e6 ions at 35000 resolution; scan range, 350-1500 m/z; Orbitrap full scan maximum injection time, 250 ms; MS2 scan AGC target, 5e4 ions at 17500 resolution; maximum injection, 120 ms; normalized collision energy, 25; dynamic exclusion time, 30 s; isolation window 1.5 m/z; 10 MS2 scans per full scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained, were initially processed with proteome discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher). The created peak lists were searched with Mascot (Matrix Science, Version 2.3) against a concatenated forward-reverse Uniprot database (taxonomy mus musculus and common contaminants, containing 43778 entries) and the following parameters: 50 p.p.m. precursor mass tolerance and 0.05 Da fragment ion tolerance. Up to two missed cleavages were accepted, oxidation of methionine and the dimethyl label on lysines and the N-terminus was set up as variable modification whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modifications. Triplex dimethyl labelling was chosen as quantification method.  All peptides are filtered for a minimal Mascot score of 20 and 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q exactive, Murine cd4+ t- cells, Scx, Th1, Th2

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics   Utrecht University
Faculty of Science

### Submitter
N. Binai

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics   Utrecht University


