### Accession
PXD026714

### Title
Acinetobacter baumannii membrane proteome

### Description
Different digestion methods and extraction detergents were examined for membrane proteome sample preparation, and label-free quantitative  proteome analysis of the polymyxin B induced Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 19606 membrane proteome were performed based on nano LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
A.baumannii ATCC19606 was cultivated in Luria–Bertani (LB) broth at 37°C with shaking (220 rpm) until OD600 reached 0.6. Bacterial cells were harvested by centrifu-gation at 4,000×g for 10 min and washed with 0.85% NaCl. Bacterial precipitation was frozen at - 80℃ until use. A.baumannii cells were resuspended in Na2CO3 buffer (0.1 M) for sonication at 4°C. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation (12,000×g for 10 min, 4°C). Supernatants were transformed into thick-walled tube and ultracentrifuged at 50,000 or 150,000×g for 30 min. The previous steps were repeated twice to wash off nonmembrane proteins as much as possible. Then the detergents ( 4%CHAPS, 1%DDM, 2%SDC, 0.5%OG, and 1% LDAO were added and incubated at 4°C overnight, after which ultracentrifugation was performed at 50,000×g for 30 min. Suspensions were collected for peptide preparation. After reduction by 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95°C for 5 min, proteins were precipitated by frozen acetone and stored at -20°C for 30 min. Then the precipitate was redissolved by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then digested in solution by sequencing grade trypsin (1:50 w/w, Promega, Madsion, WI) or  trypsin/Lys-C Mix (1:25 w/w, Promega, Madsion, WI) overnight at 37°C. For FASP method, precipitate redissolved by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were transfer on ul-trafiltration tube, centrifuged at 14,000×g for 30 min. Digestions were performed by mi-crowaving for 2min and then overnight at 37°C in 50uL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with trypsin or  trypsin/Lys-C Mix. Last, the sample was desalted by C18 reverse-phase Tips (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18, 5 µm, Dr Maisch GmbH).  Samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos platform. Peptides were enriched on a trap column (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 (3 mm, Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany), 20 ×0.15 mm) and separated on a C18 column (Reprosil-Pur Basic C18 (1.9 mm, Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) 150 × 0.15 mm) at a flow rate of 600mL/ min The solvent buffer A consists of water with 0.1% formic acid, and that of solvent B was 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.And a 75 min elution method was set as followed, the gradient started from 10% of solvent buffer B (80% ac-etonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and then from 10 to 13% of solvent buffer B for 4 min. The gradient raised from 13 to 29% of solvent buffer B for 48 min and from 29 to 37% for 14 min. Ultimately, the gradient ascended to 100% of buffer B and was maintained for 9 min. The scan sequence consist of an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution, 120 000; mass range, 350–1550 m/z; RF lens, 50%; AGC target, 4× 105; maximum injection time, 50 ms) and an MS2 analysis with HCD accompanied by the following conditions: collisionenergy, 32%; AGC, 5 × 104; maximum injection time, 22 ms; Orbitrap solution, 15 000; and isolation window, 1.6 Da.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquired data with four biological replicates were collected and searched against the Acinetobacter baumannii ATCC 19606 database downloaded from UniProt. Trypsin was specified for protein digestion with two missed cleavages allowed for each peptide , and the FDR was limited to a maximum of 0.01. Protein identification and label free quantification (LFQ) analysis were all analyzed by Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Dis-coverer™ version 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii; membrane proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College

### Submitter
Yun Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuefu You
Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College


