### Accession
PXD030768

### Title
Global crotonylatome and function analysis of lysine-crotonylated proteins in wheat response to cold stress

### Description
Abstract Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a recently identified post-translational modification (PTM) in the prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. However, the function of lysine-crotonylated proteins in response to abiotic stress in plants remains largely unknown. Here, we report the first global profiling of the Kcr proteome in common wheat, identifying 4,696 Kcr sites on 1,726 substrate proteins, participating in a wide variety of biological and metabolic pathways. Combination of transcriptome and proteome in a RIL (recombinant inbred line) population, Kcr proteome, and genome-wide association study, a candidate gene phosphoglycerate kinase (TaPGK) was identified to potentially affect on cold tolerance in common wheat. Using EMS-mutants, overexpressed transgenic wheat plants and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated know-out mutants, we demonstrated that TaPGK played a positively key role in regulation of plant cold tolerance. Moreover, TaPGK protein strongly interacted with sirtuin-like (TaSRT1). EMS-mutant tetraploid and overexpressed transgenic wheat experiments confirmed that TaSRT1 gene negatively regulated wheat cold tolerance. Immunoprecipitation demonstrated that TaSRT1 promoted the degradation of TaPGK by erasing Kcr. Additionally, RNA-sequencing results showed that overexpressed TaPGK significantly improved expression of peroxidase genes. It concluded that a large number of Kcr sites were present in wheat important proteins and TaPGK crotonylated by TaSRT1 played a key role in wheat response to cold stress through scavenging the accumulation of ROS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Trypsin Digestion The leaf tissue with three independent biological replicates from two-leaf periods of three cold-tolerant pools (CTP) (cold stress for 24h) and three cold-sensitive pools (CSP) (cold stress for 24h) from 10 lines of the RIL population was used to extract proteins using the phenol extraction method [4]. A BCA kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Nantong, China) was used to examine the protein concentration. Trypsin was used to digest the extracted proteins according to a previous study

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Z9415_Triticum_aestivum_4565_IWGSC_20190910 (133346) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  Bioinformatics analysis The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA. The lysine crotonylation (Kcr) proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions. WoLFPSORT (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html) was used to predict subcellular localization. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway [6]. GO term and KEGG pathway enrichment were performed using the DAVID bioinformatics resources 6.7. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) based on protein sequence alignment method. For enrichment or depletion (right-tailed test) of specifc annotation terms among the members of resulting protein clusters. Fisher,s exact test was used to obtain the p values. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. All differentially expressed protein name identifiers were searched against the STRING database version 10.5 for protein-protein interactions. Interaction network form STRING was visualized in Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we reported the complete profiling of the crotonylation proteome in common wheat. Through a combination of crotonylation and multi-omics analysis, we identified a TaPGK associated with wheat cold stress. Then, we confirmed the positive role of TaPGK-modulating wheat cold tolerance. Meanwhile, we found that cold stress induced lysine crotonylation of TaPGK. Moreover, we screened a lysine decrotonylase TaSRT1 interacting with TaPGK and found that TaSRT1 negatively regulated wheat cold tolerance. We subsequently demonstrated TaSRT1 inhibiting the accumulation of TaPGK protein, and this inhibition was possibly resulted from decrotonylation of TaPGK by TaSRT1. Transcriptome sequencing indicated that overexpression of TaPGK activated glycolytic key genes and thereby increased pyruvate content. Moreover, we found that exogenous application of pyruvate sharply enhanced wheat cold tolerance. These findings suggest that the TaSRT1-TaPGK model regulating wheat cold tolerance is possibly through mediating pyruvate. This study provided two valuable cold tolerance genes and dissected diverse mechanism of glycolytic pathway involving in wheat cold stress.

### Keywords
Crotonylatome; cold stress; common wheat; tapgk; ros

### Affiliations
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China
 Henan Agricultural University

### Submitter
Ning Zhang 

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Chen
Agronomy College, Henan Agricultural University, China


