### Accession
PXD005687

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis ON-A strain (Wild type vs natural mutant)

### Description
Tuberculosis remains one of the most difficult to control infectious diseases in the world. Many different factors contribute to the complexity of this disease. These include the ability of the host to control the infection which may directly relate to nutritional status, presence of co-morbidities and genetic predisposition. Pathogen factors, in particular the ability of different Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains to respond to the harsh environment of the host granuloma, which includes low oxygen and nutrient availability and the presence of damaging radical oxygen and nitrogen species, also play an important role in the success of different strains to cause disease. In this study we evaluate the impact of a naturally occurring 12 gene 15 Kb genomic deletion on the physiology and virulence of M. tuberculosis. The strains denominated ON-A WT (wild type) and ON-A NM (natural mutant) were isolated from a previously reported TB outbreak in an inner city under-housed population in Toronto, Canada. Here we subjected these isogenic strains to transcriptomic (via RNA-seq) and proteomic analyses and identified several gene clusters with differential expression in the natural mutant, including the DosR regulon and the molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis genes, both of which were found in lower abundance in the natural mutant. We also demonstrated lesser virulence of the natural mutant in the guinea pig animal model. Overall, our findings suggest that the ON-A natural mutant is less fit to cause disease, supporting the general idea that even low virulent strains have the potential to cause extended transmission in at risk populations.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysate extracts (WCL) were obtained from Mtb cells harvested from triplicate GAS cultures as follows. Cells were pipetted into a 50 mL Falcon tube and washed three times with PBS. After the final wash, cells were inactivated with 15 mL of chloroform. Cells were subsequently delipidated by adding 7.5 mL of methanol to make a 2:1 Chloroform:Methanol solution (v/v) and incubated overnight in agitation. Delipidation was repeated once more. After a final centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 10 min the delipidated cell pellet was dried down in a nitrogen bath and WCL was prepared as described previously [14]. WCL were then subjected to three buffer exchange cycles using 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and a 3 KDa MWCO Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter Unit (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Culture filtrate proteins (CFP) were obtained from the GAS cultures by filtering media using a STERICAP filtration unit (0.2 µM). CFP was concentrated using a 3 KDa MWCO Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter Unit and then subjected to three cycles of buffer exchange using 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein in WCL and CFP was quantified using the BCA Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Then, 50 µg of protein were subjected to trypsin digestion as described elsewhere. Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed at the Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility at Colorado State University. Briefly, peptides were purified and concentrated using an on-line enrichment column (Thermo Scientific 5μm, 100 μm ID x 2cm C18 column). Subsequent chromatographic separation was performed on a reverse phase nanospray column (Thermo Scientific EASYnano-LC, 3μm, 75 μm ID x 100mm C18 column) using a 90 minute linear gradient  from 10%-30% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nanoliters/min. Peptides were eluted directly into the mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Velos) and spectra were collected over a m/z range of 250-2000 Da using a dynamic exclusion limit of 2 MS/MS spectra of a given peptide mass for 30 s (exclusion duration of 90 s). Compound lists of the resulting spectra were generated using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific) with a S/N threshold of 1.5 and 1 scan/group.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into mzXML format using msConvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools.shtml) and then searched against a M. tuberculosis database retrieved from UniProt (www.uniprot.org) with Proteome ID UP000001584 containing 3996 proteins and subsequently built to include an equal number of reverse decoys. This search was performed using the SorcererTM software (Sage-N Research, Inc) and Sequest v1.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with the following parameters: Parent Tolerance of 20 ppm, Fragment Tolerance of 1 Da, up to 4 trypsin missing sites and methionine oxidation (+16 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) as variable modifications. Processed files were validated in Scaffold v4.0. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [15]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. The Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) was applied to the data, directly on Scaffold and the normalized quantitative values for each protein were exported to Excel. Differences between normalized spectral counts for each strain were determined by a two-tailed Student T test. P-values of < 0.05 were considered to be significant.

### Publication Abstract
Tuberculosis remains one of the most difficult to control infectious diseases in the world. Many different factors contribute to the complexity of this disease. These include the ability of the host to control the infection which may directly relate to nutritional status, presence of co-morbidities and genetic predisposition. Pathogen factors, in particular the ability of different Mycobacterium tuberculosis strains to respond to the harsh environment of the host granuloma, which includes low oxygen and nutrient availability and the presence of damaging radical oxygen and nitrogen species, also play an important role in the success of different strains to cause disease. In this study we evaluated the impact of a naturally occurring 12 gene 15 Kb genomic deletion on the physiology and virulence of M. tuberculosis. The strains denominated ON-A WT (wild type) and ON-A NM (natural mutant) were isolated from a previously reported TB outbreak in an inner city under-housed population in Toronto, Canada. Here we subjected these isogenic strains to transcriptomic (via RNA-seq) and proteomic analyses and identified several gene clusters with differential expression in the natural mutant, including the DosR regulon and the molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis genes, both of which were found in lower abundance in the natural mutant. We also demonstrated lesser virulence of the natural mutant in the guinea pig animal model. Overall, our findings suggest that the ON-A natural mutant is less fit to cause disease, but nevertheless has the potential to cause extended transmission in at-risk populations.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology; Colorado State University; Fort Collins, CO, USA
Colorado State University

### Submitter
Carolina Mehaffy

### Lab Head
Dr Carolina Mehaffy
Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Pathology; Colorado State University; Fort Collins, CO, USA


