### Accession
PXD022750

### Title
A small RNA and its involvement in zinc transport

### Description
The function and mode of action of small regulatory RNAs is currently still understudied in archaea. In the halophilic archaeon H. volcanii a plethora of sRNAs have been identified, however, in-depth functional analysis is missing for most of them. We selected a small RNA (s479) from H. volcanii for detailed characterization. The sRNA gene is encoded between a CRISPR RNA locus and the Cas protein gene cluster, the s479 deletion strain is viable and was characterized in detail. Transcriptome studies of wild type Haloferax cells and the deletion mutant revealed up-regulation of six genes in the deletion strain, showing that the sRNA has a distinct cellular function. Proteome comparison of wild type and deletion strains further expanded the regulon of s479 deeply rooting this sRNA within the metabolism of H. volcanii especially the regulation of transporter abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates (250 ml) of wild type (H66) and deletion strain (∆s479) were cultivated in Hv-Ca+ura, 45°C and grown to OD650nm= 0.6-0.74. Cells were harvested and washed in enriched PBS buffer (2.5 M NaCl, 150 mM MgCl2, 1× PBS (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 8 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM K2HPO4, pH 7.4). After cell lysis by ultrasonication in 10 ml lysis buffer (1 M NaCl, 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 13 μl/ml protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma)) cytosolic and membrane fraction were separated by ultracentrifugation at 100.000 x g and treated as separate samples. The cytosolic protein sample was directly used for 1D SDS PAGE whereas the pelleted membrane protein fraction was solubilized in 2 ml HTH buffer ((6 M Thiourea/2 M Urea); 10 min 37°C; 10 min 37°C ultrasonication). 20 μg of both samples were separated by 1D SDS PAGE and in gel digested as previously described (Bonn, F., Bartel, J., Büttner, K., Hecker, M., Otto, A., Becher, D., 2014. Picking Vanished Proteins from the Void: How to Collect and Ship/Share Extremely Dilute Proteins in a Reproducible and Highly Efficient Manner. Anal. Chem. 86, 7421–7427. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac501189j). Briefly, Coomassie stained gel lanes were cut resulting in ten gel pieces per sample before gel pieces were cut into smaller blocks and transferred into low binding tubes. Samples were destained and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before being covered with trypsin solution. Digestion was carried out at 37 °C overnight before peptides were eluted in water by ultrasonication. The peptide-containing supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, desiccated in a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid for mass spectrometric analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) using an EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography (LC) separation and electrospray ionization-based mass spectrometry (MS) applying exactly the same injected volumes in order to allow for label-free relative protein quantification. Therefore, peptides were loaded on a self-packed analytical column (OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and eluted by a binary nonlinear gradient of 5 - 99 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % acetic acid over 86 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For MS analysis, a full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the twenty most abundant precursor ions. MS2 experiments were acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed with MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 against a H. volcanii database (Jevtić, Ž., Stoll, B., Pfeiffer, F., Sharma, K., Urlaub, H., Marchfelder, A., Lenz, C., 2019. The Response of Haloferax volcanii to Salt and Temperature Stress: A Proteome Study by Label‐Free Mass Spectrometry. PROTEOMICS 19, 1800491. https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201800491) containing 4106 entries. Max Quant’s generic contamination list as well as reverse entries were added during the search. The following parameters were applied: digestion mode, trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages; variable modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and maximal number of 5 modifications per peptide; activated LFQ option with minimal ratio count of 2 and ‘match-between runs’ feature. The false discovery rates of peptide spectrum match and protein level were set to 0.01. A protein was considered to be identified if two or more unique peptides were identified in a biological replicate. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. The comparative proteome analyses based on MaxQuant LFQ values were performed separately for cytosolic and membrane protein samples. Proteins were considered to be quantified if a quantitative value based on at least two unique peptides was available in at least two biological replicates. LFQ values as proxy for protein abundance were used for statistical analysis. A Student’s t-tests was performed to analyse changes in protein amounts between wild type and mutant. Proteins with significantly changed amount exhibited a p-value < 0.01 and an average log2 fold change >|0.8|

### Publication Abstract
The function and mode of action of small regulatory RNAs is currently still understudied in archaea. In the halophilic archaeon <i>Haloferax volcanii</i>, a plethora of sRNAs have been identified; however, in-depth functional analysis is missing for most of them. We selected a small RNA (s479) from <i>Haloferax volcanii</i> for detailed characterization. The sRNA gene is encoded between a CRISPR RNA locus and the Cas protein gene cluster, and the s479 deletion strain is viable and was characterized in detail. Transcriptome studies of wild-type <i>Haloferax</i> cells and the deletion mutant revealed upregulation of six genes in the deletion strain, showing that this sRNA has a clearly defined function. Three of the six upregulated genes encode potential zinc transporter proteins (ZnuA1, ZnuB1, and ZnuC1) suggesting the involvement of s479 in the regulation of zinc transport. Upregulation of these genes in the deletion strain was confirmed by northern blot and proteome analyses. Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrate a direct interaction of s479 with the target <i>znu</i>C1 mRNA. Proteome comparison of wild-type and deletion strains further expanded the regulon of s479 deeply rooting this sRNA within the metabolism of <i>H. volcanii</i> especially the regulation of transporter abundance. Interestingly, s479 is not only encoded next to CRISPR-<i>cas</i> genes, but the mature s479 contains a crRNA-like 5' handle, and experiments with Cas protein deletion strains indicate maturation by Cas6 and interaction with Cas proteins. Together, this might suggest that the CRISPR-Cas system is involved in s479 function.

### Keywords
Metallostasis, Transcriptomics, Archaea, Proteomics, Abc transporter, Small rnas

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


