### Accession
PXD003964

### Title
hSSB1 DNA-binding is modulated by dynamic DNA-PK-mediated phosphorylation

### Description
The maintenance of genomic stability is essential for cellular viability and the prevention of diseases such as cancer. Human single-stranded DNA binding protein 1 (hSSB1) is a protein with roles in the stabilisation and restart of stalled DNA replication forks, as well as in the repair of oxidative DNA lesions and double-strand DNA breaks. In the later process, phosphorylation of threonine 117 by the ATM kinase is required for hSSB1 stability and proper DNA repair. The regulation of hSSB1 in other DNA repair pathways has however remained unclear. Here we report that hSSB1 may also be directly phosphorylated by DNA-PK at serine residue 134. While this modification does occur in undamaged cells, it is largely suppressed by PPP-family protein phosphatases. Following the disruption of replication forks, S134 phosphorylation is however enhanced and promotes cellular survival. Interestingly, while hSSB1 is known to associate with replication forks following their disruption, we here find that S134 phosphorylation may limit binding to replication fork junctions. Together, these data represent a novel mechanism for hSSB1 regulation following the inhibition of replication.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were excised and cut into 1 mm cubes. These were then subjected to in-gel digestion using a ProGest Investigator in-gel digestion robot (Digilab) using standard protocols [32]. Briefly the gel cubes were destained by washing with acetonitrile and subjected to reduction and alkylation before digestion with trypsin at 37 °C. The peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and concentrated to a volume of 20 l, using a SpeedVac (ThermoSavant). Peptides were then separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a nanoLC Ultra 2D plus loading pump and nanoLC as-2 autosampler (Eksigent). A quarter (5ul) of the sample was loaded. Peptides were eluted with a gradient of increasing acetonitrile, containing 0.1 % formic acid (5-40% acetonitrile in 5 min, 40-95% in a further 1 min, followed by 95% acetonitrile to clean the column, before re-equilibration to 5% acetonitrile). The eluate was sprayed into a TripleTOF 5600 electrospray tandem mass spectrometer (ABSciex) and analysed in Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) mode, performing 250 msec of MS followed by 150 msec MSMS analyses on the 15 most intense peaks seen by MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data file generated was analysed using the Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science) against the NCBInr database July 2014 with no species restriction, trypsin as the cleavage enzyme, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification of cysteines and methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamines and asparagines and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as a variable modifications. Spectra of interest were manually inspected to confirm the Mascot interpretation.

### Publication Abstract
The maintenance of genomic stability is essential for cellular viability and the prevention of diseases such as cancer. Human single-stranded DNA-binding protein 1 (hSSB1) is a protein with roles in the stabilisation and restart of stalled DNA replication forks, as well as in the repair of oxidative DNA lesions and double-strand DNA breaks. In the latter process, phosphorylation of threonine 117 by the ATM kinase is required for hSSB1 stability and efficient DNA repair. The regulation of hSSB1 in other DNA repair pathways has however remained unclear. Here we report that hSSB1 is also directly phosphorylated by DNA-PK at serine residue 134. While this modification is largely suppressed in undamaged cells by PPP-family protein phosphatases, S134 phosphorylation is enhanced following the disruption of replication forks and promotes cellular survival. Together, these data thereby represent a novel mechanism for hSSB1 regulation following the inhibition of replication.

### Keywords
Human / hssb1 / dna-pk / ppp family phosphatase / replication stress /  hydroxyurea / sciex 5600

### Affiliations
Biomedical Science Research Complex
Biomedical Sciences Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9ST

### Submitter
Catherine Botting

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Helen Botting
Biomedical Sciences Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9ST


