### Accession
PXD016068

### Title
Swarms of specialized fibroblasts drive scarring through N-cadherin

### Description
Injury in mammals induces a connective tissue response to either regenerate as before, or to scar. The fibroblastic actions and mechanisms that underlie these connective tissue responses remain obscure, as direct observation in animals is too difficult and current assays do not faithfully reproduce physiology. Here, we developed a skin explant technique termed scar-in-a-dish (SCAD) that faithfully recapitulates uniform scars with contraction and reveals how scarring occurs in unprecedented detail. By growing mouse SCADs, with a traceable scar-progenitor fibroblast lineage, we observed previously unseen intercellular connections form between scar-progenitors that then collectively swarm into the nascent wound in highly regular periodic movements that progressively contract the skin and form scars. Swarming is exclusive to scar progenitors and absent from oral cavity fibroblasts that regenerate scarless. By testing a panel of adhesion molecules that might instigate intercellular connections, we found swarming was induced by the upregulation of N-cadherin in scar progenitors. Impeding N-cadherin binding inhibited swarming and contraction, and led to reduced scarring in SCAD and in mice. Blocking N-cadherin and scar-progenitor swarming thus provides a novel therapeutic space to curtail pathological fibrotic responses across a range of medical settings.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue pieces were washed, pooled and homogenized. After centrifugation, proteins were extracted in Guanidinium Buffer (6M Guanidinium chloride, 10mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8.5). Peptides from LysC and trypsin proteolysis (1:75), were purified on SDB-RPS material stage-tips and data was acquired on a Quadrupole/Orbitrap type Mass Spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Schiller et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed by MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014) (version 1.5.3.20) and MaxQuant output tables were analyzed using the Perseus software suite (Tyanova et al., 2016) (version 1.5.8.7). Network analysis was performed with Cytoscape software (version 3.6.1). All other statistical and bioinformatics operations, such as normalization, heat-map generation, string-network mapping, and multiple-hypothesis testing corrections, were performed with the Perseus software suite.

### Publication Abstract
Scars are more severe when the subcutaneous fascia beneath the dermis is injured upon surgical or traumatic wounding. Here, we present a detailed analysis of fascia cell mobilisation by using deep tissue intravital live imaging of acute surgical wounds, fibroblast lineage-specific transgenic mice, and skin-fascia explants (scar-like tissue in a dish - SCAD). We observe that injury triggers a swarming-like collective cell migration of fascia fibroblasts that progressively contracts the skin and form scars. Swarming is exclusive to fascia fibroblasts, and requires the upregulation of N-cadherin. Both swarming and N-cadherin expression are absent from fibroblasts in the upper skin layers and the oral mucosa, tissues that repair wounds with minimal scar. Impeding N-cadherin binding inhibits swarming and skin contraction, and leads to reduced scarring in SCADs and in animals. Fibroblast swarming and N-cadherin thus provide therapeutic avenues to curtail fascia mobilisation and pathological fibrotic responses across a range of medical settings.

### Keywords
Scad, N-cadherin, Collective migration, Cell lineage, Fibroblastic swarm, Live imaging, Scarring, Contraction, Scar progenitors

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Group Regenerative Biology and Medicine, Munich, Germany, Member of the German Centre for Lung Research (DZL)
CPC/ILBD HemholtzZentrum München

### Submitter
Christoph Mayr

### Lab Head
Dr Yuval Rinkevich
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Lung Biology and Disease, Group Regenerative Biology and Medicine, Munich, Germany, Member of the German Centre for Lung Research (DZL)


