### Accession
PXD035342

### Title
Proteome analysis of Polaribacter sp. Q13 cells cultivated on mixed-linkage (β1,3/1,4-xylan), xylose and glucose

### Description
A xylan ulitization locus in Polaribacter sp. Q13, named XUL-Q13, was predicted to be involved in mixed-linkage xylan utilization. To support this, Polaribacter sp. Q13 was cultivated separately in triplicates on mixed-linkage xylan (MX_1, MX_2, MX_3), xylose (X_1, X_2, X_3) and glucose (G_1, G_2, G_3) and their proteomes were analyzed. In addition, the proteome of the resting cells (T0) was also analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Polaribacter sp. Q13 cells were cultivated on mixed-linkage xylan, xylose and glucose (the control substrate) to the mid-log phase and collected separately. Then the SDT buffer (4% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.6) was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. After quantified with a Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo, USA), 200 µg proteins from each sample were digested with trypsin according to the filter-aided sample preparation procedure (FASP). The released peptides were separated with a reversed-phase C18 column. Mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS data were determined using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were analyzed with MaxQuant. Proteins that were detected in at least two out of three replicates were counted as identified. Based on the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values from MaxQuant analysis, the relative iBAQ values (riBAQ) of each protein were calculated for semi-quantitative comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polaribacter sp. q13, Mixed-linkage xylan, Proteome

### Affiliations
Shandong University
Shandong University, Shandong, China

### Submitter
Fang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Fang Zhao
Shandong University, Shandong, China


