### Accession
PXD029652

### Title
EZH2 depletion potentiates MYC degradation inhibiting neuroblastoma and small cell carcinoma tumor formation

### Description
Efforts to therapeutically target EZH2 have generally focused on inhibition of its methyltransferase activity, although it remains less clear whether this is the central mechanism whereby EZH2 promotes cancer. We demonstrate that EZH2 directly interacts with both MYC family oncoproteins, MYC and MYCN, and promotes their stabilization in a methyltransferase-independent manner. By competing against the SCFFBW7 ubiquitin ligase to bind MYC and MYCN, EZH2 counteracted FBW7-mediated MYC(N) polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Depletion, but not enzymatic inhibition, of EZH2 induced robust MYC(N) degradation and inhibited tumor cell growth in MYC(N) driven neuroblastoma and small cell lung cancer. These findings unveil the MYC family proteins as global EZH2 oncogenic effectors and EZH2 pharmacologic degraders as potential MYC(N) targeted cancer therapeutics, pointing out that MYC(N) driven cancers may develop inherent resistance to the canonical EZH2 enzymatic inhibitors currently in clinical development.

### Sample Protocol
Total cellular proteins extracted from Kelly and NCI-H2171 cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) using MYCN and MYC antibodies. Immunoprecipitated proteins were washed, and eluted with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.0. Eluted proteins were precipitated with acetone and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted with the C18 Stage tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and loaded onto an EASY-nLC system and analyzed in an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with the FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full mass spectrometry resolutions were set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and mass range was set to 350–1500.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two-sided t-tests were performed to compare binding protein abundance between IgG and IP groups. Candidate proteins were defined by the following criteria: p-value <0.05 with a fold change >2.

### Publication Abstract
Efforts to therapeutically target EZH2 have generally focused on inhibition of its methyltransferase activity, although it remains less clear whether this is the central mechanism whereby EZH2 promotes cancer. In the current study, we show that EZH2 directly interacts with both MYC family oncoproteins, MYC and MYCN, and promotes their stabilization in a methyltransferase-independent manner. By competing against the SCF<sup>FBW7</sup> ubiquitin ligase to bind MYC and MYCN, EZH2 counteracts FBW7-mediated MYC(N) polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Depletion, but not enzymatic inhibition, of EZH2 induces robust MYC(N) degradation and inhibits tumor cell growth in MYC(N) driven neuroblastoma and small cell lung carcinoma. Here, we demonstrate the MYC family proteins as global EZH2 oncogenic effectors and EZH2 pharmacologic degraders as potential MYC(N) targeted cancer therapeutics, pointing out that MYC(N) driven cancers may develop inherent resistance to the canonical EZH2 enzymatic inhibitors currently in clinical development.

### Keywords
Mycn, Ap-ms, Myc, Ezh2

### Affiliations
school of basic medicine, wuhan university, Wuhan 430071, China
Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China

### Submitter
zemin song

### Lab Head
Dr Guoliang Qing
Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China


