### Accession
PXD037837

### Title
Immunopeptidomics reveals determinants of Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigen presentation on MHC class I (DDA data)

### Description
Tuberculosis (TB), caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), is a leading cause of infectious disease mortality worldwide for which no sufficiently protective vaccine exists. CD8+ T cells contribute to protective immunity to TB, but the antigenic targets presented on MHC-I by macrophages infected with virulent Mtb for recognition by CD8+ T cells have not been conclusively defined. Here, we use mass spectrometry to directly identify Mtb-derived peptides presented on MHC class I (MHC-I) by infected primary human monocyte-derived macrophages. We identified 16 MHC-I peptides derived from 12 Mtb proteins, and validated these identifications using internal standard parallel reaction monitoring (SureQuant). Our results show that this set of antigens is highly enriched for substrates of type VII secretion systems (T7SS) relative to the Mtb proteome. Our results identify specific Mtb proteins that may be suitable targets for subunit vaccines designed to elicit protective CD8+ T cell-mediated immunity and suggest that T7SS substrates may be a fruitful class of antigens to prioritize for further vaccine target discovery efforts. Note: donors labeled A, C, D, E, H, and I in file names here are renamed sequentially (A, B, C, D, E, and F) in the manuscript describing this study to avoid confusion.

### Sample Protocol
Deidentified buffy coats were obtained from Massachusetts General Hospital. Samples are acquired and provided to research groups with no identifying information. PBMCs were isolated by density-based centrifugation using Ficoll (GE Healthcare). CD14+ monocytes were isolated from PBMCs using a CD14 positive-selection kit (Stemcell). Isolated monocytes were differentiated in R10 media [RPMI 1640 without phenol red (Gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Gibco), 1% HEPES (Corning), 1% L-glutamine (Sigma)] supplemented with 25 ng/mL M-CSF (Biolegend, 572902). 50 million monocytes per condition were cultured on ultra-low-attachment T75 flasks (Corning) for 6 days. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) H37Rv was grown in Difco Middlebrook 7H9 media supplemented with 10% OADC, 0.2% glycerol, and 0.05% Tween-80 to mid-log phase. The Mtb culture was pelleted by centrifugation, washed once with PBS, resuspended in R10 media and filtered through a 5 μm syringe filter to obtain a single-cell suspension. Macrophages were infected at multiplicity of infection (MOI) 2.5 for 4 h and then washed with PBS to remove extracellular Mtb. Infected macrophages were cultured in R10 media for the remainder of the experiment. 72 hours post-infection, cells were detached using PBS supplemented with 2 mM EDTA, washed with PBS, and lysed in 1 mL of MHC lysis buffer [20 mM Tris, 150 mM sodium chloride, pH 8.0, supplemented with 1% CHAPS, 1x HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Pierce), and 0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Sigma-Aldrich)]. Lysate was sonicated using a Q500 ultrasonic bath sonicator (Qsonica) in five 30-second pulses at an amplitude of 60%, cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 x g, and sterile filtered twice using 0.2 μm filter cartridges (Pall NanoSep). Lysates were then added to protein A sepharose beads conjugated with 0.5 mg of pan-MHC-I antibody (clone W6/32), and incubated rotating at 4°C overnight (12-14 hours). Beads were washed with 500 μL of TBS (50 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0), then twice more with 500 μL HPLC-grade water. Peptide-MHC complexes were eluted by incubating beads in 10% acetic acid for 20 minutes at room temperature. Peptides were isolated from antibody and MHC protein using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (Pall Nanosep) (donors A, C, D) or C18 SpinTips (Protea) (donors E, H, and I). SpinTips were washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, activated with 90% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid, and washed with 0.1% formic acid. Eluate from MHC-I IPs was applied to the column by centrifugation. The column was washed with 0.1% formic acid, and peptides were eluted by applying elution solvent (30% acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid) by centrifugation twice. Eluates were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. For donors E, H, and I, lyophilized peptides were resuspended in solvent A2 [10 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0] and loaded onto a fractionation column (a 200 μm inner diameter fused silica capillary packed in-house with 10 cm of 10 μM C18 beads). Peptides were fractionated using an Agilent 1100 series liquid chromatograph using buffers A2 (10 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and B2 (99% acetonitrile, 10 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). The fractionation column was washed with solvent A2, and peptides were separated using a gradient of 1-5% solvent B2 over 5 minutes, 5-40% over 60 minutes, 40-70% over 10 minutes, hold for 9 minutes, and 70%-1% over 1 minute. 90-second fractions were collected, concatenated into 12 tubes, over 90 minutes in total. Fractions were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. 75% of sample was used for DDA analysis. 25% was reserved for validation by SureQuant.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectra were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.5) and searched using Mascot (version 2.4) against a custom database comprising the Uniprot human proteome (UP000005640) and the Uniprot Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv proteome (UP000001584). No enzyme was used, and variable modifications included oxidized methionine for all analyses. Peptide-spectrum matches from all analyses were filtered with the following criteria: search engine rank = 1, isolation interference ≤ 30%, length between 8 and 16 amino acids, ions score ≥ 15, and Percolator q-value < 0.05. Identifications (IDs) of putative Mtb-derived peptides were rejected if any peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) for the same peptide were found in the unfiltered DDA MS data for the corresponding mock-infected control. For each putative Mtb peptide identified, MS/MS spectra and extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) were manually inspected, and the ID was only accepted for further validation if it met the following criteria: (1) MS/MS spectra contained enough information to unambiguously assign a majority of the peptide sequence; (2) neutral losses were consistent with the chemical properties of the peptide; (3) manual de novo sequencing did not reveal an alternate peptide sequence that would explain a greater number of MS/MS spectrum peaks; (4) XIC showed a peak in MS intensity at the mass to charge ratio (m/z) of the peptide precursor ion at the retention time at which it was identified that did not appear in the corresponding mock-infected control. Peptides that met these criteria were further validated using SureQuant. DDA MS data were searched a second time against a database comprising only known T7SS substrates of Mtb H37Rv (all Esx-family proteins, all PE/PPE proteins, and EspA, EspB, EspC, EspE, EspF, EspI, EspJ, and EspK). Because using this limited database artificially raises Percolator q-values, these searches were filtered only on ions score ≥ 20 rather than on ions score ≥ 15 and Percolator q-value < 0.05. The only validated Mtb peptide identified via these additional searches that had not previously been identified (AEHGMPGVP, derived from PPE51) was omitted from enrichment analyses to avoid introducing bias.

### Publication Abstract
T cells must recognize pathogen-derived peptides bound to major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs) in order to initiate a cell-mediated immune response against an infection, or to support the development of high-affinity antibody responses. Identifying antigens presented on MHCs by infected cells and professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) during infection may therefore provide a route toward developing new vaccines. Peptides bound to MHCs can be identified at whole-proteome scale using mass spectrometry-a technique referred to as "immunopeptidomics." This technique has emerged as a powerful tool for identifying potential vaccine targets in the context of many infectious diseases. In this review, we discuss the contributions immunopeptidomic studies have made to understanding antigen presentation and T cell priming in the context of infection and the potential for immunopeptidomics to inform the development of vaccines to address pressing global health problems in infectious disease.

### Keywords
Human, Infectious disease, Immunopeptidomics, Tuberculosis, Immunopeptidome, Mhc-i, Vaccines, Tb, Macrophage, Phagocyte

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Owen Leddy

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


