### Accession
PXD009721

### Title
In-depth quantitative proteomic analysis of trophozoites and pseudocysts of Trichomonas vaginalis r

### Description
Trichomonas vaginalis is a sexually transmitted anaerobic parasite that infects humans causing trichomoniasis, a common and ubiquitous sexually transmitted disease. The life cycle of this parasite presents a trophozoite form without a cystic stage. However, the presence of spherical forms with internalized flagella, non-proliferative, non-motile, viable and reversible, denominated pseudocysts, have been commonly observed in this parasite. To understand the mechanisms involved in the formation of pseudocysts, here we performed a mass spectrometry-based high-throughput quantitative proteomics study using a label-free approach and functional assays by biochemical and flow cytometric methods. We observed that morphological transformation of trophozoite to pseudocysts is coupled to (i) a metabolic shift toward a less glycolytic phenotype, (ii) alterations in the abundance of hydrogenosomal iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) assembly machinery; (iii) increased abundance of regulatory particles of the ubiquitin–proteasome system; (iv) significant alterations in proteins involved in adhesion and cytoskeleton reorganization; (v) arrest in G2/M phase associated to alterations in the abundance of regulatory proteins of the cell cycle. Such data supports that pseudocysts suffer important physiological and structural alterations for survive under unfavorable environmental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Sample aliquots containing 50 ug total protein were processed using MED FASP method.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were searched using MaxQuant software. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Trichomonas vaginalis is a sexually transmitted anaerobic parasite that infects humans causing trichomoniasis, a common and ubiquitous sexually transmitted disease. The life cycle of this parasite possesses a trophozoite form without a cystic stage. However, the presence of nonproliferative and nonmotile, yet viable and reversible spherical forms with internalized flagella, denominated pseudocysts, has been commonly observed for this parasite. To understand the mechanisms involved in the formation of pseudocysts, we performed a mass spectrometry-based high-throughput quantitative proteomics study using a label-free approach and functional assays by biochemical and flow cytometric methods. We observed that the morphological transformation of trophozoite to pseudocysts is coupled to (i) a metabolic shift toward a less glycolytic phenotype; (ii) alterations in the abundance of hydrogenosomal iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) assembly machinery; (iii) increased abundance of regulatory particles of the ubiquitin-proteasome system; (iv) significant alterations in proteins involved in adhesion and cytoskeleton reorganization; and (v) arrest in G2/M phase associated with alterations in the abundance of regulatory proteins of the cell cycle. These data demonstrate that pseudocysts experience important physiological and structural alterations for survival under unfavorable environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Total protein approach, Parasite, Fasp, Proteomic ruler

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany


