### Accession
PXD037651

### Title
Characterisation of colorectal cancer cell lines through proteomic profiling of their extracellular vesicles

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent cancers, driven by several factors including deregulations in intracellular signalling pathways. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are nanosized protein-packaged particles released from cells, which are present in liquid biopsies. Here, we characterised the proteome landscape of sEVs and their cells of origin in three CRC cell lines HCT116, HT29 and SW620 in order to explore molecular traits that could be exploited as cancer biomarker candidates and how intracellular signalling can be assessed by sEV analysis instead of directly obtaining the cell of origin itself. Our findings revealed that sEV cargo clearly reflects its cell of origin with proteins of the PI3K-AKT pathway highly represented in sEVs. Proteins known to be involved in CRC were detected in both cells and sEVs including KRAS, ARAF, mTOR, PDPK1 and MAPK1, while TGFB1 and TGFBR2, known to be key players in epithelial cancer carcinogenesis, were found to be enriched in sEVs. Furthermore, phosphopeptide-enriched profiling of cell lysates demonstrated a distinct pattern between cell lines and highlighted potential phosphoproteomic targets to be investigated in sEVs. The total proteomic and phosphoproteomics profiles described in the current work can serve as source to identify candidates for cancer biomarkers that can potentially be assessed from liquid biopsies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Human colorectal carcinoma cells HCT116, HT29 and SW620 were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC®, Wesel, Germany) and cultured with complete Gibco™ RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% EV-depleted foetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, USA) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco, USA). Cells were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 air atmosphere.  SEV lysate isolation and preparation  HCT116 (5*106), HT29 (8*106) and SW620 (5*106) cells were seeded and cultured in 23ml medium (175cm2 flask) for 72 hrs to allow sEV secretion. The average number of cells from 1xT175 flask was 25*106 (HCT116), 28.5*106 (HT29) and 42*106 (SW620), respectively. The media was collected (eight flasks per cell line) and centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 mins to remove cellular debris. SEVs were isolated from the eight flasks using a standardised ultracentrifugation protocol as described by Peinado et al. (13), employing a Beckman Coulter Optima™ XE-90 ultracentrifuge. Larger EVs were removed with an initial 20mins 12 000 x g ultracentrifugation. The sEV fraction collected was further isolated by spinning at 100,000 x g for 70mins. One isolation resulted in a sEV fraction which was then washed in either (i) 21ml PBS for nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), (ii) added 200 µL 2% paraformaldehyde for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis before (iii) suspension in 20μl lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific Halt™ Protease & Phosphatase Single Use Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) in Thermo Scientific Pierce™ RIPA Buffer). Next, sEVs were gently rocked at 4ºC for 3hrs before measuring protein concentration using Bio-Rad assay for proteomic analysis. All the above work was carried out at 4ºC cooled settings.   Cell lysate preparation and protein measurement Cell lysates for all three cell lines were collected simultaneously as the media was removed for sEV isolation. For cell lysis, media was removed and the cells washed with cold PBS, trypsinised and centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 mins. The supernatant was removed and cells were resuspended in cold PBS centrifuged once again at 800RPM for 8 min before resuspension in 300ul lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific Halt™ Protease & Phosphatase Single Use Inhibitor Cocktail (100X) in Thermo Scientific Pierce™ RIPA Buffer). Cell lysates were continuously swayed at 4º for 3hrs before measuring protein concentration using Bio-Rad assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, USA).  Mass spectrometry experimental setup For shotgun analysis, 50 µg of protein extract were reduced, alkylated and digested on magnetic HILIC beads as described by the producer (Resyn Biosciences, South Africa). For phosphoproteomic analysis 500 µg protein extract were reduced, alkylated and digested prior to phosphopeptide enrichment using TiIMAC magnetic beads according to the protocol (Resyn Biosciences, South Africa). After desalting using C18 StageTips (REF: Rappsilber Nature Protocols 2007), peptides were dried down in a SpeedVac centrifuge and resuspended in 50 µl 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were analysed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of an Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanospray ESI ion source (Proxeon, Odense). Peptides were injected into a C-18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and further separated on a C-18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm i. d. x 50 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid): From 5% to 40% B in 165 min, 40-80% B in 10 min and 80% B in 5 min. The flow rate was 250 nl/min. Peptides eluted were analysed on QExactive HF mass spectrometer using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 1.9 kV, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 29, automatic gain control target value of 3E6 for Orbitrap MS and 1E5 for MS/MS scans. Each MS scan (m/z 400–1800) was acquired at a resolution of 12000 FWHM, followed by 15 MS/MS scans triggered for AGC targets above 2E3, at a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms for MS and 100 ms for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Proteins were quantified by processing MS data using Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ (http://www.thermoscientific.com/content/tfs/ en/product/proteome-discoverer-software.html) version 2.3 (PD). Preview version 2.3.5 from Protein Metrics Incorporate (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ac200609a) was used to inspect the raw files to determine optimal search criteria. Namely, the following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as Trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; Phosphorylation of Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine, Acetylation of Protein N-terminal, Oxidation of Methionine and Deamidation of Asparagine/Glutamine as dynamic post-translational modification while Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as static; Precursor mass-tolerance of 10 PPM while Fragment mass-tolerance of 0.02 Dalton. For downstream analysis of these peptide-spectra-matches (PSM), PSM false-discovery-rate (FDR) for both protein and peptide was set to 1%, thus only unique peptides with high confidence were used for final protein group identification. Peak abundances were extracted by integrating the area under the peak curve. Each protein group abundance was normalised by the total abundance of all identified peptides at FDR < 1%. The summed up median values for all unique peptide ion abundances were mapped to respective proteins using the label-free quantification algorithm (http://www.mcponline.org/content/13/9/2513.long). The resulting values were scaled for all averages with Precursor Ion Quantifier node (http://tools.thermofisher.com/content/sfs/posters/PN-64857-LC-MS-LFQ-Proteome-Discoverer-IMSC2016-PN64857-EN.pdf) for MQ and PD, respectively. Values for all samples were log2-transformed and subjected to principal component analysis (PCA). In order to calculate Phospho-site occupancies, PTM was set to True in the MQ experiment design for all the enriched shotgun proteomics samples.  Differentially expressed protein identification In order to identify the differentially expressed phospho-enriched peptides among the three cell lines, a differential expression analysis (DEA) of the data was performed using the R package DEP [20]. Prior to the DEA, all the potential contaminants identified during the MS analysis were removed. Furthermore, as some peptides were not quantified in all replicates, an additional filtering step for proteins that were identified in two out of three replicates of at least one condition was performed. For the identification of the differentially expressed peptides, linear models combined with empirical Bayes statistics were employed and all possible comparisons between cell lines were generated. The differentially expressed peptides were assessed with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.01. The most significantly differentially expressed phospho-enriched peptides in triplicate whole cell samples in all cell lines were visualised as a heat map.   Data visualisation Venn diagrams were created with the R-package eulerr [21] and heat maps were created with the R-package pheatmap [22].

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most prevalent cancers, driven by several factors including deregulations in intracellular signalling pathways. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) are nanosized protein-packaged particles released from cells, which are present in liquid biopsies. Here, we characterised the proteome landscape of sEVs and their cells of origin in three CRC cell lines HCT116, HT29 and SW620 to explore molecular traits that could be exploited as cancer biomarker candidates and how intracellular signalling can be assessed by sEV analysis instead of directly obtaining the cell of origin itself. Our findings revealed that sEV cargo clearly reflects its cell of origin with proteins of the PI3K-AKT pathway highly represented in sEVs. Proteins known to be involved in CRC were detected in both cells and sEVs including KRAS, ARAF, mTOR, PDPK1 and MAPK1, while TGFB1 and TGFBR2, known to be key players in epithelial cancer carcinogenesis, were found to be enriched in sEVs. Furthermore, the phosphopeptide-enriched profiling of cell lysates demonstrated a distinct pattern between cell lines and highlighted potential phosphoproteomic targets to be investigated in sEVs. The total proteomic and phosphoproteomics profiles described in the current work can serve as a source to identify candidates for cancer biomarkers that can potentially be assessed from liquid biopsies.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Sevs, Extracellular vesicles, Intracellular signalling

### Affiliations
MD, MSc, PhD  Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine  asmund.flobak@ntnu.no  +47 72573717 Gastrosenteret, Øya, Olav Kyrres gate 13
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Åsmund Flobak
MD, MSc, PhD  Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine  asmund.flobak@ntnu.no  +47 72573717 Gastrosenteret, Øya, Olav Kyrres gate 13


