### Accession
PXD011262

### Title
Temporally  &  Spatially-Resolved  Microproteomics  and  MALDI  MSI  Lipidomic  Analysis  for  Traumatic  Brain  Injury

### Description
Using  an  experimental  TBI  rat  model  of  mild/moderate  Controlled  Cortical  Impact (CCI)  injury,  we  combined  large-scale  proteomics  identification  and  relative  quantification  using  Spatially-Resolved  Microproteomics  with  MALDI  MS  Imaging  of  Lipids.  Spatially  by  studying  different  regions  in  the  brain  post  injury  in  a  coronal  view,  with  main  focus  on  the  injury  site  itself.  Temporally  by  studying  the  acute  and  subacute  phase  post  injury,  including  injured  rat  brains  at  1  day,  3  days,  7  days,  and  10  days  post  injury.  Direct  on-tissue  micro-digestion  followed  by  micoextraction  from  1  mm2  surface  area  within  the  injured  cortical  tissue  were  subjected  to  LC-MS  &  MS/MS  analysis  using HR  MS.  In  addition,  several  identified  potential  biomarkers  within  our  study  were  used  to  stimulate  dorsal root ganglion (DRG),  astrocyte,  and  macrophage  cell  lines  to  obtain  a  better  understanding  of  their  role  and  contribution  in  the  injury.

### Sample Protocol
Microproteomics: After subjecting tissue sections to several washing steps to deplete lipids, LysC trypsin was spotted on the injured cortical tissue using a piezoelectric microspotter chemical inkjet printer. Using Liquid Extraction Surface Analysis (LESA), the digested peptides within the injured cortical tissue were extracted. The extracted digests were then subjected to LC-MS/MS.   Stimulated cell line proteomics: Protein extraction was performed on DRG, astrocyte, and macrophage cell lines using sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer (SDS). 50 µl of extraction buffer was added to each tube and samples were then heated for 15 min at 95 °C then sonicated for 15 min. After, a centrifugation step was performed at 16,000 g for 10 min at 20 °C. The supernatant containing the tryptic peptides, was collected and its total protein content was estimated using the Bradford quantification method. All sample concentrations were normalized to obtain a final concentration of 1.5 µg/µl per sample and further experimentation, including digestion, was carried out using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method with a mass cut-off threshold of 30 KDa. An alkylation step was performed in the dark by adding Iodoacetamide (IAA) solution and samples were then digested overnight at an incubation temperature of 37°C by adding LysC/trypsin. Desalting and enrichment of the samples was carried out using ZipTip C-18 (Millipore) just before processing using LC-MS/MS.   LC-MS/MS analysis of both microproteomics and stimulated cell line extracts: MS analysis was performed using nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The peptides were separated using a reverse phase analytical column by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile for 2 hours at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full MS scans were performed with a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, a m/z mass range between 300-1600, an AGC of 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Data-dependent MS/MS scans were performed by subjecting the 10 most intense ionsto high energy collision dissociation (HCD). With regard to the MS/MS fragmentation parameters, the resolution was set at 17,500 FWHM, a m/z range between 200-2000, an AGC of 5e4 ions, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The isolation window was set at 4.0 m/z.   MALDI MSI: After tissue sections were completely dried, DHB matrix was manually sprayed for 12 min onto the tissue using a nebulizer which was constructed in-house. Images were acquired using a MALDI LTQ Orbitrap XL operated using Xcalibur software version 2.0.7. The MALDI LTQ Orbitrap XL is equipped with a commercial N2 laser (LTB Laser Technik, Berlin, Germany) operating at λ = 337 nm with a maximum repetition rate of 60 Hz. Spectra were obtained in positive ion mode at a spectral mass resolution of 30000 (centered at m/z 200) in the mass range of 300−1000 Da. Each spectrum was acquired by averaging 10 scans with 1 microscan per step with a raster step size of 70 μm. External calibration in the normal mass range (m/z 150−2000) was performed before every acquired image using the ProteoMass MALDI calibration kit.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data processing: All raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3. Proteins were identified by comparing all raw spectra with a proteome reference database of Rattus norvegicus (Uniprot, release 20180712, 8027 entries for the cell line stimulated protein identifications, and release 20180302, 8022 entries for the on-tissue microproteomics identifications). The parameters chosen for the identification include: digestion enzyme used was trypsin LysC and maximum number of missed cleavages allowed was two. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were chosen as variable modifications. As for fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set for the identification of proteins in the cell line stimulation case, and this modification was removed for the microproteomics approach. Proteins were identified based on a minimum of 2 peptides per protein, in which 1 was unique. As for initial mass tolerance, 6 ppm was selected for MS mode, and 20 ppm was set for fragmentation data with regard to MS/MS tolerance. The false discovery rate (FDR) was specified to 1% for both protein and peptide. The label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed by keeping the default parameters of MaxQuant.    MALDI data processing: All images were converted to vendor-neutral *.imzML format using the plug-in available in ImageQuest software version 1.1.0 build S4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SCiLS lab MVS software, version 2018b Premium 3D release 6.01.10194 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) was then used to process the uploaded vendor-neutral files. With this version of SCiLS Lab, the baseline removal option is not available, and the peaks are automatically imported. Normalization was performed based on the total ion count (TIC) method and m/z intervals were automatically set at ± 24.967 mDa.

### Publication Abstract
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) represents a major health concerns with no clinically-approved FDA drug available for therapeutic intervention. Several genomics and neuroproteomics studies have been employed to decipher the underlying pathological mechanisms involved that can serve as potential neurotherapeutic targets and unveil a possible underlying relation of TBI to other secondary neurological disorders. In this work, we present a novel high throughput systems biology approach using a spatially resolved microproteomics platform conducted on different brain regions in an experimental rat model of moderate of controlled cortical injury (CCI) at a temporal pattern postinjury (1 day, 3 days, 7 days, and 10 days). Mapping the spatiotemporal landscape of signature markers in TBI revealed an overexpression of major protein families known to be implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD) such as GPR158, HGMB1, synaptotagmin and glutamate decarboxylase in the ipsilateral <i>substantia nigra. In silico</i> bioinformatics docking experiments indicated the potential correlation between TBI and PD through alpha-synuclein. In an <i>in vitro</i> model, stimulation with palmitoylcarnitine triggered an inflammatory response in macrophages and a regeneration processes in astrocytes which also further confirmed the <i>in vivo</i> TBI proteomics data. Taken together, this is the first study to assess the microproteomics landscape in TBI, mainly in the <i>substantia nigra,</i> thus revealing a potential predisposition for PD or Parkinsonism post-TBI.

### Keywords
Long-chain acylcarnitine, Spatiotemporal microproteomics, Traumatic brain injury, Substantia nigra, Astrocyte, Macrophage

### Affiliations
PRISM Laboratory-INSERM U1192, University of Lille, France
PRISM- University of Lille 1

### Submitter
Jusal Quanico

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM Laboratory-INSERM U1192, University of Lille, France


