### Accession
PXD006197

### Title
The proteome and transcriptome of the infectious metacyclic form of Trypanosoma brucei define quiescent cells primed for mammalian invasion

### Description
The infectious metacyclic forms of Trypanosoma brucei result from a complex development in the tsetse fly vThe infectious metacyclic forms of Trypanosoma brucei result from a complex development in the tsetse fly vector. When they infect mammals, they cause African sleeping sickness in humans. Due to scarcity of biological material and difficulties of the tsetse fly as an experimental system, very limited information is available concerning the gene expression profile of metacyclic Trapanosoma forms. We used an in vitro system based on expressing the RNA binding protein 6 (RBP6) to obtain infectious metacyclics and determined their protein and mRNA repertoires by mass-spectrometry (MS) based proteomics and mRNA sequencing (RNAseq) in comparison to non-infectious procyclic trypanosomes. This comparison showed that metacyclics are quiescent cells, and we propose this influences the choice of a monocistronic variant surface glycoprotein expression site. Metacyclics have a largely bloodstream-form type transcriptome, and thus are programmed to translate a bloodstream-form type proteome upon entry into the mammalian host and resumption of cell division. Genes encoding cell surface components showed the largest changes between procyclics and metacyclics, observed at both the transcript and protein levels. Genes encoding metabolic enzymes exhibited expression in metacyclics with features of both procyclic and bloodstream forms, suggesting that this intermediate-type metabolism is dictated by the availability of nutrients in the tsetse fly vector.   ector. When they infect mammals, they cause African sleeping sickness in humans. Due to scarcity of biological material and difficulties of the tsetse fly as an experimental system, very limited information is available concerning the gene expression profile of metacyclic Trapanosoma forms. We used an in vitro system based on expressing the RNA binding protein 6 (RBP6) to obtain infectious metacyclics and determined their protein and mRNA repertoires by mass-spectrometry (MS) based proteomics and mRNA sequencing (RNAseq) in comparison to non-infectious procyclic trypanosomes. This comparison showed that metacyclics are quiescent cells, and we propose this influences the choice of a monocistronic variant surface glycoprotein expression site. Metacyclics have a largely bloodstream-form type transcriptome, and thus are programmed to translate a bloodstream-form type proteome upon entry into the mammalian host and resumption of cell division. Genes encoding cell surface components showed the largest changes between procyclics and metacyclics, observed at both the transcript and protein levels. Genes encoding metabolic enzymes exhibited expression in metacyclics with features of both procyclic and bloodstream forms, suggesting that this intermediate-type metabolism is dictated by the availability of nutrients in the tsetse fly vector.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy metacyclics and light procyclics, from two independent biological replicates, were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH9.0, 5% SDS, and 100 mM DTT) for 30 min at 55 °C. Lysates were cleared via centrifugation at 17,000g for 10 min. Protein concentrations were measured using Bradford assay and heavy and light cell lysate were mixed to a 1:1 (H:L) ratios. Combined supernatants were diluted with buffer UA (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH = 8.5) to a final concentration of 0.5% SDS. Proteins were digested with LysC and trypsin following the protocol for filter aided sample preparation. Briefly, protein extracts were loaded on a 30k Amicon Ultra filter unit (Millipore, Billerica, MA) by means of centrifugation at 14,000g. Samples were washed twice by the addition of 200 μl buffer UA and alkylated for 20 min in the dark by the addition of 5.5 mM iodoacetamide in 200 μl buffer UA. Samples were washed an additional four times via the addition of 200 μl buffer UA and centrifugation. 60 μl of buffer UA containing 0.5 mg/ml LysC were added to the filter units and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Recovered peptides were acidified by trifluoroacetic acid and spun to remove precipitates. 1.5 ug of peptides were injected into the high-performance liquid chromatograph. The first biological replicate was analyzed with 3 technical replicates and the second biological replicate was analyzed with 8 technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
MS Measurement and Analysis  Reversed phase chromatography was performed on a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on 50-cm columns (New Objective) with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted from 50-cm columns with a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 5-30% in 0.1% formic acid for 240 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column temperature was kept at 40°C by an oven (Sonation GmbH, Germany) with a Peltier element. Eluted peptides from the column were directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired on the Q Exactive in a data dependent-mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and up to 10 data dependent MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time for full scans was 20 ms with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z=200. The 10 most intense multiple charged ions (z≥2) from the survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 3Th and fragment with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25. Target values for MS/MS were set to 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z=200. To avoid repetitive sequencing, the dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 45 sec.  Data Analysis  The resulting MS and MS/MS spectra from all biological and technical replicates were analyzed together using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5), utilizing its integrated ANDROMEDA search algorithms. Peak lists were searched against the UNIPROT databases for Trypanosoma brucei TREU927 (version 3.3, 9826 entries) downloaded from tritrypDB (http://tritrypdb.org) with common contaminants added. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (phospho, STY), ubiquitylation (GlyGly, K) and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation for MS peaks was set to 6ppm and 20ppm for MS/MS peaks. Maximum missed cleavages were 2. The false discovery rate was determined by searching a reverse database. Maximum false discovery rates were 0.01 both on peptide and protein levels. Minimum required peptide length was 6 residues. Proteins with at least two peptides (one of them unique) were considered identified. The “match between runs” option was enabled with a time window of 0.5 min to match identification between replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The infectious metacyclic forms of Trypanosoma brucei result from a complex development in the tsetse fly vector. When they infect mammals, they cause African sleeping sickness in humans. Due to scarcity of biological material and difficulties of the tsetse fly as an experimental system, very limited information is available concerning the gene expression profile of metacyclic forms. We used an in vitro system based on expressing the RNA binding protein 6 to obtain infectious metacyclics and determined their protein and mRNA repertoires by mass-spectrometry (MS) based proteomics and mRNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) in comparison to non-infectious procyclic trypanosomes. We showed that metacyclics are quiescent cells, and propose this influences the choice of a monocistronic variant surface glycoprotein expression site. Metacyclics have a largely bloodstream-form type transcriptome, and thus are programmed to translate a bloodstream-form type proteome upon entry into the mammalian host and resumption of cell division. Genes encoding cell surface components showed the largest changes between procyclics and metacyclics, observed at both the transcript and protein levels. Genes encoding metabolic enzymes exhibited expression in metacyclics with features of both procyclic and bloodstream forms, suggesting that this intermediate-type metabolism is dictated by the availability of nutrients in the tsetse fly vector.

### Keywords
Metacyclics, Transcriptome, Proteome, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Harvard School of Public Health
Tobias Walther HHMI Investigator, HSPH, HMS, Broad http://faresewaltherlab.hms.harvard.edu https://www.hhmi.org/scientists/tobias-c-walther twitter:@TobiWalther

### Submitter
romain christiano

### Lab Head
Dr Romain Christiano
Tobias Walther HHMI Investigator, HSPH, HMS, Broad http://faresewaltherlab.hms.harvard.edu https://www.hhmi.org/scientists/tobias-c-walther twitter:@TobiWalther


