### Accession
PXD014355

### Title
Palmitoylation of BMPR1a regulates neural stem cell fate

### Description
Neural stem cells (NSCs) generate neurons and glial cells throughout embryonic and postnatal brain development. The role of s-acylation, a reversible post-translational lipid modification of proteins, in regulating fate and activity of NSCs remains largely unknown. We here used an unbiased screening approach to identify proteins that are s-acylated in mouse NSCs.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol was performed as previously described with some minor modifications[Wan, 2007 #3407]: NSCs were cultured on poly-L-ornithine and laminin  coated 10 cm cell culture Prior to protein extraction cells were washed twice using 4 °C cold PBS. Lysis was performed using 250 μl LB. Lysates were supplemented with Triton X-100 to 1.7 % and with Chaps to 1 % and incubated for 1h end-over-end at 4 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 250g for 5 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured using Biorad DC assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were adjusted to the same volume and concentration (5 ml, 2.2 mg/ml) by the addition of LB. Samples were then precipitated once using C/M precipitation and pellets were resolved in 2.5 ml LB pH 7.4 at 37 °C for 30 min by gentle agitation. Samples were diluted with dilution buffer pH 7.2 at 4 °C and 1 mM PMSF to 10 ml and incubated overnight with gentle agitation at 4 °C, followed by three sequential C/M precipitations. Samples were then divided into a + HAM  and a – HAM sample and incubated for 1h with end-over-end rotation at room temperature. After an additional CM precipitation samples were incubated for 1h with low-HPDP binding buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM HPDP–biotin, 0.2 % Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, PI. Samples were cleaned two more times with C/M precipitations and frozen down at -20 °C. Next day the samples were thawed and precipitated once more with C/M and suspended in LB pH 7.2. Samples were diluted 1:20 to a final SDS concentration of 0.1 % with dilution buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2 % Triton-X-100, 1xPI, 1 mM PMSF and centrifuged 16000g for 5 min. A Biorad DC assay was performed and protein concentrations were equalized before incubation with streptavidin agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 90 min at room temperature After incubation beads were washed 5 times with LB  and 50 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich)) for 15 min at 37 °C with occasional gentle mixing, followed by TCA precipitation (10 %) for 1h at ice. Samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 4 °C and washed twice with -20 °C acetone. Pellets were dissolved in LB pH 8.2 (4 % (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris, 100 mM DTT) and stored at -80 °C. Sample preparation, LC-MS/MS analysis and data analysis was performed as described previously: Knobloch et al.  Cell Rep, 2017

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Progenesis QI for proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics) and Gapdh, Actin and Tubulin were used for normalization between samples. Mascot was used for searching a target-decoy mouse database downloaded from uniprot (05/31/2018). Parameters were set as following: peptide tolerance +-10ppm, MS/MS tolerance +-0.7DA, variable modifications: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Gln → pyro Glu (N-term), N-Ethylmaleimide, oxidation (M). Resulting Mascot dat-files were imported into Scaffold 4 (Proteome Software). The threshold was set for peptides to 95 % and for proteins to 99 % respectively. The Scaffold Spectrum Report was reimported into Progenesis and relative quantitation using non-conflicting peptides was performed. Decoy hits were excluded and protein quantitation and statistics were exported as csv files.

### Publication Abstract
Neural stem cells (NSCs) generate neurons and glial cells throughout embryonic and postnatal brain development. The role of S-palmitoylation (also referred to as S-acylation), a reversible posttranslational lipid modification of proteins, in regulating the fate and activity of NSCs remains largely unknown. We used an unbiased screening approach to identify proteins that are S-acylated in mouse NSCs and showed that bone morphogenic protein receptor 1a (BMPR1a), a core mediator of BMP signaling, is palmitoylated. Genetic manipulation of S-acylated sites affects the localization and trafficking of BMPR1a and leads to altered BMP signaling. Strikingly, defective palmitoylation of BMPR1a modulates NSC function within the mouse brain, resulting in enhanced oligodendrogenesis. Thus, we identified a mechanism regulating the behavior of NSCs and provided the framework to characterize dynamic posttranslational lipid modifications of proteins in the context of NSC biology.

### Keywords
Abe, Nsc

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neural Plasticity, Faculties of Medicine and Science, Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Thomas Wegleiter

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Jessberger
Laboratory of Neural Plasticity, Faculties of Medicine and Science, Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.


