### Accession
PXD017019

### Title
The role of Bud23 in mouse heart tissue

### Description
Efficient mitochondrial function is required in tissues with high energy demand such as the heart, and mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with cardiovascular disease. Expression of mitochondrial proteins is tightly regulated in response to internal and external stimuli. Here we identify a novel mechanism regulating mitochondrial content and function, through BUD23-dependent ribosome generation. BUD23 was required for ribosome maturation, normal 18S/28S stoichiometry and modulated the translation of mitochondrial transcripts in human A549 cells. Deletion of Bud23 in murine cardiomyocytes reduced mitochondrial content and function, leading to severe cardiomyopathy and death. We discovered that BUD23 selectively promotes ribosomal interaction with low GC-content 5’UTRs. Taken together we identify a critical role for BUD23 in bioenergetics gene expression, by promoting efficient translation of mRNA transcripts with low 5’UTR GC content.  BUD23 emerges as essential to mouse development, and to postnatal cardiac function.

### Sample Protocol
Whole mouse hearts were dissected, quartered and washed in ice cold PBS to remove blood before disruption of the tissue in 1x TBS supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail using a TissueRuptor (Qiagen). SDS was added to a final concentration of 4% (w/v) prior to sonication. Samples were then reduced with 100mM DTT and heated for 3 minutes at 95°C. Samples were prepared for label-free quantification in accordance with published protocols (Hernandez-Valladares et al., 2016). Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer using a stepped normalized collision energy centered at 28. Cardiac samples were separated using a gradient from 95% A (0.1% FA in water) and 5% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 81.5 min, 27% B at 102 min and 60% B at 104 min, with a final run time of 120 min. The top 12 precursors were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis during each cycle.  Ionization potential was set at 1900V with a survey scan window of 300-1750 m/z. MS1 used a resolution of 120,000 with a target ion intensity of 3e6. Higher-energy collisional dissociation was used. MS2 was set at a resolution of 60,000 with a target ion intensity of 2e5. Maximum injection times for MS1 and MS2 were 20ms and 110ms respectively. Peptides were dynamically excluded for 15s after one occurrence.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008), searching against either the Uniprot Mus musculus database (accessed 21/12/2017) or Homo sapiens database (accessed 12/03/2017) using the native Andromeda search engine. Match between runs was selected with a retention time of 1 minute, using default parameters for all other settings. MS1 search tolerance was set at 20ppm, and MS2 at 4.5ppm. Modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C) for fixed, and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) variable. A minimum of 1 spectra was required for identification, while a minimum of 2 spectra were required for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Efficient mitochondrial function is required in tissues with high energy demand such as the heart, and mitochondrial dysfunction is associated with cardiovascular disease. Expression of mitochondrial proteins is tightly regulated in response to internal and external stimuli. Here we identify a novel mechanism regulating mitochondrial content and function, through BUD23-dependent ribosome generation. BUD23 was required for ribosome maturation, normal 18S/28S stoichiometry and modulated the translation of mitochondrial transcripts in human A549 cells. Deletion of <i>Bud23</i> in murine cardiomyocytes reduced mitochondrial content and function, leading to severe cardiomyopathy and death. We discovered that BUD23 selectively promotes ribosomal interaction with low GC-content 5'UTRs. Taken together we identify a critical role for BUD23 in bioenergetics gene expression, by promoting efficient translation of mRNA transcripts with low 5'UTR GC content. BUD23 emerges as essential to mouse development, and to postnatal cardiac function.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Bud23

### Affiliations
Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Maria Voronkov

### Lab Head
Dr David William Ray
Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK


