### Accession
PXD037041

### Title
MASP micro-specimen samples at different spatial locations

### Description
Quantitative protein mapping on whole-tissue levels provides important insights into the spatially-organized regulatory processes/networks related to diseases and therapy, but remains a tremendous challenge. We describe a micro-scaffold assisted spatial proteomics(MASP) method, based on precise tissue spatial-compartmentalization using a 3D-printed micro-scaffold, capable of mapping thousands of proteins across a whole-tissue slice with excellent quantitative quality. The mapping accuracy was validated and applied in mapping >5,000 cerebral proteins in mouse brain. Under stringent cutoffs, 5019 unique proteins were mapped(N=208 micro-specimens) and 4577 proteins were mapped in all regions.

### Sample Protocol
The sample preparation protocol was optimized for the micro-specimens by modifying the Surfactant Cocktail-Aided Extraction/Precipitation/On-Pellet Digestion (SEPOD) protocol. All procedures were performed on ice unless indicated otherwise. For exhaustive protein extraction, 30 mL of surfactant cocktail buffer (50 mM Tris-FA pH=8.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 2% IGEPAL CA-630, 2% SDS, cOmpleteTM Mini, EDTA-free Protease inhibitor tablets) was added into the tube of each tissue micro-specimens. The samples were sonicated in a water bath for 15 min at room temperature and then incubated at 4 ºC overnight. The tissue lysates were vortexed and then centrifuged at 20,000 g (4 ºC, 30 min). The supernatant was carefully collected into the low-protein-binding tubes, and the remaining cell debris along with the snapped tip of pistons was discarded. The total protein concentration of each sample was measured using the Micro BCA Protein Assay. For each micro-specimen, 10 mg of proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT (56 °C, 30 min), then alkylated by 25 mM IAM (37 ºC for 30 min, in darkness) in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany) at 550 rpm. After adding 6× volumes of chilled acetone (-20 ºC), the samples were placed at -20 ºC for 3 h for protein precipitation. Then, the samples were centrifuged using 20,000 g at 4 °C for 30 min, the supernatant was discarded, and the pelleted protein was carefully washed with 300 mL of methanol, then resuspended into 28 mL of 50 mM Tris-FA (pH=8.5). Activated trypsin of 2 mL (0.25 mg/mL) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w); and the tryptic digestion was performed in the Thermomixer at 37 °C, 550 rpm for 6 h. The digestion was terminated by adding FA to 1% (v/v) final concentration followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g, 4 °C for 30 min. The supernatant was transferred to autosampler vials for the LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were conducted using UHR-IonStar, a unique MS1-based quantitative proteomics pipeline, which achieves accurate and robust proteomic quantification in large cohorts, including low-abundance, regulatory proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate, in-depth mapping of proteins on whole-tissue levels provides comprehensive insights into the spatially-organized regulatory processes/networks in tissues, but is challenging. Here we describe a micro-scaffold assisted spatial proteomics (MASP) strategy, based on spatially-resolved micro-compartmentalization of tissue using a 3D-printed micro-scaffold, capable of mapping thousands of proteins across a whole-tissue slice with excellent quantitative accuracy/precision. The pipeline includes robust tissue micro-compartmentalization with precisely-preserved spatial information, reproducible procurement and preparation of the micro-specimens, followed by sensitive LC-MS analysis and map generation by a MAsP app. The mapping accuracy was validated by comparing the MASP-generated maps of spiked-in peptides and brain-region-specific markers with known patterns, and by correlating the maps of the two protein components of the same heterodimer. The MASP was applied in mapping &gt;5000 cerebral proteins in the mouse brain, encompassing numerous important brain markers, regulators, and transporters, where many&#xa0;of these&#xa0;proteins had&#xa0;not previously&#xa0;been&#xa0;mapped on the whole-tissue level.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Masp

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United State

### Submitter
Shihan Huo

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United State


