### Accession
PXD028879

### Title
Split-TurboID with Bre5 and Rps2 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
The in vivo labeling technique Split-Biotin identification (Split-BioID, De Munter et al., 2017, Schopp et al., 2017, Cho et al., 2020) was used to capture the common microenvironment of Bre5 and the ribosomal protein Rps2 (uS5). Biotinylated proteins were enriched from cell lysates using affinity purification. After SDS-PAGE, proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin and the resulting peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) for identification and relative quantification against controls. An aliquot of the cell lysate that was used for the affinity purification was taken as an input control and analyzed as well by LC-MS to account for possible differences in the input abundance of enriched proteins.  Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) was used for relative quantification of proteins according to the 2nSILAC approach (Dannenmaier et al., 2018). To evaluate the labeling efficiency, an aliquot of each culture was harvested separately prior to the pooling of the cells for the Split-BioID experiment. Cell lysates from these samples were used for SDS-PAGE, and a part of each gel lane was used for an in-gel digest of proteins. These peptides were also analyzed with LC-MS and the percentages of SILAC-labeled peptides (based on MSMS counts) were calculated. The captured proteins belong to a common cellular microenvironment of Bre5 and Rps2.  References: Cho, K.F., Branon, T.C., Rajeev, S., Svinkina, T., Udeshi, N.D., Thoudam, T., Kwak, C., Rhee, H.W., Lee, I.K., Carr, S.A., Ting, A.Y. (2020). Split-TurboID enables contact-dependent proximity labeling in cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 117, 12143-12154.  Dannenmaier, S., Stiller, S.B., Morgenstern, M., Lübbert, P., Oeljeklaus, S., Wiedemann, N., Warscheid, B. (2018). Complete Native Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for Global Proteomic Analysis. Anal Chem 90, 10501-10509.  De Munter, S., Görnemann, J., Derua, R., Lesage, B., Qian, J., Heroes, E., Waelkens, E., Van Eynde, A., Beullens, M., Bollen, M. (2017). Split-BioID: a proximity biotinylation assay for dimerization-dependent protein interactions. FEBS Lett 591, 415-424. Schopp, I.M., Amaya Ramirez, C.C., Debeljak, J., Kreibich, E., Skribbe, M., Wild, K., Béthune, J. (2017). Split-BioID a conditional proteomics approach to monitor the composition of spatiotemporally defined protein complexes. Nat Commun 8,15690.

### Sample Protocol
To compare three yeast strains within a Split-BioID experiment, SILAC-labeling was used for relative quantification. A strain expressing Bre5 fused to the C-terminal half of the biotin ligase TurboID (C-Tb) and Rps2 fused to the N-terminal half of TurboID (N-Tb) was labeled with “light” arginine and lysine. As a negative control, a strain was used that only expressed Bre5-C-Tb (“medium” labeled). As a second control, a strain expressing Bre5-C-Tb in combination with N-Tb fused to a protein of the large ribosomal subunit, Rpl5 (“heavy” labeled) was used. Cells were cultivated in 100 ml YNB medium (0.15% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 0.5% ammonium sulfate, 2% glucose) with the required amino acids. 13C6-L-arginine HCl/4,4,5,5-D4-L-lysine HCl and 13C6 15N4-L-arginine HCl/13C6-L-lysine HCl were used for the labeling of cells with “medium” and “heavy” lysine/arginine, respectively. D-biotin was added to a final concentration of 10 µM as soon as the cultures reached an OD600 of 0.25. After an additional 3 h of incubation, cells were harvested. Equal amounts of cells from the three different cultures were pooled, and proteins were extracted. SDS was added to the cell lysate to a final w/v of 4% to denature the proteins. Biotinylated proteins were enriched using 300-350 µl Strep-Tactin® Superflow® resin (IBA Lifesciences GmbH). After washing of the beads, proteins were eluted twice using 150 µl BXT buffer (0.1 M Tris-Cl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM biotin, IBA Lifesciences GmbH). Chloroform-methanol extraction was performed to precipitate the proteins (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Proteins were reconstituted in 8 M urea/2 M thiourea, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and in-gel digested according to Shevchenko et al. (1996). The resulting peptides were purified using C18 (3M) stop and go extraction (stage) tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003; Rappsilber et al., 2007) and dried. Peptides were dissolved in 20 µl sample buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed with LC-MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described (Schmitt and Valerius, 2019). The software XCalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for LC-MS method programming and data acquisition.  References: Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., and Mann, M. (1996). Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68, 850-858. Wessel, D., and Flügge, U.I. (1984). A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids. Anal Biochem 138, 141-143. Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y., and Mann, M. (2003). Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 75, 663-670. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Ishihama, Y. (2007). Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906. Roux, K.J., Kim, D.I., Raida, M., and Burke, B. (2012). A promiscuous biotin ligase fusion protein identifies proximal and interacting proteins in mammalian cells. J Cell Biol 196, 801-810. Schmitt, K., and Valerius, O. (2019). yRACK1/Asc1 proxiOMICs-Towards Illuminating Ships Passing in the Night. Cells 8, 1384.

### Data Protocol
The software MaxQuant 1.6.12.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) was used for protein identification and SILAC-based relative quantification. An S. cerevisiae-specific protein database (UniProt Proteome ID UP000002311) that also contained individual entries of the amino acid sequences of the N-terminal and C-terminal halves of TurboID (Split-TurboID, Cho et al., 2020) was used. Arg6/Lys4 and Arg10/Lys8 were defined as the medium and heavy labels, respectively. Biotinylation of lysine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Re-quantification was performed, and a minimum of one ratio count was required for protein quantification. The default settings were applied for all other parameters. The Perseus software 1.6.0.7 was used to analyze the MaxQuant output data (Tyanova et al., 2016).  References: Cho, K.F., Branon, T.C., Rajeev, S., Svinkina, T., Udeshi, N.D., Thoudam, T., Kwak, C., Rhee, H.W., Lee, I.K., Carr, S.A., Ting, A.Y. (2020). Split-TurboID enables contact-dependent proximity labeling in cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 117, 12143-12154.  Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372. Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M.Y., Geiger, T., Mann, M., and Cox, J. (2016). The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13, 731-740.

### Publication Abstract
A comparison of overlapping proximity captures at the head region of the ribosomal 40S subunit (<i>hr40S</i>) in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> from four adjacent perspectives, namely Asc1/RACK1, Rps2/uS5, Rps3/uS3, and Rps20/uS10, corroborates dynamic co-localization of proteins that control activity and fate of both ribosomes and mRNA. Co-locating factors that associate with the <i>hr40S</i> are involved in (i) (de)ubiquitination of ribosomal proteins (Hel2, Bre5-Ubp3), (ii) clamping of inactive ribosomal subunits (Stm1), (iii) mRNA surveillance and vesicular transport (Smy2, Syh1), (iv) degradation of mRNA (endo- and exonucleases Ypl199c and Xrn1, respectively), (v) autophagy (Psp2, Vps30, Ykt6), and (vi) kinase signaling (Ste20). Additionally, they must be harmonized with translation initiation factors (eIF3, cap-binding protein Cdc33, eIF2A) and mRNA-binding/ribosome-charging proteins (Scp160, Sro9). The Rps/uS-BioID perspectives revealed substantial Asc1/RACK1-dependent <i>hr40S</i> configuration indicating a function of the &#x3b2;-propeller in context-specific spatial organization of this microenvironment. Toward resolving context-specific constellations, a Split-TurboID analysis emphasized the ubiquitin-associated factors Def1 and Lsm12 as neighbors of Bre5 at <i>hr40S</i>. These shuttling proteins indicate a common regulatory axis for the fate of polymerizing machineries for the biosynthesis of proteins in the cytoplasm and RNA/DNA in the nucleus.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Split-turboid, Split-bioid, Us5, Silac, Rps2, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Bre5

### Affiliations
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Valerius
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Genetics, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics


