### Accession
PXD011064

### Title
Label free SWATH proteomics reveals sex-biased proteins potentially associated with sex expression and modification in dioecious C. grandis

### Description
Dioecy is an important sexual system wherein, male and female flowers are borne on separate unisexual plants. Knowledge of sex-related differences can enhance our understanding in molecular and developmental processes leading to unisexual flower development. Coccinia grandis is a dioecious species belonging to Cucurbitaceae, a family well-known for diverse sexual systems. Male and female plants of C. grandis have 22A+XY and 22A+XX chromosomes respectively. Previously, we have reported a gynomonoecious form (GyM) (22A+XX) of C. grandis bearing morphologically hermaphrodite flowers (GyM-H) and female flowers (GyM-F). Also, we showed that foliar spray of silver nitrate on female C. grandis plant induces development of morphologically hermaphrodite buds (Ag-H) despite the absence of Y chromosome. To identify sex-related differences, total protein from the flower buds of male, female, GyM-H and Ag-H of C. grandis at early and middle stages of development were analysed by a powerful label-free proteomics approach on ABSCIEX Triple TOF 5600 platform.

### Sample Protocol
Floral buds of C. grandis were finely crushed in liq. nitrogen and approximately 50mg of the crushed tissue was used per biological replicate. Modified TCA/Acetone and Phenol extraction method was used for total protein extraction as per Isaacson et al, 2006. The protein pellet was resuspended in 0.1% RapiGest SF and 100microgram of protein was used for trypsin digestion. The tryptic peptides were further enriched by using C18 ZipTip (Millipore) and were vacuum dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 3% ACN with 0.1% formic acid and quantified using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated by using Eksigent MicroLC 200 system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) equipped with Eksigent C18-reverse phase column (100*0.3mm, 3µm, 120Å). The sample was loaded onto the column with 97 % of mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% FA) and 3 % of mobile phase B (100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at 8 µl/min flow rate. Peptides were eluted with a 120 min linear gradient of 3 to 50% mobile phase B. The column temperature was set to 40 °C and auto sampler at 4 °C. The same chromatographic conditions were used for both IDA and SWATH acquisition. All samples were analyzed on AB-SCIEX 5600 Triple TOF mass-spectrometer in positive and high-sensitivity mode. The dual source parameters were optimized for better results: ion source gases GS1, GS2, curtain gas at 25 psi, temperature 200° C and ion spray voltage floating (ISVF) at 5500 V. The accumulation time in full scan was 250 ms for a mass range of 350-1800 m/z. The parent ions are selected based on the following criteria's: ions in the MS scan with intensities more than 120 counts per second, charge stage between +2 to +5 and mass tolerance 50 mDa. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy (CE) with an additional CE spread of ± 15 eV. In SWATH-MS mode, the instrument was specifically tuned to optimize the quadrupole settings for the selection of precursor ion selection window 25 m/z wide. Using an isolation width of 26 m/z (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap), a set of 34 overlapping windows was constructed covering the precursor mass range of 400-1250 m/z. SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected from 100 to 2000 m/z. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy with an additional CE spread of ± 15 eV. An accumulation time (dwell time) of 96 ms was used for all fragmentation scans in high-sensitivity mode, and for each SWATH-MS cycle a survey scan in high-resolution mode was acquired for 100 ms resulting in a duty cycle of 3.33 s. The source parameters were similar to that of IDA acquisition.

### Data Protocol
IDA mass spectrometric files were searched using ProteinPilot software, Version 5.0.1.0.4874 (AB SCIEX, MA, USA) with the Paragon algorithm against in silico translated in-house C. grandis flower bud transcriptome at 1% FDR. The ProteinPilot output file (.group) was used as a standard peptide spectral library. SWATH analysis was performed for six biological replicates and technical triplicates each from early-staged male, female and GyM-H buds as well as middle-staged male, female and GyM-H buds. The spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of SWATH-MS data was performed using Peakview software, Version 2.2 (AB SCIEX, MA, USA). The peptide data (.MRKVW) files were used for quantification of proteins using Markerview software, Version 1.3 (AB SCIEX, MA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sex modification, Sex expression, Pollen fertility, Swath, Stamen arrest, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Associate Professor
Associate Professor & Co-Chair, Biology Division Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER Pune) Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pashan, Pune-411008. Maharashtra, India.

### Submitter
Anjan Banerjee

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Anjan Kumar Banerjee
Associate Professor & Co-Chair, Biology Division Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER Pune) Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pashan, Pune-411008. Maharashtra, India.


