### Accession
PXD004540

### Title
Multiple sclerosis biomarker discovery in cerebrospinal fluid using glycopeptide enrichment, TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS

### Description
Multiple sclerosis biomarker discovery in pooled cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) using glycopeptide enrichment, TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS. Comparing 3 pools of CSF from relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients to 3 pools of CSF from patients with other neurological diseases (OND). To reveal protein groups and networks affected by MS and to look at correlation between a glyco and a global approach.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled CSF samples  from MS and control patients (3 MS pools and 3 OND pools) were separately subjected to in-solution digestion, TMT labeled and then pooled. Solid phase enrichemnt of N-linked glycopeptides was then performed using hydrazide modified beads, PNGase F enzyme was used for glycopeptide release from glycan, before fractionation using mixed-mode reversed phase and analysis using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Resulting LC-MS/MS data was analyzed using SearchGui, PeptideShaker and Reporter software. Normalization was based on brain proteins. Further analysis was performed using String, Cytoscape and Cytoscape plug-ins.

### Publication Abstract
In the current study, we conducted a quantitative in-depth proteome and deglycoproteome analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) and neurological controls using mass spectrometry and pathway analysis. More than 2000 proteins and 1700 deglycopeptides were quantified, with 484 proteins and 180 deglycopeptides significantly changed between pools of RRMS and pools of controls. Approximately 300 of the significantly changed proteins were assigned to various biological processes including inflammation, extracellular matrix organization, cell adhesion, immune response, and neuron development. Ninety-six significantly changed deglycopeptides mapped to proteins that were not found changed in the global protein study. In addition, four mapped to the proteins oligo-myelin glycoprotein and noelin, which were found oppositely changed in the global study. Both are ligands to the nogo receptor, and the glycosylation of these proteins appears to be affected by RRMS. Our study gives the most extensive overview of the RRMS affected processes observed from the CSF proteome to date, and the list of differential proteins will have great value for selection of biomarker candidates for further verification.

### Keywords
Human, Discovery, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Glycopeptide enrichment, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Proteomics unit (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Astrid Guldbrandsen

### Lab Head
Dr Frode S. Berven
Proteomics unit (PROBE), Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Norway


