### Accession
PXD006079

### Title
Composite PRC1/dBRD4/MOZ/MORF protein complexes in Drosophila

### Description
In this project, we provide strong proteomic evidence for PcG interaction with classic co-activators, BRD4 and MOZ/MORF, captured on chromatin during embryogenesis in Drosophila, leading to a model in which developmental regulatory elements are universally ‘poised’ early in development via occupancy of composite protein complexes of PcG silencing proteins and classical co-activators. These bivalent protein interactions may resolve into full activation or repression, depending on the cell type-specific expression, binding, and function of transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila melanogaster Schneider S2 cells or embryos collected 12-24 hours after fertilization were fixed with formaldehyde and sonicated before tandem affinity pulldowns using IgG- and streptavidin-agarose. Proteins were then digested with trypsin overnight prior to desalting for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectrometric data were searched with SEQUEST against the Drosophila proteome using either a precursor mass tolerance of 1 amu or 20 ppm depending on whether the MS1 data was acquired on an ion-trap or Orbitrap respectively. B and Y fragment ion tolerances were set at 0.9 Da with variable methionine oxidation. Further peptide filtering was achieved using thresholds of XCorr >= 2 and 3 for z = 2 and 3, and delCorr >= 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Regulatory decisions in <i>Drosophila</i> require Polycomb group (PcG) proteins to maintain the silent state and Trithorax group (TrxG) proteins to oppose silencing. Since PcG and TrxG are ubiquitous and lack apparent sequence specificity, a long-standing model is that targeting occurs via protein interactions; for instance, between repressors and PcG proteins. Instead, we found that Pc-repressive complex 1 (PRC1) purifies with coactivators Fs(1)h [female sterile (1) homeotic] and Enok/Br140 during embryogenesis. Fs(1)h is a TrxG member and the ortholog of BRD4, a bromodomain protein that binds to acetylated histones and is a key transcriptional coactivator in mammals. Enok and Br140, another bromodomain protein, are orthologous to subunits of a mammalian MOZ/MORF acetyltransferase complex. Here we confirm PRC1-Br140 and PRC1-Fs(1)h interactions and identify their genomic binding sites. PRC1-Br140 bind developmental genes in fly embryos, with analogous co-occupancy of PRC1 and a Br140 ortholog, BRD1, at bivalent loci in human embryonic stem (ES) cells. We propose that identification of PRC1-Br140 "bivalent complexes" in fly embryos supports and extends the bivalency model posited in mammalian cells, in which the coexistence of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 at developmental promoters represents a poised transcriptional state. We further speculate that local competition between acetylation and deacetylation may play a critical role in the resolution of bivalent protein complexes during development.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Biotap-xl, Formaldehyde crosslinking

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston MA USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Barry Zee

### Lab Head
Dr Mitzi Kuroda
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston MA USA


