### Accession
PXD009807

### Title
Glycolysis enzyme PFKFB4 enhances HIF1a transcriptional activity by blocking the ubiquitin E3 ligase FBXO28 in glioblastoma

### Description
Glioblastoma is one of the most aggressive primary brain tumours in adults, with a dismal median overall survival of only 14 months after diagnosis1,2. Glioblastoma stem-like cells (GSCs), are particularly resistant to current therapies3,4, capable of self-renewal and tumour initiation5,6 and are hence thought to be major contributors to patient relapse. Glycolysis gene 6-Phosphofructo-2-Kinase/Fructose-2,6-Biphosphatase 4 (PFKFB4) is an essential gene for GSC survival, and is upregulated in these cells compared with in normal brain7. However, the mode of action of PFKFB4 in GSCs is unknown. Here we show a new role for PFKFB4 in the regulation of Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1 alpha (HIF1α) in GSCs. In a metabolic tracing study, we found that silencing PFKFB4 in GSCs resulted in a global downregulation of glucose metabolism. Gene expression profiling of PFKFB4-silenced GSCs revealed a downregulation of HIF1α target genes, and HIF1α protein levels are dramatically reduced in PFKFB4-silenced GSCs and other cancer cell lines. Finally, through mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitated PFKFB4, we identified the ubiquitin E3 ligase, F box only protein 28 (FBXO28), as a new interaction partner of PFKFB4, which we show to regulate ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation of HIF1α. Crucially, this newly discovered function of PFKFB4, coupled with its cancer specificity, provides a new strategy for inhibiting HIF1α in a cancer specific manner. Compounds which disrupt the interaction between PFKFB4 and FBXO28 could be interesting therapeutic agents against glioblastoma and other cancer entities in which PFKFB4 regulates HIF1α stability.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mixtures were separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC system. For trapping we used a C18 pre- column (180 μm × 20 mm) with a particle size of 5 μm (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Liquid chromatography separation was performed on a BEH130 C18 main-column (100 μm × 100 mm) with a particle size of 1.7 μm (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Peptide mixtures were loaded on the trap column at a flow rate of 5 μL/min and were eluted with a gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Chromatography was carried out using a 2h gradient of solvent A (96.9% water, 3% DMSO, 0.1 % formic acid) and solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% µl formic acid) in the following sequence: from 0 to 4% B in 1 min, from 4% to 30% in 79 min, from 30 to 45% B in 10 min, from 45 to 90% B in 10 min, 10 min at 90% B, from 90 to 0% B in 0.1 min, and 9.9 min at 0% B. The nanoUPLC system was coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically measure MS1 and MS2. Data were acquired by scan cycles of one FTMS scan with a resolution of 60.000 at m/z 400 and a range from 300 to 2000 m/z in parallel with six MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the most abundant precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
The mgf-files generated by Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) were used for database searches with the MASCOT search engine (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against the SwissProt database (SwissProt 20180328 (557012 sequences; 199714119 residues) with taxonomy human. Peptide mass tolerance for database searches was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.4 Da. Carbamidomethylation of C was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications included oxidation of M and deamidation of NQ. One missed cleavage site in case of incomplete trypsin hydrolysis was allowed. Furthermore, proteins were considered as identified if more than one unique peptide had an individual ion score exceeding the MASCOT identity threshold

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is a highly aggressive brain tumor for which there is no cure. The metabolic enzyme 6-Phosphofructo-2-Kinase/Fructose-2,6-Biphosphatase 4 (PFKFB4) is essential for glioblastoma stem-like cell (GSC) survival but its mode of action is unclear. Understanding the role of PFKFB4 in tumor cell survival could allow it to be leveraged in a cancer therapy. Here, we show the importance of PFKFB4 for glioblastoma growth in vivo in an orthotopic patient derived mouse model. In an evaluation of patient tumor samples of different cancer entities, PFKFB4 protein was found to be overexpressed in prostate, lung, colon, mammary and squamous cell carcinoma, with expression level correlating with tumor grade. Gene expression profiling in PFKFB4-silenced GSCs revealed a downregulation of hypoxia related genes and Western blot analysis confirmed a dramatic reduction of HIF (hypoxia inducible factor) protein levels. Through mass spectrometric analysis of immunoprecipitated PFKFB4, we identified the ubiquitin E3 ligase, F-box only protein 28 (FBXO28), as a new interaction partner of PFKFB4. We show that PFKFB4 regulates the ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation of HIF-1&#x3b1;, which is mediated by the ubiquitin ligase activity of FBXO28. This newly discovered function of PFKFB4, coupled with its cancer specificity, provides a new strategy for inhibiting HIF-1&#x3b1; in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Human. glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Functional Proteome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center(DKFZ)
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Uwe Warnken

### Lab Head
Dr Martina Schnölzer
Functional Proteome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center(DKFZ)


