### Accession
PXD024526

### Title
Proteins identified by MS on liver lysates immunoprecipitated with an antibody against O-GlcNAcylated proteins (RL2).

### Description
Protein O-GlcNAcylation is a fast-cycling and nutrient-sensitive post-translational modification (PTM) involved in several functions, including hepatic metabolsm. The substrate of O-GlcNAcylation is UDP-GlcNAc, the end-product of the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway that is initiated by glutamine. O-GlcNAcylation is known to regulate several biochemical processes by modulation of the enzyme activity among other functions, we hypothesized that O-GlcNAcylation regulates the enzyme activity of one or more urea cycle enzymes, a key pathway for waste nitrogen detoxification. To test this notion, we performed immunoprecipitation of male wild-type (C57BL/6) mouse liver lysates with a well-established anti-O-GlcNAc antibody (RL2) followed by mass spectrometry analysis in order to identify proteins undergo this PTM.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and peptides purification: Gel lanes were processed according to STAGE-diging protocol (Soffientini P and Bachi A, J. Proteomics. 2016 May 17; 140:48-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2016.03.038.). Briefly the entire lanes were transferred into the STAGE-diging p1000 tip filled with a double C18 Empore Disk (3M, Minneapolis, MN) plug and submitted to reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and Trypsin digestion o/n. Digestion solutions were acidified and desalted passing through the C18 plugs then eluted peptides were dried in a Speed-Vac and resuspended in solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid).  Liquid chromatography–tandem MS (nLC–MS/MS) analysis: 2 μL for each digested sample were injected in technical replicates on a nanoLC–MS/MS quadrupole Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Peptides separation was achieved on a linear gradient of 32 min, starting from 95% of solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and ramping to 50% Solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 23 min and from 50% to 100% Solvent B in 2 min at a constant flow rate of 0.25 μl min−1 on a UHPLC Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). The LC system was connected to a 25 cm fused-silica emitter of 75 μm inner diameter (New Objective), packed in house using a high-pressure bomb loader (Proxeon) with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch). MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode, with a top15 method for HCD fragmentation. Survey full scan MS spectra (300–1750 Th) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 60,000 resolution, AGC target 1e6, IT 120 ms. For HCD spectra the resolution was set to 15,000, AGC target 1e5, IT 120 ms; normalized collision energy 28, isolation width 3.0 m/z with a dynamic exclusion of 5 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified processing .Raw files with MaxQuant ver. 1.5.2.8 searching against the database uniprot_cp_mouse in which Trypsin enzyme specificity and up to two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-term protein were set as variable modifications. Mass deviation for MS/MS peaks was 20 ppm. The peptides and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 0.01; the minimal length required for a peptide identification was six amino acids; a minimum of two peptides and at least one unique peptide was required for high-confidence protein identification. The proteins identified were filtered to eliminate known contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Life-threatening hyperammonemia occurs in both inherited and acquired liver diseases affecting ureagenesis, the main pathway for detoxification of neurotoxic ammonia&#xa0;in mammals. Protein O-GlcNAcylation is a reversible and nutrient-sensitive post-translational modification using as substrate UDP-GlcNAc, the end-product of hexosamine biosynthesis pathway. Here we show that increased liver UDP-GlcNAc during hyperammonemia increases protein O-GlcNAcylation and enhances ureagenesis. Mechanistically, O-GlcNAcylation on specific threonine residues increased the catalytic efficiency for ammonia of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1), the rate-limiting enzyme in ureagenesis. Pharmacological inhibition of O-GlcNAcase, the enzyme removing O-GlcNAc&#xa0;from proteins, resulted in clinically relevant reductions of systemic ammonia in both genetic (hypomorphic mouse model of propionic acidemia) and acquired (thioacetamide-induced acute liver failure) mouse models of liver diseases. In conclusion, by fine-tuned control of ammonia entry into ureagenesis, hepatic O-GlcNAcylation of CPS1 increases ammonia detoxification and is a novel target for therapy of hyperammonemia in both genetic and acquired diseases.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, O-glcnacylation; ogt; oga

### Affiliations
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy
TIGEM

### Submitter
Leandro R. Soria

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Brunetti-Pierri
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Italy


