### Accession
PXD023199

### Title
The proteome of granulovacuolar degeneration and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
By combining immunohistochemistry (IHC) and laser microdissection (LMD) we isolated neurons with GVD and those bearing tangles separately from human post-mortem AD hippocampus (n=12) using their typical markers casein kinase (CK)1δ and phosphorylated tau (AT8). Control neurons were isolated from cognitively healthy cases (n=12). 3000 neurons per sample were used for proteome analysis by label free LC-MS/MS.  In total 2596 proteins were quantified across samples and a significant change in abundance of 115 proteins in GVD and 197 in tangle bearing neurons was observed compared to control neurons. With IHC the presence of PPIA, TOMM34, HSP70, CHMP1A, TPPP and VXN was confirmed in GVD containing neurons. We found multiple proteins localizing specifically to the GVD bodies, with VXN and TOMM34 being the most prominent new protein markers for GVD bodies. In general, protein groups related protein folding, proteasomal function, the endolysosomal pathway, microtubule and cytoskeletal related function, RNA processing and glycolysis were found to be changed in GVD neurons. In addition to these protein groups, tangle bearing neurons show a decrease in ribosomal proteins, as well as in various proteins related to protein folding.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of individual neurons using LMD LMD was performed using a Leica LMD6500 system (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Control neurons were isolated from the CA1 and subiculum region in the hippocampus from healthy control cases that were negative for AT8 immunoreactivity and had no GVD marked by granular CK1δ staining. Neurons with GVD, marked by CK1δ staining, and tangle bearing neurons marked by AT8 positivity were isolated from the same region from AD cases (Fig. 1). Per sample approximately 3.000 individual neurons were collected into caps of tubes (Sapphire PCR/Tubes, 0.5ml Greiner Bio-One, Solingen, Germany) containing 30 µl M-PER lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with reducing SDS sample buffer (Thermo Scientific). Micro-dissected tissue was stored at -80 °C until further use.  Protein in-gel digestion Micro-dissected tissue lysates were incubated at 95 °C for 5 min to denature the proteins followed by incubation with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature (RT) in the dark. Samples were loaded onto a 10% acrylamide gel, of 1 mm thickness. Gels were composed of 10% acrylamide, 0.375M Tris–HCl (pH 8.8), ultra-pure H2O, 0.1% (w/v) APS and 6 L N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylene-diamine (TEMED) per gel. Proteins were allowed to migrate into the gel by electrophoresis (150 V), until the sample progressed in the gel for a length of approximately 8–10 mm.  Gels were fixed overnight in a solution containing 50% (v/v) ethanol and 3% (v/v) phosphoric acid in H2O at RT and stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue (34% (v/v) methanol, 3% (v/v) phosphoric acid, 15% (w/v) ammonium Sulphate, and 0.1% (w/v) Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Thermo Scientific), for 1h while shaking. The gel was washed in ultra-pure water under gentle agitation for several hours to reduce background staining. Per sample the part of the gel containing the proteins was separated and cut into blocks of approximately 1 mm3 and collected in an Eppendorf tube. Gel fragments were destained in ultrapure water with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile overnight. Gel fragments were dehydrated using acetonitrile for 20 min and dried for 30 min using a speedvac. The gel parts were rehydrated in 70 µl of ultra-pure water containing 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 10 ug/ ml trypsin (sequence grade; Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C to facilitate digestion of the proteins. Peptides were extracted twice with a solution containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile for 20 min. The samples were dried using a speedvac and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis Peptides of the individual sample fractions were dissolved in 12 µL of 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid. In the first set, the sample was loaded onto an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientiﬁc). Peptides were trapped on a 5mm Pepmap100 C18 column (Dionex) and fractionated on a 200 mm Alltima C18 column (100 μm id,3 μm particle size). In the second set, the sample was loaded onto a nanoLC 425 system (Sciex) and fractionated on a 120 mm C18 column (150 µm id column packed with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ beads). Acetonitrile concentration in the mobile phase in 0.1% formic acid was increased from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min, and to 90% at 110 min. The ﬂow rate was 400nL/min. Peptides were electrosprayed into an AB SCIEX TripleTOF® 5600 mass spectrometer using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas at 35 p.s.i., nebulizer gas at 15 p.s.i., and an interface heater temperature of 1500 °C. The MS survey scan range was m/z 350–1250 acquired for 250ms. The top 20 precursor ions were selected for 85 ms per MS/MS acquisition, with a threshold of 90 counts. Dynamic exclusion was 16 s. Rolling CID function was activated, with an energy spread of 15 eV. Analysis of one sample (tangle bearing neurons) failed due to technical problems and was removed from the analysis leaving an n=11 for the tangle bearing neurons.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were first converted from WIFF to mzML using ProteoWizard's qtofpeakpicker (version 3.0.20266.56404489e) with parameters " --resolution 20000 --area 1 --threshold 1 --smoothwidth 1.1" analogous to Schubert et al [59].  MetaMorpheus (version 0.0.311) was used to analyse the raw data [62]. The Uniprot human reference proteome database (SwissProt + TrEMBL, version 2020-04) was used to annotate spectra. Mass calibration was based on an initial search with 25ppm mass tolerance for both precursor and product ions, the dissociation type was set to CID and Carbaminomethyl(C) and Oxidation(M) were set as fixed and variable modifications respectively. For the main search, mass tolerances from the calibration task were used and acetylation of protein N-terminus was added as a variable modification. Label-free quantification by FlashLFQ was performed at 5ppm peakfinding tolerance with match-between-runs enabled. Normalization was disabled in MetaMorpheus. All other settings were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
Granulovacuolar degeneration (GVD) is a common feature in Alzheimer's disease (AD). The occurrence of GVD is closely associated with that of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and GVD is even considered to be a pre-NFT stage in the disease process of AD. Currently, the composition of GVD bodies, the mechanisms associated with GVD and how GVD exactly relates to NFTs is not well understood. By combining immunohistochemistry (IHC) and laser microdissection (LMD) we isolated neurons with GVD and those bearing tangles separately from human post-mortem AD hippocampus (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12) using their typical markers casein kinase (CK)1&#x3b4; and phosphorylated tau (AT8). Control neurons were isolated from cognitively healthy cases (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12). 3000 neurons per sample were used for proteome analysis by label free LC-MS/MS. In total 2596 proteins were quantified across samples and a significant change in abundance of 115 proteins in GVD and 197 in tangle bearing neurons was observed compared to control neurons. With IHC the presence of PPIA, TOMM34, HSP70, CHMP1A, TPPP and VXN was confirmed in GVD containing neurons. We found multiple proteins localizing specifically to the GVD bodies, with VXN and TOMM34 being the most prominent new protein markers for GVD bodies. In general, protein groups related&#xa0;to protein folding, proteasomal function, the endolysosomal pathway, microtubule and cytoskeletal related function, RNA processing and glycolysis were found to be changed in GVD neurons. In addition to these protein groups, tangle bearing neurons show a decrease in ribosomal proteins, as well as in various proteins related to protein folding. This study, for the first time, provides a comprehensive human based quantitative assessment of protein abundances in GVD and tangle bearing neurons. In line with previous functional data showing that tau pathology induces GVD, our data support the model that GVD is part of a pre-NFT stage representing a phase in which proteostasis and cellular homeostasis is disrupted. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms and cellular processes affected in GVD and its relation to the presence of tau pathology is highly relevant for the identification of new drug targets for therapy.

### Keywords
Granulovacuolar degeneration, Neurofibrillary tangles, Alzheimer´s disease, Neuropathology, Proteomics, Tau

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands
VU University

### Submitter
Frank Koopmans

### Lab Head
Dr Li, Ka Wan
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, VU University Amsterdam, The Netherlands


