### Accession
PXD036400

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of liver-derived extracellular vesicle treated skeletal muscle

### Description
To gain insight into possible regulators of liver extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated glucose effectiveness, we evaluated the phosphoproteomic profile of soleus muscle incubated in low and high glucose, without or with liver EVs

### Sample Protocol
Muscles were lysed in 2% SDS in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and quantified by BCA (Thermo Scientific). Six hundred micrograms of protein was reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM 2-choroacetamide at 45°C for 5 min. Proteins were purified using single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample SP3 beads as previously described [PMID: 30464214]. Briefly, proteins were bound to a 1:1 mix of 400mg hydrophilic:hydrophobic beads (GE; #45152105050250 and #65152105050250) at room temperature in a final concentration of 50% ethanol. The beads were washed three times with 80% ethanol, briefly dried at room temperature for 15 min and resuspended in 100 µL of 10% trifluroethanol in 100mM HEPEs pH 7.4. Protein was digested on the beads with 12 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and sequencing grade LysC (Wako, Japan) overnight at 37°C while shaking at 1,800 RPM. Peptide supernatant was collected and transferred to a LoBind deep-96-well plate (Eppendorff) and the beads washed with 190 µL of water at 37°C while shaking at 1,800 RPM for 5 min. The peptide supernatant was removed and pooled with the peptides in the 96-well plate. Phosphopeptides were enriched with EasyPhos essentially as described previously [PMID: 30190555]. Briefly, Peptides were incubated with 7.2 mg of TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, #5010-21315) in a final concentration of 50% isopropanol containing 1 mM KH2PO4 and 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 5 min at 40°C while shaking at 1800 RPM. Beads were washed five times with 60% isopropanol containing 6% TFA and phosphopeptides eluted with 5% ammonium hydroxide solution in 40% acetonitrile. Phosphopeptides were dried and resuspended in 99% isopropanol containing 1% TFA and desalted with SDB-RPS micro-columns as described [PMID: 30190555].

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 40%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 360–1033 m/z (60,000 resolution, 2.5 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with HCD of 50 x 13.7 m/z with 1 m/z overlap (30% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC, 55 ms injection time).  Data were searched against the UniProt mouse database (June 2021; UP000000589_109090 and UP000000589_109090_additional) with Spectronaut 15.7.220308.50606 using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. All data were searched with oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification. For analysis of phosphopeptides, phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine was set as a variable modification. Quantification was performed using MS2-based extracted ion chromatograms employing 3-6 fragment ions >450 m/z with automated fragment-ion interference removal as described previously [PMID: 25724911]. Data were processed with Perseus [PMID: 27348712] to remove decoy data and  potential contaminants. The Perseus Plugin Peptide collapse v 1.4.3 was used to convert a normal Spectronaut report into a site-level report as previously described [PMID: 32034161] (https://github.com/AlexHgO/Perseus_Plugin_Peptide_Collapse). Data were Log2-transformed and normalized by subtracting the median of each sample. Data were filtered to contain phosphosites quantified in at least 3 biological replicates of a single group and statistical analysis performed with ANOVA and t-tests including correction for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini Hochberg FDR with q<0.05 defined as a significance cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Muscle, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


