### Accession
PXD008958

### Title
an  evergrowing tea (Camellia sinensis L.) cultivar

### Description
Tea (Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze) is an important non-alcoholic commercial beverage crop. Tea tree is a perennial plant, and winter dormancy is its part of biological adaptation to environmental changes. We recently discovered a novel tea tree cultivar that can generate tender shoots in winter, but the regulatory mechanism of this ever-growing tender shoot development in winter is not clear. In this study, we conducted a proteomic analysis for identification of key genes and proteins differentially expressed between the winter and spring tender shoots, to explore the putative regulatory mechanisms and physiological basis of its ever-growing character during winter.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extractions were performed as previously described (Zhang et al., 2011) with minor modifications.The protein pellets were re-suspended in buffer containing 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiocarbamide and 2% CHAPS at pH 8.5. The protein concentrations were determined by SDS-PAGE imaging on Typhoon 9400 using E. coli cellular extractions as standards.  Proteins (100 µg) were reduced with 200 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine(TCEP) at 37°C for 4 hours and then alkylated with 375 mM iodoacetamidefor 30 min while protected from light to block the cysteine residues. Six volumes of pre-chilled (- 20°C) acetone were added overnight. The acetone-precipitated protein pellets were suspended with 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide. The proteins were then digested using trypsin (Promega, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin), in a ratio of 1:50 at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were labeled with TMT reagents following the manufacturer’s (Thermo scientific) instructions. For the TMT-6plex labeling analysis of the pellets, tags 126, 127 and 128 were used for winter tea extracts; and tags 129, 130 and131 were used for spring tea extracts. The efficiency of TMT labeling was assessed by Orbitrap Elite. Subsequently, the six samples were combined and subjected to high pH reverse phase (hpRP) fractionation as described below.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used to convert the raw files to MGF format. Mascot 2.5.1 was used to search the MGF format files against the camellia sinensis mRNA database from our transcriptomic analysis. Two missed cleavage was allowed with fixed carbamidomethylation (Cys), fixed 6-plex TMT modifications on Lys and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of oxidation (Met), deamidation (Asn and Gln). The peptide and fragment mass tolerance values were set as 10 ppm and 100 millimass units (mmu), respectively. The target-decoy strategy [25] and the Mascot-integrated percolator calculation were applied to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Only peptides above "identity" were counted as identified; furthermore, for accurate quantitation, all quantified proteins must have at least two unique peptides that generate a complete TMT 6-plex reporter ion series.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tea, Evergrowing, Winter

### Affiliations
Agro-biological Gene Research Center, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Agro-biological Gene Research Center, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Zhangyan Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Liu
Agro-biological Gene Research Center, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Guangzhou, China


