### Accession
PXD025632

### Title
Analysis of cryopreservation of human granulosa cells

### Description
Human primary granulosa cells (GCs) derived from women, undergoing oocyte retrieval, can be cultured and are a cellular model for the study of human ovarian functions. In vitro they change rapidly, resembling initially cells of the preovulatory follicle and then cells of the corpus luteum. They are derived from individual patients and their different medical history, lifestyle and age lead to heterogeneity. Thus, cells can rarely be ideally matched for cellular experiments or, if available, only in small quantities. We reasoned that cryopreservation of human GCs may be helpful. Previous studies indicated feasibility of such an approach, but low survival of GCs was reported and consequences on GC functionality were only partially evaluated. We tested a slow freezing protocol (employing FCS and DMSO) of GCs upon isolation from follicular fluid. We compared cryopreserved and subsequently thawed cells with fresh, not cryopreserved ones, from the same patients. About 80 % of human GCs survived freezing/thawing. Neither morphology, nor levels of cell-cell contact, mitochondrial and steroidogenic genes were different between the two groups in cells cultured for 1-5 days. A proteomic analysis revealed no statistical significance in the abundance of a total of 5962 proteins. Both groups produced comparable basal levels of progesterone and responded similarly to hCG with elevation of progesterone. Taken together, we describe a rapid and readily available method for the cryopreservation of human GCs. We anticipate that it will allow future large-scale experiments and may thereby improve cellular studies with human ovarian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed on culture day 3 with fresh and thawed human GCs from 3 individual batches. In brief, by use of Trypsin-EDTA solution (Biochrom GmbH, Berlin, Germany) 1 x 105 human GCs were detached from the plate and reaction was stopped with 1.5 ml DMEM/F12 (Gibco, Paisley, UK) supplemented with 1 % penicillin/streptamycin (BioChrom) and 10 % fetal calf serum (Capricorn Scientific, Ebsdorfergrund, Germany). The cells were washed with 1 ml PBS three times and after the third washing step, the excessive liquid was removed and the cell pellet was frozen at -80 °C. Samples were processed using the Preomics iST sample preparation kit (Planegg, Germany) as recommended by the manufacturer. For LC-MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in a nanoElute system (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) and separated in a 25-cm analytical column (75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 100-min gradient from 2 to 37 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a hybrid trapped ion mability-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using the nano-electrospray ion source at 1.4 kV (Captive Spray, Bruker Daltonics). The timsTOF was operated at 100 % duty cycle in data dependent mode to automatically switch between one full TIMS-MS scan and ten PASEF MS/MS scans in the range from 100–1700 m/z in positive electrospray mode with an overall acquisition cycle of 1.23 s. The ion mobility was scanned from 0.6 to 1.60 Vs/cm2 with TIMS ion charge control set to 5e4, RF potential of 300 Vpp. The TIMS dimension was calibrated linearly using four selected ions from the Agilent ESI LC/MS tuning mix [m/z, 1/K0: (322.0481, 0.7318 Vs/cm2), (622.0289, 0.9848 Vs/cm2), (922.0097, 1.1895 Vs/cm2), (1221.9906, 1.3820  Vs/cm2)].

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_AUP000005640_Hsapiens_20200120.fasta; MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered as differential if their fold change LFQ values were higher than log 2. The data were analyzed with the software Perseus (Computation Systems Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
Human primary granulosa cells (GCs) derived from women undergoing oocyte retrieval can be cultured and used as a cellular model for the study of human ovarian function. In vitro, they change rapidly, initially resembling cells of the preovulatory follicle and then cells of the corpus luteum. They are derived from individual patients, whose different medical history, lifestyle and age lead to heterogeneity. Thus, cells can rarely be ideally matched for cellular experiments or, if available, only in small quantities. We reasoned that cryopreservation of human GCs may be helpful to improve this situation. Previous studies indicated the feasibility of such an approach, but low survival of human GCs was reported, and effects on human GC functionality were only partially evaluated. We tested a slow freezing protocol (employing FCS and DMSO) for human GCs upon isolation from follicular fluid. We compared cryopreserved and subsequently thawed cells with fresh, non-cryopreserved cells from the same patients. About 80% of human GCs survived freezing/thawing. No differences were found in cell morphology, survival rate in culture, or transcript&#xa0;levels of mitochondrial (COX4, OPA1, TOMM20), steroidogenic (CYP11A1, CYP19A1) or cell-cell contact genes (GJA1) between the two groups in cells cultured for 1-5&#xa0;days. A proteomic analysis revealed no statistically significant change in the abundance of a total of 5962 proteins. The two groups produced comparable basal levels of progesterone and responded similarly to hCG with elevation of progesterone. Taken together, our results show this to be a rapid and readily available method for the cryopreservation of human GCs. We anticipate that it will allow future large-scale experiments and may thereby improve cellular studies with human ovarian cells.

### Keywords
Cell culture, Ovarian cells, Cryopreservation, Ivf, Progesterone, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Department for Cell Biology BioMedizinisches Centrum - BMC LMU Muenchen, Med. Faculty Großhaderner Straße 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Artur Mayerhofer
Department for Cell Biology BioMedizinisches Centrum - BMC LMU Muenchen, Med. Faculty Großhaderner Straße 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


