### Accession
PXD005362

### Title
Increased Hemodynamic Load in Early Embryonic Stages Alters Endocardial to Mesenchymal Transition

### Description
Normal blood flow is essential for proper heart formation during embryonic development, as abnormal hemodynamic load (blood pressure and shear stress) results in cardiac defects seen in congenital heart disease. However, the progressive detrimental remodeling processes that relate altered blood flow to cardiac defects remain unclear. Outflow tract banding was used to increase hemodynamic load in the chicken embryo heart between Hamburger and Hamilton stages 18 and 24. Increased hemodynamic load induced increased cell density in outflow tract cushions, fewer cells along the endocardial lining, endocardium junction disruption, and altered periostin expression as measured by confocal microscopy analysis. Proteomic mass-spectrometry analysis quantified altered protein composition after banding.

### Sample Protocol
Fertilized White Leghorn chicken eggs were incubated blunt end up at 38°C and 80% humidity until stage HH18 (~3 days). Embryo hemodynamics were altered with a 10-0 nylon suture passed under the outflow tract and tied in a knot around the mid-section of the outflow tract to constrict the cross-sectional area.  A control group of embryos served as a surgical sham where the suture was passed under the outflow tract but not tightened. Following interventions, eggs were sealed with saran wrap and incubated until further evaluation. After surgical manipulations at HH18, outflow tracts were dissected from the embryo at HH24 and rinsed in ultrapure water before pooling 8 outflow tracts for each sample. There were a total of 5 banded embryo samples (30-45% band tightness) and 5 sham control samples included in these experiments. Samples were suspended in 20 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2% ProteaseMax™ detergent (ProMega, Madison, WI), shaken for 10 min, 80 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate added, and samples probe sonicated at a setting of 5 watts for 5 sec with 3 repeats on ice using a Sonic Dismembrator (Fisher Scientific).  The protein content of each lysate was then determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) and BSA standard, 40 μg of protein removed, and the final volume of each sample set to 80.3 μl by addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.04% ProteaseMax™ solution.  Samples were then reduced by addition of 1 μl of 0.5M dithiothreitol and incubation at 56°C for 20 min, followed by alkylation by addition of 2.7 μl of 0.55 M iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for 15 min.  Samples were then trypsinized by addition of 16 μl of 0.1 μg/ul sequencing grade modified trypsin (ProMega) and incubation for 4 hours at 37°C.  Ten μl of 10% trifluoroacetic acid was then added, samples centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min, and the supernatant solid phase extracted using MicroSpin™ C18 columns (The Nest Group, Southboro, MA).  Twenty μg portions of solid phase extracted digests were then dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 25 μl of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Two hundred μg of 10-plex tandem mass tagging (TMT) reagent (Thermo Scientific) freshly dissolved in 12.5 μl of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) was then added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour.  To increase numbers of quantified proteins, TMT labeled peptides were separated by two dimensions of reverse phase chromatography performed at both high and low pH. A Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC pump was used for sample loading and 2nd dimension reverse phase separation at low pH, and a Dionex NCP-3200RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system for dilution of 1st dimension reverse phase eluents. Twenty μl samples containing 50 μg of pooled TMT-labeled digest were injected for 10 min onto a NanoEase 5 μm particle XBridge BEH130 C18 300 μm x 50 mm column (Waters, Bedford, MA) at 3 μl/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides were then eluted by sequential injection of 20 μl of 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 50 and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at a 3 ul/min flow rate using an autosampler. Eluted peptides at were then diluted at a tee with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 24 μl/min flow rate. Peptides were then delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100 μm x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 μm particle trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 75 μm x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then separated at low pH in the 2nd dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nl/min flow rate. Each 2nd dimension LC run required 2 hours for separation and reequilibration, so the entire LC/MS method required 34 hours for completion. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and data-dependent MS2 scans in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 most intense ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole.

### Data Protocol
RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific) with SEQUEST HT software and a Gallus gallus Ensembl database containing 16,187 sequences.  Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 peptide N-terminus and K residues) and iodoacetamide (+57.021 C residues), variable oxidation (+15.995 M residues), parent ion tolerance of +/- 1.25 Da, fragment ion tolerance of 1.0 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated using Percolator software. Only peptides with q-values < 0.05, having mass errors <20 ppm, and matching only one protein entry in the database were used. Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported as text files and processed using in-house scripts. After excluding the highest and lowest reporter ion intensities, an average intensity >500 was required for the remaining reporter ions to exclude the analysis of peptides with insufficient signal intensity. Reporter ions intensities with zero intensity also had values of 150 added to prevent errors during subsequent data analysis. Reporter ion intensities for peptides assigned to each protein were then summed to create an abundance measurement for each protein across the 10 samples simultaneously analyzed. TMT samples were selected with a relatively tight range of band tightness (30-45%), and therefore differences between samples with varying band tightness were not analyzed. Differential protein abundance was determined in the TMT experiment by comparing the summed peptide reporter ion intensities for each protein across samples (5 control, and 5 banded) using the R software (v 3.1.1) package edgeR, which performed data normalization, Benjamini-Hochberg multiple test correction, and calculation of false discovery rates during tests for differential abundance for each protein compared between banded and control samples.

### Publication Abstract
Normal blood flow is essential for proper heart formation during embryonic development, as abnormal hemodynamic load (blood pressure and shear stress) results in cardiac defects seen in congenital heart disease (CHD). However, the detrimental remodeling processes that relate altered blood flow to cardiac malformation and defects remain unclear. Heart development is a finely orchestrated process with rapid transformations that occur at the tissue, cell, and subcellular levels. Myocardial cells play an essential role in cardiac tissue maturation by aligning in the direction of stretch and increasing the number of contractile units as hemodynamic load increases throughout development. This study elucidates the early effects of altered blood flow on myofibril and mitochondrial configuration in the outflow tract myocardium <i>in vivo</i>. Outflow tract banding was used to increase hemodynamic load in the chicken embryo heart between Hamburger and Hamilton stages 18 and 24 (~24 h during tubular heart stages). 3D focused ion beam scanning electron microscopy analysis determined that increased hemodynamic load induced changes in the developing myocardium, characterized by thicker myofibril bundles that were more disbursed in circumferential orientation, and mitochondria that organized in large clusters around the nucleus. Proteomic mass-spectrometry analysis quantified altered protein composition after banding that is consistent with altered myofibril thin filament assembly and function, and mitochondrial maintenance and organization. Additionally, pathway analysis of the proteomics data identified possible activation of signaling pathways in response to banding, including the renin-angiotensin system (RAS). Imaging and proteomic data combined indicate that myofibril and mitochondrial arrangement in early embryonic stages is a critical developmental process that when disturbed by altered blood flow may contribute to cardiac malformation and defects.

### Keywords
Heart development; chick embryos; hemodynamics; increased load; 10-plex tmt labeling; shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Biomedical Engineering Department Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR 97239
Oregon Health & Science University

### Submitter
Sandra Rugonyi

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra Rugonyi
Biomedical Engineering Department Oregon Health & Science University Portland, OR 97239


