### Accession
PXD010445

### Title
A variant NuRD complex containing PWWP2A/B excludes MBD2/3 to regulate transcription at active genes

### Description
Transcriptional regulation by chromatin is a highly dynamic process directed through the recruitment and coordinated action of epigenetic modifiers and readers of these modifications. Using an unbiased proteomic approach to find interactors of H3K36me3, a modification enriched on active chromatin, we identify PWWP2A and HDAC2 among the top interactors. PWWP2A and its paralog PWWP2B form a stable complex with NuRD subunits MTA1/2/3:HDAC1/2:RBBP4/7, but not with MBD2/3, p66α/β, and CHD3/4. PWWP2A competes with MBD3 for binding to MTA1, thus defining a new variant NuRD complex that is mutually exclusive with the MBD2/3-containing NuRD. In mESCs, PWWP2A/B is most enriched at highly transcribed genes. Loss of PWWP2A/B leads to increases in histone acetylation predominantly at highly expressed genes, accompanied by decreases in Pol II elongation. Collectively, these findings suggest a role for PWWP2A/B in regulating transcription through the fine-tuning of histone acetylation dynamics at actively transcribed genes.

### Sample Protocol
samples were checked for quality by silverstain and western blot prior to processing for mass spectrometry. The sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes and alkylated with 20 mM 501 iodoacetamide for 30 minutes both at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated by methanol/chloroform extraction53, and the pellet was solubilised in 6 M urea buffer. In-solution 503 digestion was carried out using mass spec grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 ºC at a ratio of 1:50. The digestion was stopped by the addition of formic acid (1% final concentration), and the 505 peptides were purified using SEPPAK C18 cartridges. Briefly, the SEP-PAK C18 column was eliquibrated with 5 ml of Buffer B (65% acetonitrile, 35 % milliQ water, 0.1% TFA), followed by 10 507 ml Buffer A (98% milliQ water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA). Bound peptides were washed with 10 ml Buffer A and eluted in Buffer B. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until 509 analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was processes with either MaxQuant, PEAKS and Mascot (see suppl. material).

### Publication Abstract
Transcriptional regulation by chromatin is a highly dynamic process directed through the recruitment and coordinated action of epigenetic modifiers and readers of these modifications. Using an unbiased proteomic approach to find interactors of H3K36me3, a modification enriched on active chromatin, here we identify PWWP2A and HDAC2 among the top interactors. PWWP2A and its paralog PWWP2B form a stable complex with NuRD subunits MTA1/2/3:HDAC1/2:RBBP4/7, but not with MBD2/3, p66&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;, and CHD3/4. PWWP2A competes with MBD3 for binding to MTA1, thus defining a new variant NuRD complex that is mutually exclusive with the MBD2/3 containing NuRD. In mESCs, PWWP2A/B is most enriched at highly transcribed genes. Loss of PWWP2A/B leads to increases in histone acetylation predominantly at highly expressed genes, accompanied by decreases in Pol II elongation. Collectively, these findings suggest a role for PWWP2A/B in regulating transcription through the fine-tuning of histone acetylation dynamics at actively transcribed genes.

### Keywords
Pwwp2a/b, Nurd, Hdac

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility Oxford


