### Accession
PXD041165

### Title
Identification of potential protein biomarkers associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia in human amniotic fluid

### Description
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) results from incomplete diaphragm development and can be associated with pulmonary hypoplasia, pulmonary hypertension, and heart failure. Currently, few biomarkers are available. Since amniotic fluid comprises proteins of both fetal and maternal origin, its analysis could provide insights on mechanisms underlying CDH and provide biomarkers for early diagnosis, severity of pulmonary changes and response to treatment. The study objective was to identify proteomic changes in amniotic fluid consistently associated with CDH. Amniotic fluid was obtained at term (37-39 weeks) from women with normal pregnancies (n=5) or carrying fetuses with CDH (n=5). After immuno-depletion of the highest abundance proteins, off-line fractionation and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry were performed and quantitative differences between the proteomes of the groups were determined. Of 1036 proteins identified, 218 were differentially abundant. Bioinformatics analysis showed significant changes in GP6 signaling, MSP-RON signaling in macrophages pathways and networks associated with cardiovascular system development and function, connective tissue disorders and dermatological conditions. Pulmonary surfactant protein B, osteopontin, kallikrein 5 and galectin 3 were investigated orthogonally using ELISA in larger cohorts to test the observed differences and showed statistically significant differences aiding in the prediction of CDH. The findings provide potential tools for improved clinical detection and management of CDH.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg of total protein from each sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol DTT (final concentration) at 60 C for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration) for 30 mins in the dark at room temperature. The reaction was diluted with three volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8) and trypsin (V5280, Promega) was added in a 1:50 (trypsin: protein) ratio and incubated overnight at 37 C. Digest clean-up was done using C18 columns (Sep-Pak, Catalog number WAT023590, Waters) and peptides were eluted in 500 µl of elution buffer (25% water+75% acetonitrile +0.1% trifluoracetic acid), dried using a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific Savant SPD1030-230) and reconstituted in 50 µl of 1% acetic acid. 5 µl of this peptide mixture was injected into the mass spectrometer for analysis.   LC-MS/MS: Tryptic digests were analyzed in technical duplicates with a gap of one month between the analyses to minimize run to run variation, using a Thermo Ultimate 3000 UHPLC interfaced with a ThermoFisher Scientific Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer system (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed phase capillary chromatography column. The peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The nanospray ion source was operated at 1.9 kV. The digest was analyzed using a data-dependent method with 35% collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of the most abundant peptides every 3 seconds and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z for ion-trap MS/MS. Scans were conducted at a maximum resolution of 120,000 for full MS. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and ions within 10 ppm of the fragmented mass were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
RAW files with spectral information were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3, using the built-in SEQUEST search engine and searched against a human database downloaded from Uniprot containing 26037 sequences. Trypsin was used as the protein-cleaving enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Parameters for protein identification were set as: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static modifications included carbamidomethyl (C), whereas dynamic modifications included oxidation (M). Peptides and proteins were validated using a 1 percent false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were included only if they were identified with a minimum of 2 peptides. Label-free quantification was done using precursor ions quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 and only unique and razor peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a severe birth defect frequently associated with pulmonary hypoplasia, pulmonary hypertension, and heart failure. Since amniotic fluid comprises proteins of both fetal and maternal origin, its analysis could provide insights on mechanisms underlying CDH and provide biomarkers for early diagnosis, severity of pulmonary changes and treatment response. The study objective was to identify proteomic changes in amniotic fluid consistently associated with CDH. Amniotic fluid was obtained at term (37-39&#xa0;weeks) from women with normal pregnancies (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5) or carrying fetuses with CDH (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5). After immuno-depletion of the highest abundance proteins, off-line fractionation and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry were performed and quantitative differences between the proteomes of the groups were determined. Of 1036 proteins identified, 218 were differentially abundant. Bioinformatics analysis showed significant changes in GP6 signaling, in the MSP-RON signaling in macrophages pathway and in networks associated with cardiovascular system development and function, connective tissue disorders and dermatological conditions. Differences in selected proteins, namely pulmonary surfactant protein B, osteopontin, kallikrein 5 and galectin-3 were validated by orthogonal testing using ELISA in larger cohorts and showed statistically significant differences aiding in the diagnosis and prediction of CDH. The findings provide potential tools for clinical management of CDH.

### Keywords
Surfactant protein b, Kallikrein-5, Amniotic fluid, Proteomics, Osteopontin, Galectin-3

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic 
Biomedical Engineering department, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States

### Submitter
Sumit Bhutada

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel S. Apte
Biomedical Engineering department, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States


