### Accession
PXD041223

### Title
Disruption of immune tolerance changes epididymal extracellular vesicle (EV) protein cargo

### Description
We characterized the protein-content profile of epididymal EVs after disruption of immune tolerance by performing mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics. EVs were obtained from the proximal and distal epididymides of WT and Foxp3- DTR (diphtheria toxin receptor) mice 2 weeks after diphtheria toxin (DT) treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Epididymides were obtained from Foxp3-DTR and WT littermates 2 weeks after DT injections. The epididymides were divided into proximal and distal regions. Epididymal fluid was collected after incubation of the respective regions in PBS at 37 ºC for 15 min. Afterward, the fluid was centrifuged at 400 g, 1,200g, 3,000 g, and 10,000 g, and filtered with 0.20 µm-pore size membranes to remove any cellular leftovers and microvesicles. Then, the purified epididymal fluid was pooled from 2 independent mice (a total of 4 epididymides) to obtain enough material for the subsequent analyses. Epididymal fluid was loaded on top of a 30% sucrose/20 mM Tris/D2O density cushion followed by centrifugation at 100,000 g for 90min. The remaining supernatant was collected and loaded on top of a 25% sucrose/20 mM Tris/D2O density cushion followed by centrifugation at 100,000 g for 14 h at 4 ºC After that, both 25% and 30% sucrose cushions containing EVs were pooled and diluted in PBS, and the EVs were pelleted at 100,000 g for 90 min. The pelleted EVs were resuspended in 1X RIPA buffer with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails, as explained above. Soluble proteins were collected, and proteins were precipitated by adding trichloroacetic acid (TCA; A11156.30, Trichloroacetic acid 99%, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 20% for 15 min at 4 ºC. The protein precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 17,000 for 20 min, and the pellet was rinsed once with TCA 10%, and twice with cold 100% acetone (022928.k2, Acetone, HPLC Grade 95.5+%, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The protein pellet was dried using a speed vacuum at 37 ºC. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10% acetonitrile. 10 µl (20 ng/µl) of modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was spiked into the solutions, and samples were incubated at 37 ºC overnight.  After, samples were acidified by spiking in 5 µl 20% formic acid solution and then desalted by STAGE tip. For HPLC separation, the samples were reconstituted in 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter; 30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column, each sample was loaded via a Famos autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (92.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  As peptides eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then, entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Elite ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences, and the data were filtered to < 1 % peptide false discovery rate (FDR). Only proteins identified with at least 1 unique peptide and detected in at least one sample from each group (WT and Foxp3-DTR groups) were considered for further analysis.  Proteomic datasets of each group (n = 4) were compared using VENNY 2.1 Venn Diagram online tool (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). For statistical analysis, Multiplot Studio software was used to obtain the differentially expressed proteins and to generate the volcano plots [fold change (FC) versus p-value]. Differentially expressed proteins were defined based on the criteria ± 2 FC in protein abundance with a p-value < 0.05. For protein abundance, the sum of intensity values was used. The sum of intensity is calculated as the sum of the intensities of all peaks from the same protein. The web-based software Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus) was used to plot the heat-maps.

### Publication Abstract
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) modulate tissue homeostatic processes and immune responses. Understanding tissue-Treg biology will contribute to developing precision-targeting treatment strategies. Here, we show that Tregs maintain the tolerogenic state of the testis and epididymis, where sperm are produced and mature. We found that Treg depletion induces severe autoimmune orchitis and epididymitis, manifested by an exacerbated immune cell infiltration [CD4 T cells, monocytes, and mononuclear phagocytes (MPs)] and the development of antisperm antibodies (ASA). In Treg-depleted mice, MPs increased projections toward the epididymal lumen as well as invading the lumen. ASA-bound sperm enhance sperm agglutination and might facilitate sperm phagocytosis. Tolerance breakdown impaired epididymal epithelial function and altered extracellular vesicle cargo, both of which play crucial roles in the acquisition of sperm fertilizing ability and subsequent embryo development. The affected mice had reduced sperm number and motility and severe fertility defects. Deciphering these immunoregulatory mechanisms may help to design new strategies to treat male infertility, as well as to identify potential targets for immunocontraception.

### Keywords
Immune tolerance, Treg depletion, Extracellular vesicles, Epididymosomes, Foxp3

### Affiliations
Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Maria Agustina Battistone

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Agustina Battistone
Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School


