### Accession
PXD032754

### Title
Short and mid term heat stress proteomics characterization in pinus radiata

### Description
In order to study in detail short and mid term heat stress molecular response we performed a shotgun proteomics study. One-year-old P. radiata seedlings (plant size ∼33 ± 4 cm) were kept in 1 dm3 pots under a photoperiod of 16 h (400 µmol m−2 s−1) at 25 °C and 50% relative humidity (RH), and 15 °C and 60% RH during the night period. The plants were previously acclimated over a 1-month period inside the climate chamber, being watered with nutritive solution (N : P : K, 5 : 8 : 10). In order to perform a realistic experiment, and corresponding with the dawn, heat exposure treatment began with an increasing temperature gradient from 15 to 40 °C over 5 h, which was then maintained for 6 h; after that, temperature was gradually decreased from 40 to 15 °C over 5 h. This experimental procedure was repeated for 5 days and sampling was performed at: 3 h after 40 °C was reached on Day 1 (T1/2) and at the end of the 6 h heat exposure on Day 1 (T1), Day 2 (T2), Day 3 (T3) and Day 5 (T5) (Figure 1a). Plants were watered every day to 80% full capacity (FC) in order to avoid a collateral drought stress. A group of control plants was also collected on Day 1 (C) before starting the heat exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were purified using phenolic extraction: 550 μl phenol (Tris-buffered, pH 8) and 600 μl of water were added to each sample. Samples were mixed on a vortexer for 2 min at room temperature, and then centrifuged at 10 000 g at room temperature for 5 min. The supernatant, containing the phenolic phase, was transferred to a new 2 ml microcentrifuge tube that contained 600 μl of PWB (0.7 m sucrose, 50 mm Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 50 mm EDTA, 0.5% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.5% (v/v) Plant Protease Inhibitor Cocktail from Sigma) and mixed thoroughly by vortexing. After centrifugation at 10 000 g at room temperature for 5 min, upper phenolic phase was transferred to a new tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding 1.5 ml of 0.1 m ammonium acetate, 0.5% β-mercaptoethanol in methanol and an overnight incubation at −20°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 10 000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and protein pellets were washed with acetone in an ultrasound bath until complete disaggregation of the pellet. Proteins were precipitated by centrifugation (10 000 g for 15 min at 4°C), washed with acetone three times and finally resuspended in urea 2% SDS. Then, 60 µg of purified proteins were run 0.5 cm in 12% SDS-PAGE gels, which were then fixed and stained with 0.1% CBB R-250 in methanol:acetic acid:water at a ratio of 40:10:50 (v:v:v) for 30 min and destained in methanol:water at a ratio of 40:60 (v:v). Protein bands were cleaned, trypsin digested and desalted. The Ultimate 3000-DIonex-LTQ-ORBITRAP XL (Thermo, USA) system was maintained as Valledor and Weckwerth (2014) specified, with only a slight modification in the effective gradient, which was set to 90 min from 5% to 45% acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (v:v) with a later column regeneration step of 27 min. The employed column was Chromoltih rp-18R 15 cm length 0.1 cm inner diameter (Merck).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed and identified against an in-house database, of Pinus radiata using Proteome Discoverer software. The identification threshold was established at 5% and 1% false discovery rates (FDR) at peptide and protein levels, respectively. Peptides were also filtered establishing an XCorr threshold above the peptide-charge state of +0.25, namely 2.25 or 3.25 for peptides charged +2 or +3, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Due to the current climate change, many studies have described main drivers in abiotic stress. Recent findings suggest that alternative splicing (AS) has a critical role in controlling plant responses to high temperature. AS is a mechanism that allows organisms to create an assortment of RNA transcripts and proteins using a single gene. However, the most important roles of AS in stress could not be rigorously addressed because research has been focused on model species, covering only a narrow phylogenetic and lifecycle spectrum. Thus, AS degree of diversification among more dissimilar taxa in heat response is still largely unknown. To fill this gap, the present study employs a systems biology approach to examine how the AS landscape responds to and 'remembers' heat stress in conifers, a group which has received little attention even though their position can solve key evolutionary questions. Contrary to angiosperms, we found that potential intron retention may not be the most prevalent type of AS. Furthermore, our integrative analysis with metabolome and proteome data places splicing as the main source of variation during the response. Finally, we evaluated possible acquired long-term splicing memory in a diverse subset of events, and although this mechanism seems to be conserved in seed plants, AS dynamics are divergent. These discoveries reveal the particular way of remembering past temperature changes in long-lived plants and open the door to include species with unique features to determine the extent of conservation in gene expression regulation.

### Keywords
Climate change, Pine, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Plant Physiology, department of Organisms and Systems Biology, University of Oviedo, Spain
Universidad de Oviedo

### Submitter
Laura Lamelas

### Lab Head
Dr Mónica Meijón
Plant Physiology, department of Organisms and Systems Biology, University of Oviedo, Spain


