### Accession
PXD043798

### Title
Yeast meiotic proteome in wildtype versus kar4 mutant

### Description
The Kar4 protein has been identified as being a component of the yeast N6A mRNA methyltransferase, homologous to human METTL14.   Mutations in KAR4 cause blocks in meiosis due to 1) reduced expression of Ime1p-induced transcripts, and 2) reduced levels of a subset of meiotic proteins, independent of their transcript levels.  The reduced levels of the proteins are partially suppressed by increased levels of a translational regulator, Rim4.  This proteomic study was aimed at identifying the spectrum of meiotic proteins affected by the absence of Kar4.  The defect in Ime1p-depedent transcription was suppressed by over-expression of Ime1p. Proteins present in wildtype and kar4 deletion strains at two different times in meiosis were fractionated using reverse-phase chromatography and identified by MS/MS.  Some 4068 proteins expressed during meiosis were identified. At 8 hours, 432 proteins were present at less than 50% the levels in kar4Δ/Δ compared to wild type. GO term analysis of the low proteins at 8 hours returned “meiotic cell cycle” as the sixth term with a P value of 7.74x10^-5. At 12 hours, 318 proteins were present at less than 50% the levels in kar4Δ/Δ relative to wild type. GO term analysis returned “meiotic cell cycle” as the second term with a P value less than 0.001.  Proteins that were low at both 8 and 12 hours in kar4∆/∆ comprise proteins required for meiotic recombination and sporulation including Sps2p, Gas4p, Gmc2p, Mei5p, and Sae3p.  Other meiotic proteins were expressed at or above wild type levels at 8 hours, but went down to lower than wild type levels at 12 hours, including Ecm11p, Hed1p, Spo11p, and Rec8p.  In each case the levels of the proteins were reduced to much greater extents that can be explained by changes in transcript levels.  Taken together these data suggest that Kar4 plays a role in the regulation of transcription and translation during yeast meiosis.

### Sample Protocol
For each time point, the optical density of the yeast cultures was measured and a total of 30 OD600 was aliquoted. Samples were pelleted, washed with water, and flash frozen by liquid nitrogen. Frozen yeast pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (6M guanidium hydrochloride, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8.5).  Cells were lysed by sonication using 5x 30s pulses with 1min rest in ice between pulses.  Samples were then heated to 95°C for 15 min, and allowed to cool in the dark for 30 min.  Samples were then centrifuged, and lysate removed to a fresh tube.  Lysate was then diluted 1:3 with digestion buffer (10% CAN, 25mM Tris pH 8.5) containing LysC (1:50) and incubated at 37°C for 3 hours.  Samples were then further diluted to 1:10 with digestion buffer containing Trypsin (1:100) and incubated O/N at 37°C.  TFA was added to 1% final.  Samples were then centrifuged, and digested lysate removed to a new tube.  Samples were desalted on C18 cartridges (Oasis, Waters) as per manufacturer protocol.  Dried down peptide samples were then fractioned using High pH Reversed-Phase peptide fraction kit (Pierce) into 8 fractions using manufacturer’s instructions.  Fractions were dried completely in a speedvac and resuspended with 20μl of 0.1% formic acid pH 3.  5ul was injected per run using an Easy-nLC 1000 UPLC system.  Samples were loaded directly onto a 45cm long 75μm inner diameter nano capillary column packed with 1.9μm C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch, Germany) mated to metal emitter in-line with a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, USA).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with the 700,00 resolution MS1 scan (400-1800 m/z), AGC target of 1e6 and max fill time of 60ms. The top 15 most intense ions were selected (2.0 m/z isolation window) for fragmentation (28 NCE) with a resolution of 17,500, AGC target 2e4 and max fill time of 60ms.  Dynamic exclusion list was evoked to exclude previously sequenced peptides for 120s if sequenced within the last 10s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched with MaxQuant (ver 1.5.3.28), using default settings for LFQ data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as dynamic modifications.  Trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Files were searched against the yeast SGD database download 13 Jan 2015 and supplemented with common contaminants. Results were imported into the Perseus (ver 1.5.2.6) workflow for data trimming and imputation. Final data were exported as a table.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adenine methyltransferase, Meiosis, Saccaromyces

### Affiliations
Georgetown University
Department of Biology Georgetown University Washington, DC 20057

### Submitter
Mark Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Mark D. Rose
Department of Biology Georgetown University Washington, DC 20057


