### Accession
PXD022864

### Title
Proteomic profiling of plasma membrane proteins from bovine rod photoreceptor outer segments

### Description
The outer segment (OS) organelle of vertebrate photoreceptors is a highly specialized cilium whose plasma membrane plays vital and diverse roles in supporting photoreceptor function and health. However, little is known about the identity of its protein constituents, as this membrane cannot be purified to homogeneity. In this study, we employed the technique of protein correlation profiling to identify unique OS plasma membrane proteins. To achieve this, we used label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to compare relative protein abundances in an enriched preparation of the OS plasma membrane to a preparation of total outer segment membranes. We have found that only five proteins were enriched at the same level as previously validated OS plasma membrane markers. Two of these proteins, TMEM67 and TMEM237, had not been previously assigned to this membrane and one, embigin, had not been identified in photoreceptors. We further showed that embigin associates with monocarboxylate transporter MCT1 in the OS plasma membrane, facilitating lactate transport through this cellular compartment.

### Sample Protocol
Three types of protein samples (hypotonically washed OS membranes, proteins precipitated by PMe 2D9 antibodies and proteins precipitated by 9E10 antibodies) were processed in parallel in three biological repeats. For each sample, 5-20 μg total protein was used to prepare peptide mixtures for proteomic profiling. Proteins were cleaved with the trypsin/endoproteinase LysC mixture (Promega, V5072) using the paramagnetic beads-based method (49). Each digest was dissolved in 12 μl of 1/2/97% (by volume) of the trifluoroacetic acid/acetonitrile/water solution, and 3 μl were injected into a 5 μm, 180 μm×20 mm Symmetry C18 trap column (Waters) in 1% acetonitrile in water for 3 min at 5 μl/min. For protein profiling in serial retinal sections, each section was dissolved in 100 l of 2% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and proteins were cleaved as above. The analytical separation was next performed using an HSS T3 1.8 μm, 75 μm×250 mm column (Waters) over 90 min at a flow rate of 0.4 μl/min at 55°C. The 5-30% mobile phase B gradient was used, where phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and phase B 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides separated by LC were introduced into the Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using positive electrospray ionization at 1900 V and capillary temperature of 275°C. Data collection was performed in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with 120,000 resolution (at m/z 200) for MS1 precursor measurements. The MS1 analysis utilized a scan from 375-1600 m/z with a target AGC value of 2.0e5 ions, the RF lens set at 30%, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Advanced peak detection and internal calibration (EIC) were enabled during data acquisition. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using charge state filtering (2-5), monoisotopic peak detection and a dynamic exclusion time of 20 sec with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. MS/MS was performed using HCD with a collision energy of 30±5% with detection in the ion trap using a rapid scanning rate, AGC target value of 3.0e3 ions, maximum injection time of 300 ms, and ion injection for all available parallelizable time enabled.

### Data Protocol
For label-free relative protein quantification, raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were imported into Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics) for duplicate runs alignment of each preparation and peak area calculations. Peptides were identified using Mascot version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) for searching a custom IPI bovine database containing 1598 entries of proteins confidently identified in multiple ROS preparations. For mouse samples, we used the UniProt mouse database containing 17,008 entrees (reviewed in 2019). Mascot search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.25 Da for fragment-ion mass tolerance; two missed cleavages by trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification was oxidized methionine. Only proteins identified with 2 or more peptides (Mascot scores >15 for a peptide and >50 for a protein), were included in the protein correlation profiling analysis. To account for variations in experimental conditions and amounts of protein material in individual LC-MS/MS runs, the integrated peak area for each identified peptide was corrected using the factors calculated by automatic Progenesis algorithm utilizing the total intensities for all peaks in each run. Values representing protein amounts were calculated based on a sum of ion intensities for all identified constituent non-conflicting peptides (12). For absolute protein quantification in mouse ROS, samples were spiked with cold isotope-labeled synthetic peptides prior to trypsin digestion. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the DDA workflow, as above for label-free protein quantification. Peptides were identified using Mascot version 2.5.1 by searches against the mouse Uniprot database, as described above, with an inclusion of labels: 13C(6)15N(2) for lysine and 13C(6)15N(4) for arginine. The intensities of light and heavy peptides were measured using Progenesis IQ for Proteomics. Protein amounts were calculated based on the intensities of corresponding light and heavy peptides and known heavy peptide amounts. The following peptides (all from JPT Peptide Technologies, GmbH) were used: NPLGDDDASATASK, EAAAQQQESATTQK for rhodopsin, VYGSSSPAVDR, IAIISQGR, ALSLLEENR for ABCA4; LLSSSGSTFEQSIK, SATVPVSIWR, LFVNQDSSSSK and FVAASYDIR for TMEM67; FTAPTGVSQPVG, AEGSEPPAAELK and DVALSVHR for TMEM237; and SDDSNGIENNVPR, SLIAYVGDSTVLK and GTFNIHVPK for embigin.  For protein correlation profiling, we compared relative amounts of proteins confidently identified in preparations of the OS plasma membrane enriched with the PMe 2D9 antibody and hypotonically washed OS membranes by calculating ratios between their amounts in indicated membrane preparations. Each ratio was normalized by the averaged ratio for three plasma membrane markers – NCKX1, CNGα1 and CNGβ1 – contained in the corresponding membrane preparation. In this analysis, the markers and all other unique OS plasma membrane proteins were expected to yield a ratio close to 1. To account for non-specific protein binding to magnetic beads, we repeated the same analysis for proteins precipitated by control beads coupled to anti-Myc 9E10 antibodies. The resulting values were subtracted from those obtained with experimental samples with PMe 2D9 beads.

### Publication Abstract
The outer segment (OS) organelle of vertebrate photoreceptors is a highly specialized cilium evolved to capture light and initiate light response. The plasma membrane which envelopes the OS plays vital and diverse roles in supporting photoreceptor function and health. However, little is known about the identity of its protein constituents, as this membrane cannot be purified to homogeneity. In this study, we used the technique of protein correlation profiling to identify unique OS plasma membrane proteins. To achieve this, we used label-free quantitative MS to compare relative protein abundances in an enriched preparation of the OS plasma membrane with a preparation of total OS membranes. We have found that only five proteins were enriched at the same level as previously validated OS plasma membrane markers. Two of these proteins, TMEM67 and TMEM237, had not been previously assigned to this membrane, and one, embigin, had not been identified in photoreceptors. We further showed that embigin associates with monocarboxylate transporter MCT1 in the OS plasma membrane, facilitating lactate transport through this cellular compartment.

### Keywords
Protein correlation profiling, Outer segment, Retina, Photoreneptor

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke University Eye Center

### Submitter
Nikolai Skiba

### Lab Head
Dr Vadim Arshavsky
Duke University Eye Center


