### Accession
PXD010981

### Title
Quantitation Analysis using OpenMS of iPRG2015: Detection of Differentially Abundant Proteins in Label-Free Quantitative LC–MS/MS Experiments

### Description
The 2015 study of the Proteome Informatics Research Group (iPRG) of the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities (ABRF) aimed to evaluate the effects of the statistical analysis on the accuracy of the results. The study used LC–tandem mass spectra acquired from a controlled mixture, and made the data available to anonymous volunteer participants. The participants used methods of their choice to detect differentially abundant proteins, estimate the associated fold changes, and characterize the uncertainty of the results. The study found that multiple strategies (including the use of spectral counts versus peak intensities, and various software tools) could lead to accurate results, and that the performance was primarily determined by the analysts’ expertise. This manuscript summarizes the outcome of the study, and provides representative examples of good computational and statistical practice. The data set generated as part of this study is publicly available.  This project contains the analysis performed with OpenMS framework and exported to mztab. This is the first official submission of mzTab (PRIDE Complete Submission) and should used as reference by software providers as example of How to export Quantitative results into PRIDE database as Complete submission.

### Sample Protocol
The study was based on four artificially made samples of known composition, each containing a constant background 200 ng of tryptic digests of S. cerevisiae (ATCC strain 204508/S288c). Each sample was separately spiked with different quantities of six individual protein digests. All of the proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to digestion with trypsin.  The concentrations of the spiked-in proteins are summarized in the paper with PubmedID: 27990823.  The four samples were analyzed in three LC−MS/MS acquisitions (total of 12 runs) in random order. The digests were loaded directly on to a 15 cm × 75 μm PicoFrit column (New Objective) self-packed with 3 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). Samples were separated using a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000 system with a 110 min linear gradient of 0−40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 250 nL/min directly connected to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data were acquired in data-dependent (DDA) mode, with each MS survey scan followed by 10 MS/MS HCD scans (AGC target 10E6, max fill time 60 ms), with 30-s dynamic exclusion. Both MS and MS/MS data were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap, with resolution 70 000 for MS and 17 500 for MS/MS. The MS1 scan range was 300−1650 m/z, the normalized collision energy was set to 27%, and singly charged ions were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted form Thermo Scientific raw files to mzML using the msconvert tool from ProteoWizard. Spectra were centroided and searched using  MSGF+ (v2018.01.30) executed via the OpenMS search engine wrapper MSGFPlusAdapter. 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modification was used to as apart from default values. PSMs were filtered (q-value < 5%) and used for feature detection using the semi-targeted approach described by Weisser et al. PMID: 28673088 and implemented in the OpenMS tool FeatureFinderIdentification. Prior to identification, nonlinear retention time alignment was performed using the MapAlignerIdentification tool. Proteins were quantified using unique peptides only and exported to mzTab (v1.0).

### Publication Abstract
Detection of differentially abundant proteins in label-free quantitative shotgun liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) experiments requires a series of computational steps that identify and quantify LC-MS features. It also requires statistical analyses that distinguish systematic changes in abundance between conditions from artifacts of biological and technical variation. The 2015 study of the Proteome Informatics Research Group (iPRG) of the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities (ABRF) aimed to evaluate the effects of the statistical analysis on the accuracy of the results. The study used LC-tandem mass spectra acquired from a controlled mixture, and made the data available to anonymous volunteer participants. The participants used methods of their choice to detect differentially abundant proteins, estimate the associated fold changes, and characterize the uncertainty of the results. The study found that multiple strategies (including the use of spectral counts versus peak intensities, and various software tools) could lead to accurate results, and that the performance was primarily determined by the analysts' expertise. This manuscript summarizes the outcome of the study, and provides representative examples of good computational and statistical practice. The data set generated as part of this study is publicly available.

### Keywords
Iprg2015, Openms, Benchmark, Iprg study, Reference dataset, Label-free

### Affiliations
Applied Bioinformatics, Department for Computer Science, University of Tuebingen, Sand 14, 72076 Tuebingen,Germany
EBI

### Submitter
Yasset Perez-Riverol

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Sachsenberg
Applied Bioinformatics, Department for Computer Science, University of Tuebingen, Sand 14, 72076 Tuebingen,Germany


### SDRF
- Characteristics[organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae
- Characteristics[organism part: not applicable
- Characteristics[cell type: not available
- Characteristics[disease: not available
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: AC=MS:1001911;NT=Q Exactive
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;MT=fixed;AC=UNIMOD:4
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:67;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable
- modification parameters.3: NT=Cyclization;PP=Protein N-term;TA=Q,E;MT=variable

