### Accession
PXD021898

### Title
Systematic analysis of MYC regulators identifies AKIRIN2 as an essential mediator of nuclear proteasome import

### Description
AKIRIN2 is an essential negative regulator of MYC protein levels. To test the specificity of AKIRIN2-dependent MYC regulation we performed unbiased protein quantification after inducible AKIRIN2- or Proteasome knockout und identified subsets of proteins accumulating after loss of AKIRIN2, Proteasomes or both.

### Sample Protocol
Per sample, 3-5x106 RKO cells expressing dox-inducible Cas9 and respective sgRNAs were harvested two (sgAKIRIN2 and sgAAVS1) or three (sgPSMA3) days after Cas9 induction. Cell pellets were lysed in 250 µL lysis buffer (10 M Urea, 50 mM HCl) for 10 min at 25 °C, before 30 µL 1 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), pH 8, 1 µL Benzonase and dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM were added and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and after 30 min incubation the reaction was quenched with DTT at a final concentration of 15 mM. 300 µg protein per sample were diluted with 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration of 6 M and digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein; Wako) for 3 h at 37 °C and, after adjustment of urea concentration to 2 M with 100 mM TEAB, with trypsin (1:50; enzyme:protein; Trypsin Gold, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Samples were desalted with SEP-PAK C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (WAT054960, Waters), eluted and lyophilized. The freeze-dried samples were dissolved in 100 mM HEPES and labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT) 11-plex reagents (90110 and A34808, Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Labelled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio for all channels and desalted via C18 column. Samples were then dissolved in SCX buffer A (5 mM NaPO4 pH 2.7, 15% ACN) at a final peptide concentration of 4 µg/µL and 250 µg were separated along a ternary gradient into 140 fractions by strong cation-exchange using a TSKgel SP-2PW SCX column (1 mm i.d. x 300 mm, 5µm particle size; Tosoh Bioscience) and an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation system (Thermo Fisher) at a flow rate of 35 µl/min. Fractions as well as the flow-through were stored at -80 °C until mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. LC-MS was performed using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (160454, Thermo Scientific), eluted at a flow rate of 230 nL/min using a binary 180 min gradient and data was acquired with the Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode using a full scan followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific) and the created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.3.0.12368, engine version 2.0.0.12368 against the Swiss-Prot database, taxonomy Homo sapiens (20,339 sequences; 11,360,750 residues), supplemented with common contaminants. Iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine and 11-plex tandem mass tag® (TMT) on lysine were set as fixed modifications. Peptides and proteins were quantified based on Reporter Ion intensities extracted by the “Reporter Ions Quantifier”-node implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins were determined using the limma R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Akirin2, Inducible cas9, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry - Protein Chemistry Facility
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Vienna Biocenter, Dr. Bohrgasse 3, A-1030 Wien, Austria
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria  Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Zuber
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria  Medical University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), 1030 Vienna, Austria


