### Accession
PXD026912

### Title
MAD2L2 dimerization and TRIP13 control shieldin activity in DNA repair

### Description
MAD2L2 (also known as REV7) functions in a diverse range of processes. It facilitates DNA lesion bypass through translesion synthesis (TLS), aids in interstrand crosslink repair and contributes to timely mitotic progression. Moreover, MAD2L2 plays an important role in DNA repair at DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and uncapped telomeres. As the first identified member of the shieldin complex, consisting of MAD2L2, SHLD1, SHLD2 and SHLD3, it controls DNA repair pathway choice between non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR) by counteracting DNA end-resection. Here we investigated the requirements for shieldin complex assembly and activity. Besides a dimerization surface, HORMA domain containing protein MAD2L2 has the extraordinary ability to wrap its C-terminal tail around an interacting peptide motif in SHLD3, thereby likely creating a very stable complex. We show that appropriate function of MAD2L2 in DNA repair as a member of the shieldin complex requires it to form a dimer that is mediated by SHLD2 and accelerates MAD2L2-SHLD3 interaction. Dimerization defective MAD2L2 impairs assembly of shieldin and fails to promote NHEJ at telomeres and during immunoglobulin class switch recombination (CSR). Moreover, dimerization of MAD2L2, along with the presence of SHLD3, allows the shieldin complex to interact with the AAA+ family ATPase TRIP13, known to drive topological switches in HORMA domain proteins. We find that appropriate levels of TRIP13 are important for proper shieldin (dis)assembly and activity in DNA repair. Together our data provide important insights in the dependencies for shieldin activity.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry, samples were run short-distance on a 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie Blue. The lane was excised from the gel after which proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with trypsin (mass spec grade, Promega) overnight at 37ᴼC and peptides were extracted with acetonitrile. Digests were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 10% formic acid for MS analysis. Peptide mixtures (10% of total digest) were loaded directly on the analytical column and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1000 system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Scientific) using standard settings. MS/MS data were searched against the Human Swissprot database (20,367 entries, release 2020_02) using Sequest HT. The maximum allowed precursor mass tolerance was 50 ppm and 0.6 Da for fragment ion masses. Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) was used as variable modifications. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 5% and as additional filter Sequest HT XCorr>1 was set. For the heatmap, samples were analyzed using the free R scripting language. The PD output file containing the PSM counts was loaded into R (version 4.0.2). Spectral counts of the biological replicates were averaged and proteins were filtered for zero counts in the control and for at least one count (average of two replicates) in one of the other two conditions. The counts were represented in a heat map with a color code ranging from white (0 PSM(s)) to red (≥5 PSM(s)). For the volcano plot, the PD output file containing the abundances was loaded into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0)58. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed and the proteins were filtered for at least two out of three valid values. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on the standard settings of Perseus, i.e. a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a t-test (–LOG(p-value) ≥ 1.3 and [x-y] ≥ 1.5 | [x-y] ≤ -1.5).

### Publication Abstract
MAD2L2 (REV7) plays an important role in DNA double-strand break repair. As a member of the shieldin complex, consisting of MAD2L2, SHLD1, SHLD2 and SHLD3, it controls DNA repair pathway choice by counteracting DNA end-resection. Here we investigated the requirements for shieldin complex assembly and activity. Besides a dimerization-surface, HORMA-domain protein MAD2L2 has the extraordinary ability to wrap its C-terminus around SHLD3, likely creating a very stable complex. We show that appropriate function of MAD2L2 within shieldin requires its dimerization, mediated by SHLD2 and accelerating MAD2L2-SHLD3 interaction. Dimerization-defective MAD2L2 impairs shieldin assembly and fails to promote NHEJ. Moreover, MAD2L2 dimerization, along with the presence of SHLD3, allows shieldin to interact with the TRIP13 ATPase, known to drive topological switches in HORMA-domain proteins. We find that appropriate levels of TRIP13 are important for proper shieldin (dis)assembly and activity in DNA repair. Together our data provide important insights in the dependencies for shieldin activity.

### Keywords
Mad2l2, Shieldin, Trip13, Dna repair, Nhej

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


