### Accession
PXD027267

### Title
Proxiome at the 40S ribosomal head region according to proximity labeling MS experiments

### Description
The in vivo labeling technique Biotin identification (BioID, Roux et al., 2012) was used to capture proteins in the microenvironments of the ribosomal proteins Rps3 (uS3) and Rps20 (us10) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotinylated proteins were captured from cell lysates using affinity purification and subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by in-gel digestion with trypsin. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) was performed to identify and relatively quantify peptides and thus proteins. Relative quantification of proteins was based on stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). To account for putative differences in the expression levels of the enriched proteins, an input control was analyzed as well. To this end, an aliquot of the cell lysate was taken prior to protein enrichment and analyzed as well. Beyond the known and expected interaction partners of Rps3 and Rps20, we identified proteins not known to co-localize with them. Moreover, we could also observe changes in their environment when the WD40-repeat protein Asc1/RACK1 was absent from the head region.

### Sample Protocol
Using SILAC-labeling for relative quantification, three strains were compared in each BioID experiment. For the Rps3 BioID experiment, Rps3-BirA* was expressed in the ASC1 wild type (“light” labeled) as well as the asc1- (“heavy” labeled) background. As a negative control, Rpl5-BirA* was expressed in the ASC1 wild type background (“medium” labeled). For the Rps20-BioID experiment, the same negative control was used. Like Rps3-BirA*, Rps20-BirA* was expressed in the ASC1 wild type and in the asc1- backgrounds. Cells were cultivated in YNB medium (0.15% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids and ammonium sulfate, 0.5% ammonium sulfate, 2% glucose) with the required amino acids. For the labeling of cells with “medium” and “heavy” lysine/arginine 13C6-L-arginine HCl/4,4,5,5-D4-L-lysine HCl and 13C6 15N4-L-arginine HCl/13C6-L-lysine HCl were used, respectively. The medium contained 10 μM D-biotin to induce biotinylation. Equal amounts of cells from the three different cultures were harvested (at an OD600 of about 0.8) and pooled. Cells were lysed and SDS was added to a final w/v of 4% to denature the proteins. Biotinylated proteins were enriched using Strep-Tactin® Sepharose® gravity flow columns (Rps3-BioID) or Strep-Tactin® Superflow® resin (Rps2-BioID, IBA Lifesciences GmbH). After washing the columns or beads, proteins were eluted using BXT buffer (0.1 M Tris-Cl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM biotin, IBA Lifesciences GmbH). Proteins were extracted and precipitated according to Wessel and Flügge (1984), reconstituted in 8 M urea/2 M thiourea, and then subjected to SDS-PAGE. Proteins were digested in-gel according to Shevchenko et al. (1996) and the resulting peptides were purified using C18 (3M) stop and go extraction (stage) tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003; Rappsilber et al., 2007). The peptides were dried, dissolved in 20 µl sample buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed with LC-MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to either an Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid ion trap-Orbitrap or a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS analysis was performed as previously described (Schmitt and Valerius, 2019). LC-MS method programming and data acquisition were performed with the software XCalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). References: Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., and Mann, M. (1996). Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68, 850-858. Wessel, D., and Flügge, U.I. (1984). A method for the quantitative recovery of protein in dilute solution in the presence of detergents and lipids. Anal Biochem 138, 141-143. Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y., and Mann, M. (2003). Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 75, 663-670. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Ishihama, Y. (2007). Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906. Roux, K.J., Kim, D.I., Raida, M., and Burke, B. (2012). A promiscuous biotin ligase fusion protein identifies proximal and interacting proteins in mammalian cells. J Cell Biol 196, 801-810. Schmitt, K., and Valerius, O. (2019). yRACK1/Asc1 proxiOMICs-Towards Illuminating Ships Passing in the Night. Cells 8, 1384.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and SILAC-based relative quantification were performed using the software MaxQuant 1.6.12.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). An S. cerevisiae-specific protein database (UniProt Proteome ID UP000002311) that also contained an entry for the amino acid sequence of Escherichia coli BirA (UniprotKB: P06709) was used. Due to the SILAC labeling of the yeast cultures, Arg6/Lys4 and Arg10/Lys8 were defined as the medium and heavy labels, respectively. Biotinylation of lysine was set as a variable modification, as well as the oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation. Re-quantification was enabled and a minimum of one ratio count was required for protein quantification using unique and razor peptides. For all other parameters the default settings were used. MaxQuant output data were analyzed using the Perseus software 1.6.0.7 (Tyanova et al., 2016). References: Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008). MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26, 1367-1372. Tyanova, S., Temu, T., Sinitcyn, P., Carlson, A., Hein, M.Y., Geiger, T., Mann, M., and Cox, J. (2016). The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13, 731-740.

### Publication Abstract
A comparison of overlapping proximity captures at the head region of the ribosomal 40S subunit (<i>hr40S</i>) in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> from four adjacent perspectives, namely Asc1/RACK1, Rps2/uS5, Rps3/uS3, and Rps20/uS10, corroborates dynamic co-localization of proteins that control activity and fate of both ribosomes and mRNA. Co-locating factors that associate with the <i>hr40S</i> are involved in (i) (de)ubiquitination of ribosomal proteins (Hel2, Bre5-Ubp3), (ii) clamping of inactive ribosomal subunits (Stm1), (iii) mRNA surveillance and vesicular transport (Smy2, Syh1), (iv) degradation of mRNA (endo- and exonucleases Ypl199c and Xrn1, respectively), (v) autophagy (Psp2, Vps30, Ykt6), and (vi) kinase signaling (Ste20). Additionally, they must be harmonized with translation initiation factors (eIF3, cap-binding protein Cdc33, eIF2A) and mRNA-binding/ribosome-charging proteins (Scp160, Sro9). The Rps/uS-BioID perspectives revealed substantial Asc1/RACK1-dependent <i>hr40S</i> configuration indicating a function of the &#x3b2;-propeller in context-specific spatial organization of this microenvironment. Toward resolving context-specific constellations, a Split-TurboID analysis emphasized the ubiquitin-associated factors Def1 and Lsm12 as neighbors of Bre5 at <i>hr40S</i>. These shuttling proteins indicate a common regulatory axis for the fate of polymerizing machineries for the biosynthesis of proteins in the cytoplasm and RNA/DNA in the nucleus.

### Keywords
Bioid, Ribosome, Us3, Us10, Bira*, Rps3, Silac, Rps20, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Georg-August-University Institute of Microbiology & Genetics Department of Mol. Microbiol. & Genetics Grisebachstr. 8 Göttingen
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Valerius
Georg-August-University Institute of Microbiology & Genetics Department of Mol. Microbiol. & Genetics Grisebachstr. 8 Göttingen


