### Accession
PXD033739

### Title
The SUMO-NIP45 pathway guards against accumulation of toxic DNA catenanes

### Description
SUMOylation is an essential protein modification that regulates numerous biological processes, but what constitutes its most critical functions in the cell remains unclear. Here, using genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9-based synthetic lethality screens, we show that the BLM-TOP3A-RMI1-RMI2 (BTRR)-PICH pathway, which resolves ultra-fine anaphase DNA bridges (UFBs) arising from catenated DNA structures, and NIP45 (NFATC2IP) display a synthetic lethal interaction in human cells and are essential for proliferation when SUMOylation is impaired. NIP45 and SUMOylation prevent excessive UFB formation that leads to extensive binucleation when BTRR-PICH-dependent UFB resolution is defective, by orchestrating an interphase pathway for converting DNA catenanes into DNA double-strand breaks that trigger G2 arrest via canonical ATM/ATR-dependent DNA damage signaling. NIP45 exerts its crucial function in this pathway by acting as a cofactor for specific SUMOylation processes that are at least in part targeted to the SLX4 multi-nuclease complex, which may facilitate nucleolytic DNA catenane resolution. Our findings establish an essential role of SUMO signaling in underpinning cell proliferation by counteracting the deleterious threat to faithful chromosome segregation posed by toxic DNA catenanes arising in virtually every cell cycle, via non-epistatic NIP45- and BTRR-PICH-dependent pathways.

### Sample Protocol
“N45-IP” samples – Quadruplicates of U2OS Flp-In T-REx NIP45-KO/GFP-NIP45 WT and SLD2* cell lines were induced with 0.1 µM doxycycline for 24 h and cell pellets collected and lysed for 15 min in ice-cold low-salt buffer containing 1 mM NaF, 10 mM N-Ethylmaleimide, 10 mM ß-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mM vanadate and complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,100g at 4 °C. Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit and equalized with lysis buffer before addition to 30 µL GFP-trap bead/slurry pre-washed twice in lysis buffer. Following incubation at 4 °C for 45 min the beads were washed three times in lysis buffer. Digestion of proteins was performed on-beads, using 250 ng trypsin, with 30 min pre-incubation on ice and 3 h incubation with shaking at 37 °C. Digests were cleared by centrifugation through 0.45 µm spin filters, after which peptides were purified on StageTips at high pH. C18 StageTips were prepared in-house, by layering four plugs of C18 material (Sigma-Aldrich, Empore SPE Disks, C18, 47 mm) per StageTip. Activation of StageTips was performed with 100 μL 100% methanol, followed by equilibration using 100 μL 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 200 mM ammonium hydroxide, and two washes with 100 μL 50 mM ammonium hydroxide. Samples were basified to pH >10 by addition of one tenth volume of 200 mM ammonium hydroxide, after which they were loaded on StageTips. Subsequently, StageTips were washed twice using 100 μL 50 mM ammonium hydroxide, after which peptides were eluted using 80 µL 25% ACN in 50 mM ammonium hydroxide. All fractions were dried to completion using a SpeedVac at 60 °C. Dried peptides were dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid (FA) and stored at −20 °C until analysis using mass spectrometry (MS).  “SUMO” samples – Quadruplicates of HeLa/His10-SUMO2 cells and the parental HeLa cell line were treated with siRNAs for 72 h prior to incubation with or without 2 µM ICRF-193 for 2 h. Purification of proteins modified by His10-SUMO2 was performed essentially as described previously (Hendriks et al., Methods Mol Biol, 2016), with the following exceptions: After the 100K MWCO concentration step, reduction and alkylation of peptides was performed by simultaneous addition of chloroacetamide and tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine to final concentrations of 5 mM. StageTip purification of peptides was performed at high pH, with a single-shot elution, as described above, after which samples were stored at −20°C until MS analysis.  All samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were analyzed on 20 cm long analytical columns, with an internal diameter of 75 μm, and packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was heated to 40 °C, and elution of peptides from the column was achieved by application of gradients with stationary phase Buffer A (0.1% FA) and increasing amounts of mobile phase Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% FA). The primary analytical gradient ranged from 7 %B to 33 %B over 75 min, followed by a tail-end increase to 48 %B over 11 min to ensure full peptide elution, followed by a washing block of 14 min. Ionization was achieved using a NanoSpray Flex NG ion source (Thermo), with spray voltage set at 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275 °C, and RF funnel level to 40%. Full scan range was set to 300-1,300 m/z, MS1 resolution to 120,000, MS1 AGC target to “200” (2,000,000 charges), and MS1 maximum injection time to “Auto”. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was enabled in “Peptide” mode. Precursors were prevented from being repeatedly sequenced by setting expected peak width to 50 s, and setting dynamic exclusion duration to 100 s, with an exclusion mass tolerance of 15 ppm, exclusion of isotopes, and exclusion of alternate charge states for the same precursor. MS/MS resolution was set to 30,000, MS/MS AGC target to “200” (200,000 charges), MS/MS intensity threshold to 360,000, MS/MS maximum injection time to “Auto”, and TopN to 12.

### Data Protocol
All RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30). RAW files corresponding to the GFP-trap (“N45-IP”) and SUMOylome (“SUMO”) experiments were analyzed separately. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions outlined below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the HUMAN.FASTA database was extracted from UniProt on 24 May, 2019. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were included as potential variable modifications (default), with a maximum allowance of 3 variable modifications per peptide. First search mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and maximum charge state of considered precursors to 6. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled, “Fast LFQ” was disabled, and “LFQ min. ratio count” was increased to 3. Second peptide search was enabled (default) and matching between runs was enabled with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Data was filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at both the peptide-spectrum match and the protein assignment levels.

### Publication Abstract
SUMOylation regulates numerous cellular processes, but what represents the essential functions of this protein modification remains unclear. To address this, we performed genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9-based screens, revealing that the BLM-TOP3A-RMI1-RMI2 (BTRR)-PICH pathway, which resolves ultrafine anaphase DNA bridges (UFBs) arising from catenated DNA structures, and the poorly characterized protein NIP45/NFATC2IP become indispensable for cell proliferation when SUMOylation is inhibited. We demonstrate that NIP45 and SUMOylation orchestrate an interphase pathway for converting DNA catenanes into double-strand breaks (DSBs) that activate the G2 DNA-damage checkpoint, thereby preventing cytokinesis failure and binucleation when BTRR-PICH-dependent UFB resolution is defective. NIP45 mediates this new TOP2-independent DNA catenane resolution process via its SUMO-like domains, promoting SUMOylation of specific factors including the SLX4 multi-nuclease complex, which contributes to catenane conversion into DSBs. Our findings establish that SUMOylation exerts its essential role in cell proliferation by enabling resolution of toxic DNA catenanes via nonepistatic NIP45- and BTRR-PICH-dependent pathways to prevent mitotic failure.

### Keywords
Human, Slx4, Sumo, Sumoylation, Dna damage, Nip45, Pich, Btrr, Dna catenane

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


