### Accession
PXD030435

### Title
RNA oligomers training set for the Pytheas scoring function

### Description
Mass spectrometry remains an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. This dataset contains the 95 MS/MS spectra of 3-14 nts-long oligomers, used for the training and validation of Pytheas' scoring function.

### Sample Protocol
Mixtures of synthetic RNA oligonucleotides (IDT, Sigma) and in-vitro transcribed 16S RNA constructs p1 (202 nt), p2 (250 nt) and p4 (173 nt) were used. 40-300 pmol of each RNA was digested with either T1 or A nuclease for 1 h at 55°C in 25 mM ammonium acetate (pH = 6). LC-MS/MS data were collected using an Agilent Q-TOF 6520 LC-MS platform and precursor MS2 scans were averaged across the chromatographic peak to reduce noise. Finally, 95 individual spectra representing 95 distinct sequences were extracted from multiple LC-MS/MS runs, visually inspected, and included in a training set for Pytheas search validation. For simplicity, data were reduced to include a single charge state for each precursor.

### Data Protocol
The theoretical digest library was obtained by using known RNA sequences and nucleoside modification positions, and by appending competing decoys. A set of MS1 and MS2 ions charge states included in the digest were empirically obtained for the Agilent Q-TOF analytical workflow. RNA termini were set to 3’-P and 5’-OH, and 11 CID ion series were used. The analytical form of the scoring function and parameter values were varied during the optimization process.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is an important method for analysis of modified nucleosides ubiquitously present in cellular RNAs, in particular for ribosomal and transfer RNAs that play crucial roles in mRNA translation and decoding. Furthermore, modifications have effect on the lifetimes of nucleic acids in plasma and cells and are consequently incorporated into RNA therapeutics. To provide an analytical tool for sequence characterization of modified RNAs, we developed Pytheas, an open-source software package for automated analysis of tandem MS data for RNA. The main features of Pytheas are flexible handling of isotope labeling and RNA modifications, with false discovery rate statistical validation based on sequence decoys. We demonstrate bottom-up mass spectrometry characterization of diverse RNA sequences, with broad applications in the biology of stable RNAs, and quality control of RNA therapeutics and mRNA vaccines.

### Keywords
Rna, Scoring function, Pytheas, Training set

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States

### Submitter
Luigi D'Ascenzo

### Lab Head
Dr James R. Williamson
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, United States


