### Accession
PXD044391

### Title
Proteome-wide abundance profiling of yeast deletion strains for GET pathway members using sample multiplexing

### Description
The GET pathway is associated with post-translational delivery of tail-anchored (TA) proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in yeast, as well as other eukaryotes. Moreover, dysfunction of the GET pathway has been associated with various pathological conditions. In this study, we used yeast deletion strains of Get complex members (specifically, Get1, Get2, Get3, Get4, and Get5) coupled with sample multiplexing-based quantitative mass spectrometry to profile protein abundance on a proteome-wide scale across five individual deletion strains. Our dataset consists of over 4,500 proteins, which corresponds to >75% of the yeast proteome. The data reveal several dozen proteins that are differentially abundant in one or more deletion strains, some of which are membrane-associated, yet the abundance of many TA proteins remained unchanged. This study provides valuable insights into the roles of these Get genes, and the potential for alternative pathways which help maintain cellular function despite the disruption of the GET pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry sample preparation followed the SL-TMT workflow. Harvested yeast cultures were lysed using the Y-PER buffer kit with protease inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined with the BCA assay kit. Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 10 mM DTT (each for 20 min). Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Processing (SP3) was used during protein isolation and digestion. Briefly, 5 μL of each bead type was added to 100 μg of protein in 100 μL total volume. Neat ethanol was added to a final concentration of 50%. The samples were carefully triturated 10 times and held to the magnet for 2 min. After the supernatant was discarded, beads (with bound protein) were washed again twice with 80% ethanol and reconstituted in 100 μL 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). We performed Lys-C digestion overnight at room temperature, which was followed by a 6 h trypsin digestion at 37℃, both at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Following digestion, we added a final volume of 30% acetonitrile to the peptides and labeled 25 μg peptides with 60 μg TMTpro reagent directly into the digestion mixture for 1 h. The reaction was quenched with a final concentration of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio across 18 channels. The pooled, multiplexed samples were desalted using a 100 mg SepPak cartridge, of which 250 μg of  peptide was fractionated via basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC, collected in a 96-well plate, and concatenated into 24 fractions prior to desalting and LC-MS/MS analysis).  Each of the 24 samples was analyzed via LC-FAIMS-MS3.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Comet-based software pipeline. MS raw files were converted to mzXML for processing using Monocle). Database searching included all S. cerevisiae entries from UniProt (UP000002311 with 6,050 entries, downloaded March 2023). Reversed sequences of all proteins were appended to the search database for target-decoy false discovery rate (FDR) determination. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.9 Da product ion tolerance to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously. TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% FDR. Peptide intensities were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, thereby giving greater weight to more intense ions. We required a TMT reporter ion summed signal-to-noise (S/N) of greater than 100.

### Publication Abstract
The GET pathway is associated with post-translational delivery of tail-anchored (TA) proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in yeast, as well as other eukaryotes. Moreover, dysfunction of the GET pathway has been associated with various pathological conditions (i.e., neurodegenerative disorders, cardiovascular ailments, and protein misfolding diseases). In this study, we used yeast deletion strains of Get complex members (specifically, Get1, Get2, Get3, Get4, and Get5) coupled with sample multiplexing-based quantitative mass spectrometry to profile protein abundance on a proteome-wide scale across the five individual deletion strains. Our dataset consists of over 4500 proteins, which corresponds to &gt;75% of the yeast proteome. The data reveal several dozen proteins that are differentially abundant in one or more deletion strains, some of which are membrane-associated, yet the abundance of many TA proteins remained unchanged. This study provides valuable insights into the roles of these Get genes, and the potential for alternative pathways which help maintain cellular function despite the disruption of the GET pathway.

### Keywords
Get pathway, Rts-ms3, Faims, Isobaric tagging, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA


