### Accession
PXD025133

### Title
Paracrine IFN response limits ZIKV infection in human Sertoli cells

### Description
Zika virus (ZIKV) is unique among mosquito-borne flaviviruses in its ability to be sexually transmitted. The testes have been implicated as sites of long-term ZIKV replication, and our previous studies have identified Sertoli cells (SC), the nurse cells of the seminiferous epithelium that govern spermatogenesis, as major targets of ZIKV infection. To improve our understanding of the host-ZIKV interaction within human testicular cells, we analyzed ZIKV-induced proteome changes in SC and mixed seminiferous tubule cells (STC) using high-throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We found that ZIKV infection in SC and STC induced distinct IFN-stimulated proteins and impacted pathways and functional networks associated with innate antiviral defense. IFN signaling was the most significantly enriched pathway and MX1 was the most abundant IFN-stimulated protein in both SC and STC. Increased levels of MX1 at later time points of infection coincided with diminished propagation of ZIKV in SC, whereas silencing of MX1 and IFIT1 enhanced peak ZIKV titers in SC. Furthermore, although downstream IFN-I signaling was found to be functional and restricted ZIKV replication in SC, in comparison to A549 cells, SC exhibited dampened expression of IFN-I/III-stimulated genes despite higher levels of virus progeny and IFN-I/III transcripts. Together, this study highlights the IFN-I/III response as a driver of the antiviral state that limits ZIKV infection in SC and suggests that delayed and reduced robustness of innate antiviral defense in SC may contribute to ZIKV persistence in the testes.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from mock and ZIKV-infected SC and STC grown in 6-well tissue culture plates using mammalian protein extraction reagent (M-PER; Thermo Scientific, 78503) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific, A32963). The protein extracts were centrifuged at 14,000 x g at 4°C for 20 min and the supernatant was then removed and transferred to fresh collection tubes and stored at -80°C until processed for tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-Plex labeling using the iFASP method (46, 47).

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS protein searches were conducted using ProteomeDiscovery 2.1 Sequest HT (Thermo Scientific) and the human (taxID 9606) subset of the SwissProt database. Peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.1% using Posterior Error Probability validation. Only proteins with at least 2 Peptide Spectral Matches (PSM) were considered. Total peptide amount was used for normalization. Mass tolerances were 10 ppm for the MS1 scan and 0.6 Da for all MS/MS scans. Only filtered quantitation results with high-confidence unambiguous PSMs with MS2 isolation interference values of ≤30% were used.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) is unique among mosquito-borne flaviviruses in its ability to be sexually transmitted. The testes have been implicated as sites of long-term ZIKV replication, and our previous studies have identified Sertoli cells (SC), the nurse cells of the seminiferous epithelium that govern spermatogenesis, as major targets of ZIKV infection. To improve our understanding of the interaction of ZIKV with human SC, we analyzed ZIKV-induced proteome changes in these cells using high-throughput liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Our data demonstrated that interferon (IFN) signaling was the most significantly enriched pathway and the antiviral proteins MX1 and IFIT1 were among the top upregulated proteins in SC following ZIKV infection. The dynamic between IFN response and ZIKV infection kinetics in SC remains unclear, therefore we further determined whether MX1 and IFIT1 serve as antiviral effectors against ZIKV. We found that increased levels of MX1 at the later time points of infection coincided with diminished ZIKV infection while the silencing of <i>MX1</i> and <i>IFIT1</i> enhanced peak ZIKV propagation in SC. Furthermore, although IFN-I exposure was found to significantly hinder ZIKV replication in SC, IFN response was attenuated in these cells as compared to other cell types. The data in this study highlight IFN-I as a driver of the antiviral state that limits ZIKV infection in SC and suggests that MX1 and IFIT1 function as antiviral effectors against ZIKV in SC. Collectively, this study provides important biological insights into the response of SC to ZIKV infection and the ability of the virus to persist in the testes.

### Keywords
Interferon, Zika virus, Sartoli cells

### Affiliations
USAMRIID
Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology, and Pharmacology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA

### Submitter
Michael Ward

### Lab Head
Dr Saguna Verma
Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology, and Pharmacology, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI, USA


