### Accession
PXD016326

### Title
LFQP of lysates from wild-type, RAB18-, TBC1D20-, RAB3GAP1- and RAB3GAP2-null RPE1 cells

### Description
These data are from two wild-type RPE1 clones (WT11, WT20), a RAB18-null clone, a TBC1D20-null clone, a RAB3GAP1-null clone and a RAB3GAP2-null clone, each analysed in triplicate.

### Sample Protocol
RPE1 cells were grown to confluence in T75 flasks, then trypsinised, and washed in PBS. Pellets were snap-frozen prior to use. Pellets were in resuspended in 300µl 6M GnHCl, 75mM Tris, pH=8.5. Samples were sonicated for 10 minutes using a Bioruptor device together with protein extraction beads (Diagenode), then heated for 5 minutes at 95⁰C and clarified by centrifugation. Lysates were reduced and alkylated through addition of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) to 5mM and 10mM respectively and then incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. After cooling, samples were diluted to 3M guanidine and 0.5µg lysC added with incubation overnight at 37°C.  A further dilution to 1M guanidine was followed by digest with 0.3µg trypsin at 37°C for 4 hours.  Samples were acidified with TFA. Peptides were loaded on to activated (methanol), equilibrated (0.1% TFA) C18 stage tips before being washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted with 0.1% TFA/80 acetonitrile. The organic was dried off, 0.1% TFA added to 15 uL and 5 uL injected onto LC-MS. Peptides were separated on an Ultimate nano HPLC instrument (Thermo), and analysed on an Orbitrap Lumos instrument (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
After data-dependent acquisition of HCD fragmentation spectra, data were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10 and the uniprot human reference proteome 2018_07\UP000005640_9606.

### Publication Abstract
Loss of functional RAB18 causes the autosomal recessive condition Warburg Micro syndrome. To better understand this disease, we used proximity biotinylation to generate an inventory of potential RAB18 effectors. A restricted set of 28 RAB18 interactions were dependent on the binary RAB3GAP1-RAB3GAP2 RAB18-guanine nucleotide exchange factor complex. Twelve of these 28 interactions are supported by prior reports, and we have directly validated novel interactions with SEC22A, TMCO4, and INPP5B. Consistent with a role for RAB18 in regulating membrane contact sites, interactors included groups of microtubule/membrane-remodeling proteins, membrane-tethering and docking proteins, and lipid-modifying/transporting proteins. Two of the putative interactors, EBP and OSBPL2/ORP2, have sterol substrates. EBP is a &#x394;8-&#x394;7 sterol isomerase, and ORP2 is a lipid transport protein. This prompted us to investigate a role for RAB18 in cholesterol biosynthesis. We found that the cholesterol precursor and EBP-product lathosterol accumulates in both RAB18-null HeLa cells and RAB3GAP1-null fibroblasts derived from an affected individual. Furthermore, de novo cholesterol biosynthesis is impaired in cells in which RAB18 is absent or dysregulated or in which ORP2 expression is disrupted. Our data demonstrate that guanine nucleotide exchange factor-dependent Rab interactions are highly amenable to interrogation by proximity biotinylation and may suggest that Micro syndrome is a cholesterol biosynthesis disorder.

### Keywords
Human, Tbc1d20, Rab3gap2, Rab18, Rpe1, Rab3gap1, Lfqp

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
Leeds Institute of Medical Research (LIMR) St James's University Hospital Leeds LS9 7TF United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mark Handley

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Thomas Handley
Leeds Institute of Medical Research (LIMR) St James's University Hospital Leeds LS9 7TF United Kingdom


