### Accession
PXD001953

### Title
Molecular signatures after challenge with Salmonella Typhi implicate host tryptophan metabolism in the pathogenesis of typhoid fever, part 1

### Description
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell derived human macrophages were stimulated with IFN-y or exposed to viable S. Typhimurium SL1344 using either a gentamicin invasion assay or after over-night priming with IFN-y. Protein abundance changes between samples was determined relative to unstimulated controls using TMT labelling and mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Each cell pellet was lysed in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and SDS buffer with pulsed probe sonication and boiling. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation. Protein concentration was measured with Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay according to manufacturer’s instructions. Aliquots containing 80 μg of total protein were prepared for trypsin digestion. Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of tris-2-carboxymethyl phosphine (TCEP) followed by incubation. Cysteine residues were blocked by the addition of Iodoacetamide (IAA) solution and incubation at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin solution was added at a final concentration 70ng/μL to each sample for overnight digestion. After proteolysis the peptide samples were diluted up to 100μL with TEAB buffer. Anhydrous acetonitrile was added to each TMT 10-plex reagent vial and after vortex mixing the content was transferred to each sample tube. Samples were labelled in biological replicates according to the following scheme: 127_N & 129_N: Unstimulated, 127_C & 129_C: INF-y, 128_N & 130_N: Salmonella, 128_C & 130_C INF-y and Salmonella. Labelling reaction was quenched with 8μL 5% hydroxylamine. Samples were pooled and injected for offline peptide fractionation based on high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography, using the Waters, XBridge C18 column on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with autosampler. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high-resolution LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Each peptide fraction was reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and a volume of 5 μL was loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with a user modified injection method at 10 μL/min flow rate. The sample was then subjected to a multi-step gradient elution on the Acclaim PepMap  RSLC C18 capillary column retrofitted to an electrospray emitter. A 95 minute gradient was used.The five most abundant multiply charged precursors within 380 -1500 m/z were selected with FT mass resolution of 30,000 and isolated for CID and HCD fragmentation sequentially with isolation widths 2 and 1.2 Th respectively. Normalized collision energies were set at 35 for CID and 40 for HCD activation. HCD spectra were acquired with FT resolution of 30,000 and targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 40 seconds with 10 ppm mass tolerance. FT max ion time for full MS experiments was set at 200 ms and FT MSn max ion time was set at 100 ms. The AGC target vales were 3×10e6 for full FTMS and 1×10e5 for MSn FTMS. The DMSO signal at m/z 401.922718 was used as a lock mass.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectra were submitted to SequestHT search engine implemented on the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da for the HCD and 0.5 for the CID spectra. TMT6plex at N-termimus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N,Q. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. All spectra were searched against a UniProt fasta file containing 20,190 Human reviewed entries. The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a custom TMT 10plex Quantification Method with integration window tolerance 20 ppm and integration method the Most Confident Centroid.

### Publication Abstract
Enteric fever, caused by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, is an important public health problem in resource-limited settings and, despite decades of research, human responses to the infection are poorly understood. In 41 healthy adults experimentally infected with wild-type S. Typhi, we detected significant cytokine responses within 12 h of bacterial ingestion. These early responses did not correlate with subsequent clinical disease outcomes and likely indicate initial host-pathogen interactions in the gut mucosa. In participants developing enteric fever after oral infection, marked transcriptional and cytokine responses during acute disease reflected dominant type I/II interferon signatures, which were significantly associated with bacteremia. Using a murine and macrophage infection model, we validated the pivotal role of this response in the expression of proteins of the host tryptophan metabolism during Salmonella infection. Corresponding alterations in tryptophan catabolites with immunomodulatory properties in serum of participants with typhoid fever confirmed the activity of this pathway, and implicate a central role of host tryptophan metabolism in the pathogenesis of typhoid fever.

### Keywords
Human, Salmonella typhi, Tmt, Macrophages, Ips

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


