### Accession
PXD002123

### Title
Pleiotropic effect of Francisella ABC transporter gene inactivation on production of glycoconjugates

### Description
The present study deals with the cross-talk of polysaccharide biosynthesis pathways of a highly infectious intracellular pathogen Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia. We have studied the consequences of disrupting the FTS_1402 gene that lies within the putative polysaccharide locus FTT0789-FTT0800 on production of glycoconjugates and host-pathogen associated properties. Based on the homology to campylobacterial PglK flippase, FTS_1402 was predicted to play a role in glycosylation as a transporter of the nascent glycan across the inner membrane before its addition to target protein. Surprisingly, an inactivation of FTS_1402 gene had a pleiotropic effect upon production of multiple surface glycoconjugates. We show that FTS_1402 encoded protein is required for complete glycosylation but also for biogenesis of other surface exopolysaccharides such as lipopolysaccharide, capsule and/or capsule-like complex. All monitored glycoconjugates had preserved structures but were synthesized in lower amounts when compared to the highly virulent parental strain. Inactivation of FTS_1402 had an unexpectedly marked impact on virulence of the mutant, which however, provided protection against subsequent systemic challenge. With particular respect to protein glycosylation in the mutant and a wild type FSC200 strain, we here provide relevant MS data.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were grown in a Chamberlain´s medium at 37°C until the late logarithmic phase of growth, lysed in a French press cell, and membrane pellet was obtained by ultracentrifugation of the whole-cell lysate. Aceton-precipitated membrane proteins-enriched fractions were dissolved in a 2D-membrane rehydration buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE following IEF in the nonlinear pH range of 3-10. Protein spots were excised from gels, destained with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 40% acetonitrile for 20 min at 30°C, followed by equilibration with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 5% acetonitrile. After vacuum drying, proteins were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion at 37°C for 18 h. The in-gel digests were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled on-line with Q-Exactive mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex; all instruments from Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded onto PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 20-mm trap column with a mobile phase containing 2% acetonitrile, 98% water and 0.05% TFA. The actual peptide separation was achieved using a linear gradient (0.1% FA in water as phase A; 80% acetonitrile, 20% water and 0.1% FA as phase B) from 4 to 36% B in 19 min, and from 36 to 55% of mobile phase B in 6 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min on PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 0.075 × 150-mm analytical column. Column temperature was kept constant at 40ºC and the separation was monitored by UV absorbance at 214 nm. To minimize carryover, the sample loading path was cleaned by injection of trifluoroethanol39 and by loading pump mobile phase B washes within the running separation gradient. The cytochrome c digest standard was run before each injection of in-gel digest. The full MS/Top10 data dependent acquisition was used for identification of peptides and glycopeptides. Positive ion full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-2000) were acquired on a 3×106 target ion population in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z 200). Precursors ions with charge state ≥ 2, minimal threshold intensity of 5×104 counts and not fragmented during previous 7s were admitted for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Tandem mass spectra were acquired at resolution of 17500 and with other parameters set to; 1×105 for AGC target value, 100 ms for maximum ion injection time, 27 for normalized collision energy, and m/z 120 for fixed first mass, to allow detection of diagnostic glycan oxonium ions. Data acquisition was under control of Xcalibur software v3.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteome discoverer v1.4.1.14 (Thermo) was used to create the peak lists from the acquired RAW data. No filters were applied for data reduction. Peak lists were searched against F. tularensis subsp. holarctica (FSC200) protein sequences database (NC_019551.1; 1,423 sequences; 441, 592 residues, released 2012/09/28) with addition of possible contaminations (increasing number of sequences to 1,673 in total) using the MASCOT search engine (v2.4, Matrix Science) with the following searching criteria: trypsin was used as the enzyme, 2 missed cleavages were allowed, 2+ and 3+ charge-state ions were considered; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was selected as a variable modification. The mass tolerance of the precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Obtained data were further filtered, accepting only those peptides with a peptide score higher than 30 and peptides containing more than seven amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Francisella tularensis, an intracellular pathogen causing the disease tularemia, utilizes surface glycoconjugates such as lipopolysaccharide, capsule, and capsule-like complex for its protection against inhospitable conditions of the environment. Francisella species also possess a functional glycosylation apparatus by which specific proteins are O-glycosidically modified. We here created a mutant with a nonfunctional FTS_1402 gene encoding for a putative glycan flippase and studied the consequences of its disruption. The mutant strain expressed diminished glycosylation similarly to, but to a lesser extent than, that of the oligosaccharyltransferase-deficient &#x394;pglA mutant. In contrast to &#x394;pglA, inactivation of FTS_1402 had a pleiotropic effect, leading to alteration in glycosylation and, importantly, to decrease in lipopolysaccharide, capsule, and/or capsule-like complex production, which were reflected by distinct phenotypes in host-pathogen associated properties and virulence potential of the two mutant strains. Disruption of FTS_1402 resulted in enhanced sensitivity to complement-mediated lysis and reduced virulence in mice that was independent of diminished glycosylation. Importantly, the mutant strain induced a protective immune response against systemic challenge with homologous wild-type FSC200 strain. Targeted disruption of genes shared by multiple metabolic pathways may be considered a novel strategy for constructing effective live, attenuated vaccines.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Francisella, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Defence
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences University of Defence Trebesska 1575 500 01 Hradec Kralove Czech Republic

### Submitter
Lucie Balonova

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Stulik
Department of Molecular Pathology and Biology Faculty of Military Health Sciences University of Defence Trebesska 1575 500 01 Hradec Kralove Czech Republic


