### Accession
PXD020864

### Title
Proteomics analysis of 80S ribosomes in nine mouse tissues and different developmental stages of testes

### Description
Mass spectrometry data of 80S ribosomes in nine mouse tissues and different developmental stages of testes

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 80S monosomes from 9 adult mouse tissues, including testis, fat, brain, liver, kidney, lung, skeletal muscle, heart and spleen, and 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-week postnatal mouse testes using urea lysis buffer, digested with trypsin and subsequently quenched by trifluoroacetic acid. The digested peptides were desalted by tC18 Sep-Pak column. For MS analyses, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1200. A trap column (75μm×2cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an analytical column (75μm×25cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300nl/min was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database by MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5). False discovery rates (FDR) cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites. Searches were performed using Trypsin/P enzyme specificity while allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215Da) were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N termini. And iBAQ was used in label-free quantifiation.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes are highly sophisticated translation machines that have been demonstrated to be heterogeneous in the regulation of protein synthesis<sup>1,2</sup>. Male germ cell development involves complex translational regulation during sperm formation<sup>3</sup>. However, it remains unclear whether translation during sperm formation is performed by a specific ribosome. Here we report a ribosome with a specialized nascent polypeptide exit tunnel, Ribosome<sup>ST</sup>, that is assembled with the male germ-cell-specific protein RPL39L, the paralogue of core ribosome (Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>) protein RPL39. Deletion of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> in mice causes defective sperm formation, resulting in substantially reduced fertility. Our comparison of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy structures of ribosomes from mouse kidneys and testes indicates that Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> features a ribosomal polypeptide exit tunnel of distinct size and charge states compared with Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> predominantly cotranslationally regulates the folding of a subset of male germ-cell-specific proteins that are essential for the formation of sperm. Moreover, we found that specialized functions of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> were not replaceable by Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Taken together, identification of this sperm-specific ribosome should greatly expand our understanding of ribosome function and tissue-specific regulation of protein expression pattern in mammals.

### Keywords
Mouse, Ribosomes

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China

### Submitter
Xuejiang Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China


