### Accession
PXD008354

### Title
The Proteomic Landscape in the Vitreous of Patients With Age-Related and Diabetic Retinal Disease

### Description
In contrast to neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD), no treatment option exists for dry AMD. The identification of specific biomarkers is required to facilitate diagnosis and therapy of dry AMD. We thus measured the proteome of 34 vitreous humor samples (dry AMD: n = 6, nAMD: n = 10, PDR: n = 9, ERM: n = 9). Samples were immunodepleted for high abundant blood proteins and analyzed by LC-MS/MS with a shotgun approach. Data from dry AMD, nAMD and PDR were compared to the ERM patient group, which was used as reference group. A bioinformatic pipeline was used for label-free relative quantification of proteins and to perform cluster analysis, gene ontology classification and gene set enrichment analysis. A selection of differentially regulated proteins was validated by ELISA.  A total of 677 proteins were identified and relatively quantified in the four patient groups. Different clusters of regulated proteins for each patient group were identified and showed characteristic enrichment of specific pathways, like ‘oxidative stress’ for dry AMD, ‘focal adhesion’ for nAMD and ‘complement and coagulation cascade’ for PDR patients. We’ve identified CHLE to be specifically upregulated in dry AMD and RNAS1 together with CPVL to be upregulated in both forms of AMD. The description of pathways specific for the different patient groups and the identification of differentially regulated proteins provide a first step towards the definition of biomarkers for dry AMD. To validate these data and to unravel the mechanistic connection of identified proteins to dry AMD, larger patient cohorts need to be investigated.

### Sample Protocol
VH patient sample collection  The study was approved by the ethics committee of Zurich, Switzerland and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. 38 patients affected by either dry AMD, nAMD, PDR or ERM were enrolled to this non-interventional, single-centered study at the Department of Ophthalmology of the University Hospital Zurich. All study subjects were recruited among patients who were scheduled for elective cataract surgery or vitrectomy. Signed informed consent was obtained from each subject prior to participation.  Sample preparation and mass spectrometry VH samples were subjected to Agilent’s Plasma 7 Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge system (MARS Hu-7; Agilent Technologies; Basel; Switzerland) for the depletion of the seven high abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, and fibrinogen) according to the adapted depletion protocol by Murthy et al.2 Depleted flow through was pooled, desalted and concentrated to a final volume of 100 µL by 3 kDa Nominal Molecular Weight Limit (NMWL) low-adsorption filter membranes (Amicon Ultra-4; Merck Millipore; Schaffhausen; Switzerland). Protein concentration was determined by a Qubit fluorometric protein assay (Life Technologies; Zug; Switzerland). 5 µg protein was subjected to filter assisted sample preparation (FASP)-digest adapted from Wiśniewski et al.3 with a subsequent desalting step by C18 solid phase extraction columns (Sep-Pak Fenisterre; Waters Corp.; Milford; MA; U.S.A.). Desalted tryptic peptides were lyophilized and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Shot-gun proteomics analysis was performed on a high-resolution Fourier transformation mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nano-HPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a self-packed reverse-phase column (75 µm × 10 cm) with C18 beads (AQ, 3 µm, 200 Å; Bischoff GmbH, Leonberg, Germany). The HPLC system was operated at a flow rate of 200 nL × min-1. The column was equilibrated with 97 % solvent A (1 % ACN, 0.2 % FA in water), and 3 % solvent B (80 % ACN, 0.2 % FA in water). Peptides were eluted using the following gradient: 0–5 min, 3–15% B; 5–55 min, 15–50% B; 55–60 min, 50–97% B at a flow rate of 200 nL × min-1. Electrospray source was fitted with a 10 µm emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA, U.S.A.) and an electric potential of 2.2 kV was applied. High accuracy mass spectra were acquired in the mass range of 300–1,500 m/z and a target value of 4 × 105 ions in Orbitrap MS1, followed by top-speed MS2 via quadrupole isolation, higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation and detection in the ion trap. Target ions already selected for MS2 were dynamically excluded for 25 s. General MS conditions were: normalized collision energy, 30%; ion selection threshold, 2000 counts; activation, 0.25; and activation time, 300 ms for MS2 acquisitions.

### Data Protocol
ProgenesisQI for proteomics software (v3.0.5995, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Tyne, UK) was used for MS1 intensity based label-free relative quantification by direct import of ‘Thermo.raw’ files. The feature maps of all samples were aligned to the measurement of a representative pool of 4 samples per patient group. Peptides with a charge state of 2+ to 5+ were used for quantification. From each Progenesis peptide ion the top five tandem mass spectra were exported using charge deconvolution and deisotoping option at a maximum number of 200 peaks per MS2. The Mascot generic file (.mgf) was searched with Mascot Server v. 2.5.1 (www.matrixscience.com; Matrix Science; London; U.K) using the following search parameters:maximum missed cleavages: 2; peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm (# 13C = 1); and fragment ion tolerance: 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cystein was specified as fixed, whereas oxidation on Methionine and acetylation at protein N-terminus were specified as variable modifications. Searches were performed against the human protein database (Taxonomy ID: 9606) from UniProt (59’783 entries; downloaded at: 02.09.2016) concatenated to a decoy (reversed) database and 260 known mass spectrometry contaminants. A target-decoy approach was used to estimated the false-discovery levels.4 Peptide and protein assignments were filtered for peptide identification with maximally 5 % FDR and protein identification with less than 10 % protein FDR by Scaffold (Vers. 4.8.3; Proteome Software; Portland, Oregon, USA). The Scaffold spectrum report was exported and loaded into ProgenesisQI. Decoy hits and proteins with single peptide assignment were excluded from further analysis. For protein quantification the normalized abundance of all non-conflicting peptide ions of the same protein group were summed together individually for each sample to generate the normalized quantitative protein abundance. Dry AND, nAMD and PDR patient groups were relatively quantified to the ERM patient group. Fold changes (FC) were calculated and statistical significance was determined by parametric t-test (ANOVA) on the hyperbolic arcsine transformed normalized protein abundance. A protein was defined to be significantly differentially regulated if it reached a |log2(FC)| > 0.58 with a p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Vitreous humor, Erm, Biomarker, Neovascular amd, Epiretinal membrane, Vitreous proteome, Proliferative diabetic retinopathy, Age-related macular degeneration, Dry amd, Namd, Pdr

### Affiliations
Lab for Retinal Cell Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Zürich, Wagistrasse 14, Schlieren, CH 8952, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Christian Schori

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Grimm
Lab for Retinal Cell Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Zürich, Wagistrasse 14, Schlieren, CH 8952, Switzerland


