### Accession
PXD023790

### Title
HAX1 controls mitochondrial proteostasis

### Description
The relevance of mitochondrial proteostasis for the differentiation and function of hematopoietic and immune cells is unknown. Dissecting the HCLS1-associated protein X-1 (HAX1) –related protein network, we define a functional CLPB-HAX1-PRKD2-HSP27 axis with critical importance for the differentiation of neutrophil granulocytes and thus elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying congenital neutropenia in patients with mutations in HAX1 and CLPB. As shown by SILAC proteomics, CLPB and HAX1 control the balance of protein synthesis and persistence in mitochondria, leading to dysfunction of the respiratory complex 1. Impaired mitochondrial proteostasis is associated with decreased abundance of the serine-threonine kinase PRKD2 and Ser82-phosphorylated HSP27. Cellular defects in HAX1-/- cells can be functionally reconstituted by HSP27. Thus, mitochondrial proteostasis emerges as a critical mechanism governing the differentiation and function of neutrophil granulocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 media lacking two amino acids (lysine and arginine) (RPMI 1640 media for SILAC, Life technologies) with dialyzed FBS. The medium was supplemented with either “light” standard unlabelled Lysine and Arginine or “medium” isotope labelled 13C4 - Lysine (Lys4) and 13C6 - Arginine (Arg6) (Silantes, Munich, Germany). Cells were cultured for more than 10 passages in SILAC medium and their incorporation of “medium” amino acids was confirmed by MS analysis. For the pulse experiment with heavy SILAC amino acids, cells cultured in “medium” amino acids were washed and incubated with “heavy”-isotope labelled 13C615N2 - Lysine (Lys8) and 13C6 15N4 - Arginine (Arg10) (Silantes) for 24 hours (see Figure 3A). At time 0, 6 hours and 24 hours, pulsed cells were collected and counted using cell counting chamber. 2 × 106 PLB-985 cells of “heavy”-pulsed cells were mixed with the same number of cells cultured in “light” medium (FM Boisvert et al., 2011). 1 × 106 “heavy”-pulsed+ “light” cells were washed with PBS and pelleted at 1200 rpm for 3 minutes and snap-frozen. 3 × 106 “heavy”-pulsed+ “light” cells were further processed for the isolation of mitochondria (see above) which were subsequently snap-frozen. Data were obtained in three independent cell clones per genotype in two entirely independent biological replicates corresponding to two rounds of SILAC labeling. Eluted peptides (0.5 μg/sample) were separated on a reverse phase 50-cm column with 75-μm inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.8-μm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) kept at 60°C by a column oven (Sonation, Biberach, germany) controlled by the SprayQC software (Scheltema and Mann, 2012). Liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid), applying a 100 minutes nonlinear gradient of 5%–98% buffer B (0.1% [v/v] formic acid and 80% [v/v] acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 350 nL/minute. Data acquisition switched between a full scan and 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.13) was used for the analysis of raw files (Cox and Mann 2008). Peak lists were searched against the human UniProt FASTA database version of 2018 (21042 protein entries) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al 2011). False discovery rate was set to 1% for peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins and was determined by searching a reverse database. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 10 ppm. The “Match between runs” option in MaxQuant was activated.

### Publication Abstract
The relevance of molecular mechanisms governing mitochondrial proteostasis to the differentiation and function of hematopoietic and immune cells is largely elusive. Through dissection of the network of proteins related to HCLS1-associated protein X-1, we defined a potentially novel functional CLPB/HAX1/(PRKD2)/HSP27 axis with critical importance for the differentiation of neutrophil granulocytes and, thus, elucidated molecular and metabolic mechanisms underlying congenital neutropenia in patients with HAX1 deficiency as well as bi- and monoallelic mutations in CLPB. As shown by stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) proteomics, CLPB and HAX1 control the balance of mitochondrial protein synthesis and persistence crucial for proper mitochondrial function. Impaired mitochondrial protein dynamics are associated with decreased abundance of the serine-threonine kinase PRKD2 and HSP27 phosphorylated on serines 78 and 82. Cellular defects in HAX1-/- cells can be functionally reconstituted by HSP27. Thus, mitochondrial proteostasis emerges as a critical molecular and metabolic mechanism governing the differentiation and function of neutrophil granulocytes.

### Keywords
Hematopoiesis, Severe congenital neutropenia, Protein quality control, Inborn errors of immunity

### Affiliations
MPI Biochemistry
Department of Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner Children’s Hospital and Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Marta Murgia

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Klein
Department of Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner Children’s Hospital and Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany


