### Accession
PXD007669

### Title
Non-canonical circadian oscillations in Drosophila S2 cells

### Description
Circadian rhythms are cell-autonomous biological oscillations with a period of about 24 hours. Current models propose that transcriptional feedback loops are the principal mechanism for the generation of circadian oscillations. In these models, Drosophila S2 cells are generally regarded as ‘non-rhythmic’ cells, as they do not express several canonical circadian components. Using an unbiased multi-omics approach, we made the surprising discovery that Drosophila S2 cells do in fact display widespread daily rhythms. Transcriptomics and proteomics analyses revealed that hundreds of genes and their products are rhythmically expressed in a 24-hour cycle. Metabolomics analyses extended these findings and illustrated that central carbon metabolism and amino acid metabolism are the main pathways regulated in a rhythmic fashion. We thus demonstrate that daily genome-wide oscillations, coupled to metabolic cycles, take place in eukaryotic cells without the contribution of known circadian regulators.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were spun down and the pellets were flash-frozen and stored at -80oC until protein extraction. To extract protein, pellets were lysed on ice with 500 μL of Lysis Buffer (100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 10 mM diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA),1/100 Halt protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Cells were vortexed and incubated for 30 min on ice. Samples were sonicated using a Bioruptor Standard (Diagenode) for 5 min (30 s On, 30 s Off) on medium power. Samples were spun at max speed at 4oC for 10min to remove debris and transferred to fresh tubes. BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to quantify protein levels for tandem-mass tag (TMT) labelling (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT labelling was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. 200 μg per condition was transferred into a new tube and the volume was adjusted to 200 μL with 100 mM TEAB. 10 μL of 200 mM TCEP was added to each sample to reduce cysteine residues and samples were incubated at 55°C for 1 h. To alkylate cysteines, 10 μL of 375 mM iodoacetamide was added to each sample and samples were incubated for 30 min protected from light at room temperature. Samples were split in two and acetone precipitation was performed by adding 6 volumes (~600 μL) of pre-chilled (-20°C) acetone. The precipitation was allowed to proceed overnight at -20°C. The samples were centrifuged at 8000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, before decanting the acetone. Acetone-precipitated (or lyophilized) protein pellets were resuspended with 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB. 2.5 μg of trypsin per 100 μg of protein was added to the proteins for proteolytic digestion. Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C to complete the digestion. TMT Label Reagents were resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile and 0.4 mg of each label was added to the corresponding peptide sample. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 h at room temperature. 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added to each sample and incubated for 15 min to quench the labelling reaction. Samples were combined in a new microcentrifuge tube at equal amounts and store at -80°C until mass spectrometry analyses.  TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were subjected to HpRP-HPLC fractionation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 powered by an ICS-3000 SP pump with an Agilent ZORBAX Extend-C18 column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm particle size). Mobile phases (H20, 0.1% NH4OH or MeCN, 0.1% NH4OH) were adjusted to pH10.5 with the addition of formic acid and peptides were resolved using a linear 40 min 0.1–40 % MeCN gradient over 40 min at a 400 μL/min flow rate and a column temperature of 15°C. Eluting peptides were collected in 15 s fractions. 120 fractions covering the peptide-rich region were re-combined to give 12 samples for analysis. To preserve orthogonality, fractions were combined across the gradient. Re-combined fractions were dried down using an Eppendorf Concentrator (Eppendorf, UK) and resuspended in 15 μL MS solvent (3% MeCN, 0.1% TFA). Data for TMT labelled samples were generated using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated using an RSLCnano 3000 (Thermo Scientific) with solvent A comprising 0.1% formic acid and solvent B comprising 80% MeCN, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto a 75 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific) and eluted using a gradient rising from 7 to 37 % solvent B by 180 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 fwhm between 380–1500 m/z. Spectra were acquired in profile with AGC 2 × 105. Ions with a charge state between 2+ and 7+ were isolated for fragmentation using the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window. CID fragmentation was performed at 35% collision energy with fragments detected in the ion trap between 400–1200 m/z. AGC was set to 1 × 104 and MS2 spectra were acquired in centroid mode. TMT reporter ions were isolated for quantitation in MS3 using synchronous precursor selection. Ten fragment ions were selected for MS3 using HCD at 65% collision energy. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap at 60,000 fwhm between 120–500 m/z with AGC set to 1 × 105. MS3 spectra were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008) was used to process the raw TMT proteomics data using the following parameters: Fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation, FDR for protein and peptide identification = 0.01, sequence database=UniprotKB proteome for Drosophila melanogaster (downloaded on 13 January 2017), variable modifications= oxidation of methionine, protein N- terminal acetylation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tmt, Circadian, Clock

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute, London

### Submitter
Guillaume Rey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh B. Reddy
The Francis Crick Institute, London


