### Accession
PXD013683

### Title
Identification of histone adducts with glycidamide

### Description
Identification of protein covalent modifications (adducts) is a challenging task mainly due to the lack of data processing approaches for Adductomics studies. We report a novel strategy to identify covalently modified peptides that consists on LC-MS data preprocessing followed by statistical analysis. This strategy was compared with the standard methodology of adductomics, which relies on producing comprehensive MS/MS data by data dependent acquisition and analysis with proteomics data search engines (Mascot, Global Proteome Machine interface (GPM Fury) that uses X!Tandem, MaxQuant  and MSFragger).

### Sample Protocol
Two liver cell lines were used in this study: the non-tumorigenic cell line THLE-2 and the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2. Cells were incubated with glycidamide at 0.1, 1 and 5 mM for 16 hours. For each experiment, two control conditions were applied: control medium or DMSO 0.1 % (v/v).  Nuclear histones were isolated and then digested with trypsin. The peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with a Bruker Impact II quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer equipped with a CaptiveSpray (nanospray) source (Bruker Daltoniks, Bremen, Germany). Chromatographic separation was performed on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 µm x 150 mm, 3 µm particle size; Thermo Scientific).  Data were acquired in positive mode from m/z 100 to 2200 at an acquisition rate of 5 spectra/sec, using a data-dependent auto-MS/MS method to select the 10 most abundant precursor ions per cycle for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
a) LC-MS data preprocessing followed by statistical analysis LC-MS data was preprocessed with the open-source software MZmine and consisted of peak detection, removal of isotopes, correction of retention time, peak matching and peak filling. Peak detection was performed in three steps: i) mass detection with noise value = 20,000 and retention time range = 17-48 minutes; ii) chromatogram builder with minimum time span = 0.2 minutes, minimum height = 20,000 and m/z tolerance = 0.005 Da or 15 ppm; iii) deconvolution with peak width = 0.2 – 1.5 minutes, noise = 20,000. Isotopes were removed using the isotopic peak grouper with m/z tolerance = 0.005 Da or 10 ppm, retention time tolerance = 3.5 min and minimum standard intensity = 20,000. Then, a filter was applied to keep only those ions with at least 2 peaks in their isotope pattern. Retention time was corrected with m/z tolerance = 0.005 Da or 10 ppm, retention time tolerance = 3.5 minutes and minimum standard intensity = 20,000. Peak matching among samples was performed using the RANSAC aligner with m/z tolerance = 0.005 Da or 10 ppm, retention time tolerance before and after correction = 3.5 and 2 minutes respectively, RANSAC iterations = 0, minimum number of points = 40%, threshold value = 3.5 and required same charge state. Gap filling was applied using the method peak finder with retention time correction with intensity tolerance = 40%, m/z tolerance = 0.005 Da or 10 ppm, retention time tolerance = 1 minute. The resulting list was split by ion charge (+2, +3 and +4). Potential adducts were searched for each ion charge list using the adduct search tool of MZmine knowing the mass increment of 87.0320 between the non-modified peptide and the glycidamide-modified peptide (m/z tolerance = 0.005 Da or 10 ppm, maximum relative adduct peak height = 70%). A final filter was applied to keep only those potential adducts identified in at least half of the samples exposed to the highest dose of glycidamide in each cell line. Data was centered and unit variance scaled before statistical analysis. Multivariate analysis was performed using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Partial Least Square (PLS) Analysis with SIMCA software package version 14.1 (MKS Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden). b) MS/MS data processing by proteomics search engines The acquired MS data files of the samples exposed to the highest concentration of glycidamide were converted to *.mgf format using the Compass DataAnalysis software (Bruker Daltonics). Four distinct search engines were used for peptide identification: Mascot (v2.6, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK), the Global Proteome Machine interface (GPM Fury) that uses X!tandem, MaxQuant and MSFragger. Search parameters were the same for all four methods and included precursor ion mass tolerance = 15 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance = 30-40 ppm, number of missed-cleavages ≤ 3 and variable amino acid modifications = oxidation of methionine and glycidamide incorporation (mass increment of 87.0320 Da) at the most nucleophilic amino acids, namely lysines, cysteines, serines, histidines and arginines. The acquired MS/MS spectra was searched against an in-house compiled human histones database. All human histones sequences were obtained from Uniprot. Lastly, only in the case of MSFragger, the generated pepXML files were processed by Peptide Prophet via the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v5.1.0)  with the following settings: use accurate mass binding using PPM, use a non-parametric model and report decoy hits. Several filters were applied to each search engine. For Mascot and X!Tandem, the significance threshold was set to p < 0.05. Besides, in Mascot, only peptides identified with Mascot Ion Score > 13 were considered. For MaxQuant, the minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. For MSFragger, the list of peptides obtained after running the Peptide Prophet, was filtered with a peptide probability > 0.9. Besides, only those peptides containing glycidamide in at least half of the samples exposed to the highest dose of glycidamide in each cell line were considered. All spectra corresponding to glycidamide-modified peptides were manually checked.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of protein covalent modifications (adducts) is a challenging task mainly due to the lack of data processing approaches for adductomics studies. Despite the huge technological advances in mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation and bioinformatics tools for proteomics studies, these methodologies have very limited success on the identification of low abundant protein adducts. Herein we report a novel strategy inspired on the metabolomics workflows for the identification of covalently-modified peptides that consists on LC-MS data preprocessing followed by statistical analysis. The usefulness of this strategy was evaluated using experimental LC-MS data of histones isolated from HepG2 and THLE2 cells exposed to the chemical carcinogen glycidamide. LC-MS data was preprocessed using the open-source software MZmine and potential adducts were selected based on the <i>m/z</i> increments corresponding to glycidamide incorporation. Then, statistical analysis was applied to reveal the potential adducts as those ions are differently present in cells exposed and not exposed to glycidamide. The results were compared with the ones obtained upon the standard proteomics methodology, which relies on producing comprehensive MS/MS data by data dependent acquisition and analysis with proteomics data search engines. Our novel strategy was able to differentiate HepG2 and THLE2 and to identify adducts that were not detected by the standard methodology of adductomics. Thus, this metabolomics driven approach in adductomics will not only open new opportunities for the identification of protein epigenetic modifications, but also adducts formed by endogenous and exogenous exposure to chemical agents.

### Keywords
Adductomics, Glycidamide, Histones, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Centro de Química Estrutural, Instituto Superior Técnico, ULisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
CQE, IST

### Submitter
Judit Morello

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra MM Antunes
Centro de Química Estrutural, Instituto Superior Técnico, ULisboa, Lisboa, Portugal


