### Accession
PXD023553

### Title
Discovery and evaluation of protein biomarkers as a signature of wellness in late stage cancer patients in early phase clinical trials

### Description
TARGET (Tumour characterisation to Guide Experimental Targeted therapy) seeks to optimise the pathway for molecular characterisation of all patients entering early phase cancer trials to inform clinical decision-making on optimal therapy. Performance status (PS) was developed to assess a patient’s ability to perform a variety of activities to further inform clinical decision making on optimal therapy including appropriate inclusion in clinical trials. However, the quality of present algorithms to assess performance status are limited and based on a semi-quantitative clinician assessment. In particular, a common eligibility criterion for entry into early phase cancer clinical trials is a life expectancy of >3 or 6 months. Here we investigate proteomics as a means of more objective and quantitative assessment of both performance status and thus likely prognosis prior to clinical trial enrolment. Improved patient stratification at enrolment would reduce the number of patients unnecessarily exposed to potentially toxic drugs and decrease withdrawal from trials. Plasma samples from patients enrolled into the TARGET trial were analysed using the mass spectrometry (MS) technique: Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra (SWATH) MS. SWATH-MS was used on a discovery cohort of 73 patients to identify proteins that could differentiate patients into either a good or poor prognosis. A three-protein panel showed a stronger prediction of overall survival (p = 0.000086) compared to PS (p = 0.001). This panel was then tested against a validation cohort of 77 patients. The panel was determined as being a significant (p = 0.000451) predictor of overall survival whereas PS was not significant. The panel had a receiver operating characteristic curve area under the curve (AUC) of 0.73 in the validation set; the AUC of PS was 0.54. This signature can now be developed further in larger patient populations to assess its utility in a clinical setting.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were depleted of the top 12 most abundant proteins using the commercially available Top-12 kits (Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s methods. The resultant solution was assayed for the protein amount using a Bradford reagent (Bio-Rad, Watford, UK). Solution containing 40μg worth of protein was taken and processed further. Samples were reduced using 60 mM TCEP at 60⁰C for 60 minutes followed by alkylation using 10mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. Digestion was performed using trypsin (Promega, Southampton, UK) overnight at 37⁰C in a 10:1 ratio of protein to enzyme. Digested peptides were cleaned using a SepPak (Waters, Wilmslow, UK) 96 well plate SPE system.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data files were converted using wiffconverter (Sciex, Warrington, UK) to mzML format prior to search using openSWATH (Version 2.0.0) against a human plasma spectral library. openSWATH results files were processed using pyProphet before being aligned using MSproteomicstools.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swath-ms, Survival, Prognostic, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Stoller biomarker discovery centre, University of Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Bethany Geary

### Lab Head
Dr Bethany Geary
Stoller biomarker discovery centre, University of Manchester, UK


