### Accession
PXD015066

### Title
The leaves of creeping bentgrass (Agrostis stolonifera) LC−ESI−MS/MS

### Description
The global emergence of soil salinization poses a serious challenge to many countries and regions. γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is involved in systemic regulation of plant adaptation to salt stress, but the underling molecular and metabolic mechanism still remains largely unknown. The elevated endogenous GABA level by exogenous application of GABA could significantly improve salt tolerance in creeping bentgrass with the enhancement of antioxidant capacity, photosynthetic characteristics, osmotic adjustment (OA), and water use efficiency. GABA strongly upregulated transcript levels of AsPPa2, AsATPaB2, AsNHX2/4/6, and AsSOS1/20 in roots involved in enhanced capacity of Na+ compartmentalization and mitigation of Na+ toxicity in cytosol. Significant downregulation of AsHKT1/4 expression could be induced by GABA in leaves in relation to maintenance of significantly lower Na+ accumulation and higher K+/Na+ ratio. GABA-depressed aquaporins (AQPs) expression and accumulation induced declines in stomatal conductance and transpiration, thereby reducing water loss in leaves during salt stress. For metabolic regulation, GABA primarily enhanced sugars and amino acids accumulation and metabolism largely contributing to improved salt tolerance through maintaining OA and metabolic homeostasis. Other major pathways could be responsible for GABA-induced salt tolerance including increases in antioxidant defense, heat shock proteins, dehydrins, and myo-inositol accumulation in leaves. Integrative analyses of molecular, protein, metabolic, and physiological changes reveal systemic function of GABA on regulating ions, water, and metabolic homeostasis in non-halophytic creeping bentgrass under salt stress.

### Sample Protocol
Creeping bentgrass (cv. Penncross) seeds geminated in a pot (25 cm length, 15 cm width, and 10 cm height) filled with sterilized quartz sand and distilled water in growth chambers at 21/19°C (day/night) with 65% relative humidity and 750 μmol·m-2·s-1 PAR. After 1 days of germination, plants were irrigated with Hoagland’s solution (26) for another 20 days. Thirty-day-old plants were pretreated with or without 0.5 mM GABA solution (GABA was dissolved in Hoagland’s solution) for 3 days. GABA-treated and untreated plants were well cultivated with Hoagland’s solution or were subjected to salt stress (NaCl was dissolved in Hoagland’s solution) in the growth chamber for 24 days. During 24 days of salt stress, GABA-treated and untreated plants were cultivated in 150 mM NaCl solution for 3 days, and in 200 mM NaCl for another 3 days, and then in 250 mM NaCl for the rest of 18 days. Hoagland’s and salt solution were refreshed every day to avoid the change of solution concentration and aerated using aeration pumps (115 V, 60 Hz, Tetra® Blacksburg, VA). The effective concentration of GABA has been chosen in our previous study (27). Six biologic replicates (six containers) for each treatment was completely arranged in growth chambers. The second leaf of each plant was collected for analysis of all parameters. For metabolomics analysis, six independent biological replicates of each treatment were used. Three independent biological replicates of each treatment were used for proteomics analysis. Four independent biological replicates of each treatment were used for the analysis of the rest of all parameters.

### Data Protocol
The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were subjected to a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) for SCX fractionation in an Ultremex SCX column (4.6 × 250 mm) containing 5 μm particles prior to LC-ESI-MS analysis. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, and desalted with a Strata X C18 column and then vacuum-dried. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20000 rpm for 10 min. 10 μL supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with a C18 column trap column (2 cm) and then was eluted onto an analytical C18 column (10 cm, inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house for 4 min at 8 μL·min-1, and then the samples were run for 35 min gradient at 300 nL·min-1 from 2% to 35% B (95%ACN, 0.1%FA), 5 min linear gradient to 60%, 2 min linear gradient to 80%, and then maintenance at 80% B for 4 min, return to 5% in 1 min at last. A Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) was used (the accuracy of both first and second mass less than 2 ppm) and parameters were set as follows: the ion spray voltage, curtain gas, nebulizer gas, and the interface temperature was 2.5 kV, 30 psi, 15 psi, 150 °C, respectively; the MS survey scan was set to a ≥30000 resolution from 350 to 1600 mass range; only first 30 product ion (precursors) were collected if these precursors with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state exceed a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s); the cycle time was 3.3 s. Q2 transmission window was set to 100 Da with 100% efficiency (a pulser frequency value was 11 kHz and monitoring frequency of detector was 40 GHz). Fragmentation was conducted by higher-energy collision dissociation with a 17500 resolution. A normalized collision energy was set at 35±5 eV, and dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (15 s) and no more than twice for the fragmentation of same ion.

### Publication Abstract
The global emergence of soil salinization poses a serious challenge to many countries and regions. &#x3b3;-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is involved in systemic regulation of plant adaptation to salt stress but the underlying molecular and metabolic mechanism still remains largely unknown. The elevated endogenous GABA level by the application of exogenous GABA improved salt tolerance associated with the enhancement of antioxidant capacity, photosynthetic characteristics, osmotic adjustment (OA), and water use efficiency in creeping bentgrass. GABA strongly upregulated transcript levels of <i>AsPPa2</i>, <i>AsATPaB2</i>, <i>AsNHX2/4/6</i>, and <i>AsSOS1/20</i> in roots involved in enhanced capacity of Na<sup>+</sup> compartmentalization and mitigation of Na<sup>+</sup> toxicity in the cytosol. Significant downregulation of <i>AsHKT1/4</i> expression could be induced by GABA in leaves in relation to maintenance of the significantly lower Na<sup>+</sup> content and higher K<sup>+</sup>/Na<sup>+</sup> ratio. GABA-depressed aquaporin expression and accumulation induced declines in stomatal conductance and transpiration, thereby reducing water loss in leaves during salt stress. For metabolic regulation, GABA primarily enhanced sugar and amino acid accumulation and metabolism, largely contributing to improved salt tolerance through maintaining OA and metabolic homeostasis. Other major pathways could be related to GABA-induced salt tolerance including increases in antioxidant defense, heat shock proteins, and myo-inositol accumulation in leaves. Integrative analyses of molecular, protein, metabolic, and physiological changes reveal systemic functions of GABA in regulating ionic, water, and metabolic homeostasis in nonhalophytic creeping bentgrass under salt stress.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Bentgrass, Proteomics, Lc−esi−ms/ms

### Affiliations
Sichuan Agricultural University

### Submitter
Zhou Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Peng
Sichuan Agricultural University


