### Accession
PXD043709

### Title
Chemical acetylation of ligands and two-step digestion protocol for reducing co-digestion in affinity purification-mass spectrometry

### Description
We present an effective, fast and user-friendly method to reduce co-digestion of bead-bound ligands, such as antibodies or streptavidin, in affinity purification-mass spectrometry experiments. A short pre-incubation of beads with Sulfo-NHS-Acetate leads to chemical acetylation of lysine residues, making ligands insusceptible to Lys-C-mediated proteolysis. In contrast to similar approaches, our procedure offers the advantage of exclusively using non-toxic chemicals and employing mild chemical reaction conditions. After binding of bait proteins to Sulfo-NHS-Acetate treated beads, we employ a two-step digestion protocol with the sequential use of Lys-C protease for on-bead digestion followed by in-solution digestion of the released proteins with trypsin. The implementation of this protocol results in a strong reduction of contaminating ligand peptides, which allows significantly higher amounts of sample to be subjected to LC-MS analysis, improving sensitivity and quantitative accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cell extract preparation and immunoprecipitation: Cells were harvested by filtration and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen cells were pulverized in a cryogenic grinder. Freezer milled yeast powder was resuspended in RLB+ buffer, cell extracts were cleared by centrifugation twice at 5000 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °. For GFP immunoprecipitation, the protein concentration of yeast cell extracts was adjusted to 20 µg/µl in RLB+ buffer. Mock treated or S-NHS-Ac treated GFP-Trap-MA beads (ChromoTek) were incubated with cell extract for 1 hour rotating at 4 °C, and washed three times with RLB+ buffer. For LC-MS analysis, beads were further processed according to the on-bead digestion protocol.  Mammalian cell extract preparation and affinity purification: Cells were scraped, harvested and lysed by resuspension in RIPA buffer. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 x g at 4 °C. The supernatant was incubated for 1 hour at 4 °C with mock treated or S-NHS-Ac treated magnetic streptavidin beads (Pierce, 88816). After incubation, beads were washed three times with a RIPA buffer.On-bead digestion and sample preparation for LC-MS analysis. On bead digest: beads washed five times with 100 µl 50 mM ABC buffer, and resuspended in 30 µl of 2 M urea in 50 mM ABC buffer. Beads were reduced and alkylated using either TCEP and MMTS, or DTT and IAA. TCEP and DTT were used in final concentrations of 0.2 mM and 10 mM, respectively, for 30 minutes at room temperature. MMTS and IAA were used in final concentrations of 1 mM and 20 mM, respectively, in the dark at room temperature for 15 minutes. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 0.1 mM TCEP or 5 mM DTT. Alkylated proteins were eluted by digestion with 150 ng Trypsin for 90 minutes at 37 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new 0.2 mL vial and further digested overnight at 37 °C by addition of 150 ng Trypsin. For the newly developed two-step digestion protocol, the alkylated proteins were eluted by digestion with 150 ng Lys-C overnight at 25 °C in the dark. The supernatant was transferred to a new 0.2 mL vial and further digested for 5 hours at 37 °C by addition of 150 ng Trypsin. For either protocol, the proteolytic digestion was stopped by adding a 10% TFA solution to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptide samples were desalted using C18 StageTips, and peptides were resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% TFA. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC System (Thermo Scientific), containing both a trapping column for peptide concentration (PepMap C18, 5 x 0.3 mm, 5 µm particle size) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 500 x 0.075 mm, 2 µm particle size (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap (with HCD, higher-energy collisional dissociation mode) mass spectrometer via a Proxeon nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). For peptide chromatography the concentration of organic solvent (acetonitrile) was increased linearly over 2 hours (Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated) or over 90 minutes (Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation) from 1.6% to 28% in 0.1% formic acid or at a flow rate of 230 nL/min. For acquisition of MS2 spectra the instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled. The scan sequence began with an Orbitrap MS1 spectrum with the following parameters: Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated: resolution 120,000, scan range 375 – 1,500 m/z. Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation: resolution 60,000, scan range 380 – 1,650 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) target 3 × 106, and maximum injection time (IT) 60 ms. The top 8 (Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated) or top 10 (Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation) precursors were selected for MS2 analysis (HCD) with the following parameters: resolution 30,000, AGC 1 × 105, maximum IT 250 ms (Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation) or 200 ms (Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated), isolation window 1.6m/z (Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated) or 1.2 m/z (Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation), scan range 200 - 2000 m/z, and normalized collision energy (NCE) 27 (Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated) or 28 (Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation). The minimum AGC target was set at 1 × 105, which corresponds to a 4.0 × 104 intensity threshold (Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated) or at 1 × 104, which corresponds to a 5.0 × 105 intensity threshold (Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation). Peptide match was set to preferred. In addition, unassigned, singly and > 6+ charged species and isotopes were excluded from MS2 analysis and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec (Dataset GFP-Atg8_trypsin_untreated, GFP-Atg8_untreated and GFP-Atg8_acetylated) or 10 sec Dataset GFP-bead_Acetylation and Strp-bead_Acetylation).

### Data Protocol
The RAW MS data was analyzed with FragPipe (19.1), using MSFragger (3.7), IonQuant (1.8.10), and Philosopher (4.8.0). The default FragPipe workflow for label free quantification with match between runs (LFQ-MBR), except that “Normalize intensity across runs” was turned off. Cleavage specificity was set to Trypsin/P, with two missed cleavages allowed. The protein FDR was set to 1%. A mass of 57.02146 (carbamidomethyl) was used as fixed Cysteine modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. MS2 spectra were searched against the S. cerevisiae reference proteome from Uniprot (Proteome ID UP000002311, release 2022.01) containing 6059 entries, concatenated with a database of 379 common laboratory contaminants (in house database) and one entry for the anti-GFP nanobody sequence extracted from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 3OGO). For the S-NHS-Ac titration experiment (Figure 2) only the contaminants database, also containing the streptavidin and the anti-GFP nanobody sequences, was used; the protein FDR was set to 5%; and a mass of 45.98772 (methylthio) was used as fixed Cysteine modification.

### Publication Abstract
The scope of bibliometric studies is the treatment and quantitative analysis of scientific publications. They belong to the so-called "social studies of science", and science policy constitutes one of its main applied fields. These studies efficiently complement the opinions and judgements of experts, thus providing objective and useful tools for evaluating the results of scientific activity. Nevertheless, given the impact that these evaluations have on the assignment of funding for research and even on the professional career of investigators, it becomes essential to know in detail the characteristics of bibliometric indicators and the limitations of their use. The Science Citation Index database is one of the most employed. In the case of biomedical research it is useful to analyze the most internationally visible scientific production, since it satisfactorily covers biomedical journals; however, clinical research with local interest published in Spanish journals is not included in that database. Widely employed bibliometric indicators are those measuring scientific activity through the number of publications, those based on the citations received by published studies and, in between them, the impact of journals. The impact factor is an indicator very used in bibliometric studies; though occasionally a high impact factor is assumed to reflect high quality, this indicator specifically measures visibility and diffusion of the works published by these journals rather than their scientific quality.

### Keywords
Gfp, Nanobody, Ligand, Sulfo-nhs-acetate, Streptavidin, Chemical acetylation, Immunopurification, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna


