### Accession
PXD007674

### Title
DNA Affinity chromatografy on Mycoplasma pneumoniae extracts I

### Description
Determining the gene regulatory network of an organism is fundamental to achieving a global understanding of cell behavior. In general, studies of transcription regulation are limited to the annotated transcription factors, not considering other non-canonical regulators. Here we describe the first systematic analysis of the DNA-interactome of a bacterium with a minimal proteome (Mycoplasma pneumoniae). We first determined by DNA affinity chromatography and intact chromatin isolation all potential DNA binding proteins. We then mapped the DNA binding of these factors by ChIP-seq, as well as their functionality by gain- and loss-of-function experiments, by transcriptomics and proteomics. This identified new DNA binding proteins and novel regulators with moonlighting properties like proteases and metabolic enzymes and allowed to reconstruct the gene regulatory network.

### Sample Protocol
Cellulose column control. Mycoplasma pneumoniae cells were diluted 1:10 in Hayflick and grown for 3 days at 37C in a 300 cm2 flask. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate buffer saline (PBS), collected in 5 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris·HCl, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 1 mM DTT, pH 8), supplemented with a protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche). High salt was used to release the proteins from the DNA. Cell extracts were centrifuged during 30 min at 100.000xg and 4C (Beckman ultracentrifuge) and the soluble fraction was diluted 10 times with 50 mM Tris·HCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8 (to dilute out salt and detergent). A DNA-Cellulose column was compacted and assembled (2 g, Sigma) and run in Äkta Xpress (GE Healthcare) in equilibration buffer (50 mM Tris·HCl, 0.1 M NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8), before binding of the cleared cell lysate. After washing thoroughly with equilibration buffer, and was buffer (equilibration buffer plus 200 mM NaCl) nucleic acid binding proteins were eluted with 1 M NaCl in equilibration buffer, and concentrated by TCA precipitation before submission for mass-spec identification (see below). Here, a cellulose resin was used as a negative control for unspecific binding. E12 is the fraction of the wash and C6 is the eluate with 1M salt. TCA pellets were resuspended in 4% SDS, and 0.1 M Hepes pH 7.5. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (15 μM, 30 min, 56°C), alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (180 nmols, 30 min, 25ºC) and digested with 3 μg LysC (Wako) O/N at 37ºC and then with 3 μg of trypsin (Promega) for eight hours at 37˚C following fasp procedure. After digestion, the peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixes were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2,000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5,000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the Ion Trap, AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 2 m/z, activation time of 0.1 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science) were used for peptide identification. Samples were searched against a M. pneumoniae database with a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries (87,059 entries). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of three miscleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-terminal) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm, a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR < 5 %. Protein top 3 areas have been calculated with unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we determined the relative importance of different transcriptional mechanisms in the genome-reduced bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae, by employing an array of experimental techniques under multiple genetic and environmental perturbations. Of&#xa0;the 143 genes tested (21% of the bacterium's annotated&#xa0;proteins), only 55% showed an altered phenotype, highlighting the robustness of biological systems. We identified nine transcription factors (TFs) and their targets, representing 43% of the genome, and 16 regulators that indirectly affect transcription. Only 20% of transcriptional regulation is mediated by canonical TFs when responding to perturbations. Using a Random Forest, we quantified the non-redundant contribution of different mechanisms such as supercoiling, metabolic control, RNA degradation, and chromosome topology to transcriptional changes. Model-predicted gene changes correlate well with experimental data in 95% of the tested perturbations, explaining up to 70% of the total variance when also considering noise. This analysis highlights the importance of considering non-TF-mediated regulation when engineering bacteria.

### Keywords
Minimal cell, Microbiology, Affinity chromatography, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, System biology, Proteome, Regulation, Transcription factor, Gene expression, Dna binding protein

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation

### Submitter
Eva Yus

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation


