### Accession
PXD026066

### Title
Revealing the Structural Plasticity of SARS-CoV-2 nsp7 and nsp8 Using Structural Proteomics (HDX-MS)

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 nsp7 and nsp8 are important cofactors of the RTC, as they interact and regulate the activity of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and other nspsHere we used solution-based structural proteomic techniques, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), illuminate the dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 full-length nsp7, nsp8, and nsp7:nsp8 proteins and protein complex.

### Sample Protocol
For differential HDX, protein-protein complexes were formed by incubating nsp7 and nsp8 at 1:1, 3:1, or 1:3 molar ratios for 30 min at room temperature. The reactions (5 μL) were mixed with 20 μL of D2O-containing HDX buffer (50 mM HEPES, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, pD 8.4) and incubated at 4°C for 0 s, 10 s, 30 s, 60 s, 900 s or 3600 s. Following on-exchange, unwanted forward- or back-exchange was minimized, and the protein was denatured by the addition of 25 μL of a quench solution (5 M Urea, 1% TFA, pH 2). Samples were then immediately passed through an immobilized pepsin column (prepared in house) at 50 μL min-1 (0.1% v/v TFA, 4°C) and the resulting peptides were trapped and desalted on a 2 mm × 10 mm C8 trap column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher). The bound peptides were then gradient-eluted (4-40% CH3CN v/v and 0.3% v/v formic acid) across a 2.1 mm × 50 mm C18 separation column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher) for 5 min. Sample handling and peptide separation were conducted at 4°C. The eluted peptides were then subjected to electrospray ionization directly coupled to a high resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, ThermoFisher). The HDX experiments were performed in triplicates with single preparations of each protein/protein complex.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using tandem MS (MS/MS) experiments performed on a QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) over a 70 min gradient. Product ion spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode and the five most abundant ions were selected for the product ion analysis per scan event. The MS/MS *.raw data files were converted to *.mgf files and then submitted to MASCOT (version 2.3 Matrix Science, London, UK) for peptide identification. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 4 with the mass tolerance for precursor ions +/- 0.6 Da and for fragment ions +/- 8 ppm. Oxidation to methionine was selected for variable modification. Pepsin was used for digestion and no specific enzyme was selected in MASCOT during the search. Peptides included in the peptide set used for HDX detection had a MASCOT score of 20 or greater. The MS/MS MASCOT search was also performed against a decoy (reverse) sequence and false positives were ruled out if they did not pass a 1% false discovery rate.  Data analysis was conducted using HDX Workbench software. The intensity weighted mean m/z centroid value of each peptide envelope was calculated and subsequently converted into a percentage of deuterium incorporation. This is accomplished by determining the observed averages of the undeuterated and fully deuterated spectra using the conventional formula described elsewhere [31]. The fully deuterated control, 100% deuterium incorporation, was calculated theoretically, and corrections for back-exchange were made on the basis of an estimated 70% deuterium recovery and accounting for 80% final deuterium concentration in the sample (1:5 dilution in D2O HDX buffer). Statistical significance for the differential HDX data is determined by an unpaired t-test for each time point.

### Publication Abstract
Coronavirus (CoV) nonstructural proteins (nsps) assemble to form the replication-transcription complex (RTC) responsible for viral RNA synthesis. nsp7 and nsp8 are important cofactors of the RTC, as they interact and regulate the activity of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase and other nsps. To date, no structure of the full-length SARS-CoV-2 nsp7:nsp8 complex has been published. The current understanding of this complex is based on structures from truncated constructs, with missing electron densities, or from related CoV species where SARS-CoV-2 nsp7 and nsp8 share upward of 90% sequence identity. Despite available structures solved using crystallography and cryo-EM representing detailed static snapshots of the nsp7:nsp8 complex, it is evident that the complex has a high degree of structural plasticity. However, relatively little is known about the conformational dynamics of the individual proteins and how they complex to interact with other nsps. Here, the solution-based structural proteomic techniques, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), illuminate the dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 full-length nsp7 and nsp8 proteins and the nsp7:nsp8 protein complex. Results presented from the two techniques are complementary and validate the interaction surfaces identified from the published three-dimensional heterotetrameric crystal structure of the SARS-CoV-2 truncated nsp7:nsp8 complex. Furthermore, mapping of XL-MS data onto higher-order complexes suggests that SARS-CoV-2 nsp7 and nsp8 do not assemble into a hexadecameric structure as implied by the SARS-CoV full-length nsp7:nsp8 crystal structure. Instead, our results suggest that the nsp7:nsp8 heterotetramer can dissociate into a stable dimeric unit that might bind to nsp12 in the RTC without significantly altering nsp7-nsp8 interactions.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Hdx-ms, Nsp8, Nsp7

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Department of Molecular Medicine The Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Valentine Courouble

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Griffin
Department of Molecular Medicine The Scripps Research Institute


