### Accession
PXD003613

### Title
Comprehensive proteome profiling of platelet identified a protein profile predictive of responses to an antiplatelet agent sarpogrelate.

### Description
Here, we performed a comprehensive proteome profiling of platelets collected from 18 healthy subjects before and after administration of sarpogrelate. For each subject, platelets were isolated before and then again after drug administration to investigate the alteration in the platelet proteome by sarpogrelate. A sample preparation method involving filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was used to improve extraction of proteins including both soluble and membraneous proteins. Moreover, an ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) coupled with extensive fractionation was used to generate a comprehensive proteome of platelets.

### Sample Protocol
Analytical Sample Protocol – Platelet isolation : Centrifugation at room temperature, Protein extraction : Sonication using hand-type sonicator, Digestion : FASP method using trypsin, Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Fractionation: Basic-pH RPLC with non-contiguous pooling, Fractions: 12; Chromatography Protocol – Column length: 100 cm, Column inner diameter: 75 m, Particle size: 3 m;  Gradient length: 240 min , Injected: 5 g (triplicate analysis for unfractionated sample) 10 g per fraction (fractionated sample); Mass Spectrometry Protocol – Dissociation: CID, Instrument: Thermo LTQ-FT, MS1 resolution:100,000, Precursors: Top 7

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data from a total of 96 LC-MS/MS experiment were processed using PE-MMR for the refinement of precursor masses. The resultant MS/MS data were searched against uniprot human reference database (released September 2012; 69,391 entries) and the common contaminants (180 entries) using MS-GF+ search engine (V9012). The mass tolerance for the precursor ion was set at 15 ppm and the number of tryptic termini was 1. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set to static modification. Oxidation of methionine and the carbamylation of N-termini were set to variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches at the peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 were used for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Sarpogrelate is an antiplatelet agent widely used to treat arterial occlusive diseases. Evaluation of platelet aggregation is essential to monitor therapeutic effects of sarpogrelate. Currently, no molecular signatures are available to evaluate platelet aggregation. Here, we performed comprehensive proteome profiling of platelets collected from 18 subjects before and after sarpogrelate administration using LC-MS/MS analysis coupled with extensive fractionation. Of 5423 proteins detected, we identified 499 proteins affected by sarpogrelate and found that they strongly represented cellular processes related to platelet activation and aggregation, including cell activation, coagulation, and vesicle-mediated transports. Based on the network model of the proteins involved in these processes, we selected three proteins (cut-like homeobox 1; coagulation factor XIII, B polypeptide; and peptidylprolyl isomerase D) that reflect the platelet aggregation-related processes after confirming their alterations by sarpogrelate in independent samples using Western blotting. Our proteomic approach provided a protein profile predictive of therapeutic effects of sarpogrelate.

### Keywords
Platelet proteomes, And drug responses., Lc-ms/ms, Antiplatelet agents

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Korea university
Korea university

### Submitter
Hangyeore Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Won Lee
Department of Chemistry, Korea university


