### Accession
PXD010332

### Title
Lysine benzoylation - Here we report the identification and characterization of a histone mark, lysine benzoylation (Kbz). Our study identifies 22 Kbz sites on histones from HepG2 and RAW cells. This type of histone mark can be stimulated by sodium benzoate (SB), a FDA-approved drug and a widely used chemical food preservative, via generation of benzoyl CoA.

### Description
Here we report the identification and characterization of a histone mark, lysine benzoylation (Kbz). Our study identifies 22 Kbz sites on histones from HepG2 and RAW cells. This type of histone mark can be stimulated by sodium benzoate (SB), a FDA-approved drug and a widely used chemical food preservative, via generation of benzoyl CoA.

### Sample Protocol
Histone peptide samples were dissolved in 2.5 µL of HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water, v/v) and loaded onto an in-house packed capillary C18 column (10 cm length x 75 µm ID, 3 µm particle size, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany), which was connected to EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5% to 90% HPLC buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, v/v) in solvent A at a flow rate of 200 nL/min over 60 min. The eluted peptides were analyzed by a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a nano-spray source. Full mass scans were acquired in the m/z range of 300 -1400 with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The 15 most intensive ions were fragmented with 27% normalized collision energy and tandem mass spectra were acquired with a mass resolution of 17500 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Restrictive identification was performed with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) against UniProt Human protein database (88,277 entries, http:// http://www.uniprot.org). The following parameters were used during sequence alignment: methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, lysine acetylation, lysine mono-/di-/tri-methylation, arginine mono-/di-methylation, and lysine benzoylation were specified as variable modifications. Maximum missing cleavage was set at 4, and mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for precursor ions and ± 0.05 Da for MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptm, Histone mark, Benzoylation

### Affiliations
The University of Chicago
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingming Zhao
The University of Chicago


