### Accession
PXD006347

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana DOG1 pull-downs from seed tissues

### Description
Functionally complemented dog1-1 mutant with a YFP-DOG1 fusion protein under the control of its native promoter were used as starting material for in vivo pull-down of YFP: DOG1 and its interacting proteins from seed tissues in native conditions. DOG1 interacting proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. Pull-downs were performed in biological triplicates using dry or 24 h water imbibed seeds, directly after harvest (dormant condition) and after 7 months of dry storage (non-dormant condition).

### Sample Protocol
One hundred milligram of seeds (dry weight) were pulverised in liquid nitrogen with mortar and pestle. Soluble proteins were directly extracted from the powder in native conditions by solubilisation for 2 hours at 4°C under constant rotation in a native buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA; 1 mM EGTA; 0.25% (w/V) Triton X-100; 5 mM DTT; 50 U ml-1 DNase I (Roche); 5 U ml-1 RNase A (Machery Nagel); 1 U ml-1 macerozyme (Boehringer-Mannheim). Protein extraction buffers were supplemented with 1% (V/V) of protease inhibitor cocktail special plant (Sigma) and 1% (V/V) phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma). Protein fractions from seed extracts were purified by repeated centrifugation until lipid and oil free samples were obtained. YFP-DOG1 pull-down in native conditions was performed as follows: An adjusted quantity of 4 mg of total protein (in 1 ml final volume) was incubated with 25 µL of agarose beads coupled to a GFP antibody (GFP-Trap®_A Chromoteck) under constant rotation for 2 h at 4°C. After incubation, beads were separated from the non-bound fraction by centrifugation and washed three times using 500 µL of native extraction buffer without Triton X-100, DNase I, and RNase A. Bound proteins were eluted by incubation for 5 min with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Eluates were recovered from the beads by centrifugation and immediately neutralized by an equal volume of neutralization buffer (8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8). Pull-downs using non complemented dog1-1 seeds were performed in parallel and used as a background control for protein identification by MS. Eluted proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested in solution. Cysteines were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min. Subsequently, alkylation was performed by adding chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 14 mM and incubation for 30 min. The reaction was quenched by addition of DTT. Urea concentration was adjusted to 2 M by dilution with 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM CaCl2. Trypsin digestion (1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio) was performed over night at 37°C and stopped by addition of 1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted with StageTip (Empore C18, 3M). After elution, peptides were dried and directly subjected to MS measurement Peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) on a 16 cm C18 column (3 µm bead size) with a 120 min segmented linear gradient. Peptides were analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a Top15 method.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.5.1.2). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the TAIR10 proteome (35,386 entries), the sequence of YFP-DOG1, and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The time of seed germination is a major decision point in the life of plants determining future growth and development. This timing is controlled by seed dormancy, which prevents germination under favourable conditions. The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) and the protein DELAY OF GERMINATION 1 (DOG1) are essential regulators of dormancy. The function of ABA in dormancy is rather well understood, but the role of DOG1 is still unknown. Here, we describe four phosphatases that interact with DOG1 in seeds. Two of them belong to clade A of type 2C protein phosphatases: ABA-HYPERSENSITIVE GERMINATION 1 (AHG1) and AHG3. These phosphatases have redundant but essential roles in the release of seed dormancy epistatic to DOG1. We propose that the ABA and DOG1 dormancy pathways converge at clade A of type 2C protein phosphatases.The DOG1 protein is a major regulator of seed dormancy in Arabidopsis. Here, N&#xe9;e et al. provide evidence that DOG1 can interact with the type 2C protein phosphatases AHG1 and AHG3 and that this represents the convergence point of the DOG1-regulated dormancy pathway and signalling by the plant hormone abscisic acid.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Dormancy, Dog1, Seed, Germination

### Affiliations
Plant Physiology Group, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research

### Submitter
Katharina Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Iris Finkemeier
Plant Physiology Group, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Germany


