### Accession
PXD033171

### Title
The metabolite-controlled ubiquitin conjugase Ubc8 promotes mitochondrial protein import by enhancing assembly of the TOM complex

### Description
Mitochondria are essential organelles that play a key role in energy metabolism. Transitions between glycolytic and respiring conditions induce considerable adaptations of the cellular proteome. These metabolism-dependent changes are particularly pronounced for the protein composition of mitochondria. Here we show that the ubiquitin conjugase Ubc8 of the yeast cytosol plays a crucial role in the remodeling process when cells are shifted from respiratory to fermentative conditions. Ubc8 is a conserved and well-studied component of the catabolite control system that is known to regulate the stability of gluconeogenesis enzymes. Unexpectedly, we found that Ubc8 also promotes the assembly of the translocase of the outer membrane of mitochondria (TOM) and stabilizes its cytosol-exposed receptor subunit Tom22. Ubc8 deficiency results in a compromised protein import into mitochondria and a subsequent accumulation of mitochondrial precursor proteins in the cytosol. Our observations show that Ubc8 which is controlled by the prevalent metabolic conditions, promotes on the one hand the switch from glucose synthesis to glucose usage in the cytosol and, on the other hand, the biogenesis of the mitochondrial TOM machinery in order to protect the mitochondrial import machinery during phases of metabolic transition.

### Sample Protocol
For dynamic SILAC mass spectrometry, YPH499 arg4 WT and ubc8 cells were cultured in SLac medium containing light [14N2, 12C6]-lysine and [14N4, 12C6]-arginine isotopes. Cells were diluted continuously to keep them in the exponential growth phase while increasing the culture volume stepwise up to 300 ml. For timepoint t(0) 100 ml of each culture were harvested (5,000 g, 5 min, RT), washed with sterile water, and shock frozen with liquid nitrogen. Samples were stored at -80°C for further analysis. To investigate glucose-induced proteome changes, 2x100ml of every culture was harvested (5,000 g, 5 min, RT) and washed with 30 ml SLac medium without lysine and arginine (5,000 g, 5 min, RT). Cells were resuspended in 200 ml SLac+2% glucose or SLac as a control. Both of these media only contained the heavy amino acid isotopes of lysine (15N2, 13C6) and arginine (15N4, 13C6). Cultures were incubated at 30°C and 140 rpm for one doubling time of the cells. Cell growth was continuously monitored by measuring OD600. Samples (t(1) Gluc and t(1) Lac) were harvested and treated like described before for the samples t(0). MS samples were prepared according to a published protocol with minor adaptations (REF). Cell lysates from 25 OD were prepared in 100 µl lysis buffer (6 M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP-HCl, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) using a FastPrep-24 5 G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) with 3 cycles of 20 s, speed 8.0 m/s, 120 s breaks, glass beads (Ø 0.5 mm) at 4°C. Samples were heated for 10 min at 96°C and afterwards centrifuged for 5 min at 16,000 g twice. In between the supernatant was transferred to fresh Eppendorf tubes to remove all remaining glass beads. Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, #23225). For protein digestion, 36 µg of protein was diluted 1:10 with LT-digestion buffer (10% acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.8). Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich #T6567) and Lys-C (Wako #125-05061) were added to the samples (1:50 related to the amount of protein used for digestion). Samples were incubated over night at 37°C and 700 rpm. After 16 h, fresh Trypsin (1:100) was added for 30 min (37°C, 700 rpm). pH of samples was adjusted to pH <2 with Tri-flouracetic acid (10%) and samples were centrifuged for 3 min at 16,000 g and RT. Desalting/mixed-Phase cleanup with 3 layer SDB-RPS stage tips (cat 2241). Samples were dried down in speed-vac and resolubilized in 12 µl buffer A++ (buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer A* (2% acentonitrile and 0.1% trifluoracetic acid) in a ratio of 9:1)). In total four biological replicates (n=4) were prepared.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software Version 1.6.3.3 and a Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database obtained from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria play a key role in cellular energy metabolism. Transitions between glycolytic and respiratory conditions induce considerable adaptations of the cellular proteome. These metabolism-dependent changes are particularly pronounced for the protein composition of mitochondria. Here, we show that the yeast cytosolic ubiquitin conjugase Ubc8 plays a crucial role in the remodeling process when cells transition from respiratory to fermentative conditions. Ubc8 is a conserved and well-studied component of the catabolite control system that is known to regulate the stability of gluconeogenic enzymes. Unexpectedly, we found that Ubc8 also promotes the assembly of the translocase of the outer membrane of mitochondria (TOM) and increases the levels of its cytosol-exposed receptor subunit Tom22. Ubc8 deficiency results in compromised protein import into mitochondria and reduced steady-state levels of mitochondrial proteins. Our observations show that Ubc8, which is controlled by the prevailing metabolic conditions, promotes the switch from glucose synthesis to glucose usage in the cytosol and induces the biogenesis of the mitochondrial TOM machinery to improve mitochondrial protein import during phases of metabolic transition.

### Keywords
Metabolic switch, Mitochondrial import

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics, Tech. University of Kaiserslautern
Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, Tech. University of Kaiserslautern


