### Accession
PXD030735

### Title
Linkage Reprogramming by Tailor-made E3s Reveals Polyubiquitin Chain Requirements in DNA Damage Bypass

### Description
A polyubiquitin chain can adopt a variety of shapes, depending on how the ubiquitin monomers are joined. However, the relevance of linkage for the signaling functions of polyubiquitin chains is often poorly understood because of our inability to control or manipulate this parameter in vivo. Here we present a strategy for reprogramming polyubiquitin chain linkage by means of tailor-made, linkage- and substrate-selective ubiquitin ligases. Using the polyubiquitylation of the budding yeast replication factor PCNA in response to DNA damage as a model case, we show that altering the features of a polyubiquitin chain in vivo canchange the fate of the modified substrate. We also provide evidence for redundancy betweendistinct, but structurally similar linkages, and we demonstrate by proof-of-principle experiments that the method can be generalized to targets beyond PCNA. Our study illustrates apromising approach towards the in vivo analysis of polyubiquitin signaling.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC experiments, lys1Δ pdr5Δ cells expressing PIP-E3s or harboring an empty vector were cultured  in SC complete medium containing 15 mg·L-1 L-arginine and 30 mg·L-1 L-lysine0 (light) or L-lysine8 (heavy), respectively. All experiments were performed in triplicates, including one label switch. At an OD600 approximately 3, equal numbers of cells were mixed and harvested by centrifugation. PIP-E3(48)-expressing strains and their correspondingempty vector controls were treated with 75 μM MG132 for 90 min before harvesting. Cell lysis was performed with a PreCellys instrument using 200 µL of zirconia beads for 800 µL lysate in RIPA buffer (50 mM Hepes , 1 mM EDTA, 140 mM NaCl, 0.1% (v/v) Triton, freshly supplemented with protease proteasome inhibitors (Roche)  and 10 mM N-ethyl maleimide) for 10 cycles at 6800 rpm at 2°C. Triton concentration was increased to 1% (v/v) and after 15 min incubation at 4°C the supernatant was collected through centrifugation. Ubiquitylated peptides were enriched using PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling Technology)and analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientifi

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a reference proteome database containing S. cerevisiae protein sequences obtained from UniProtKB (version 2017_02) using Andromeda search engine. The reference proteome was appended with protein sequences of engineered E3 ligases (PIP-E3(M1), PIP-E3(K48) and PIP-E3(K63)). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation), and di-glycine-lysine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Di-glycine lysine-modified peptides with a minimum score of 40, delta score of 6 and localization probability higher than 90% are reported and used for the analyses. Statistical analysis and MS data visualization were performed using the R software environment. P-values and false discovery rates were calculated using a moderated t-test (Limma algorithm).

### Publication Abstract
A polyubiquitin chain can adopt a variety of shapes, depending on how the ubiquitin monomers are joined. However, the relevance of linkage for the signaling functions of polyubiquitin chains is often poorly understood because of our inability to control or manipulate this parameter in&#xa0;vivo. Here, we present a strategy for reprogramming polyubiquitin chain linkage by means of tailor-made, linkage- and substrate-selective ubiquitin ligases. Using the polyubiquitylation of the budding yeast replication factor PCNA in response to DNA damage as a model case, we show that altering the features of a polyubiquitin chain in&#xa0;vivo can change the fate of the modified substrate. We also provide evidence for redundancy between distinct but structurally similar linkages, and we demonstrate by proof-of-principle experiments that the method can be generalized to targets beyond PCNA. Our study illustrates a promising approach toward the in&#xa0;vivo analysis of polyubiquitin signaling.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, E3 ligase, Pcna, Dna damage bypass

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


