### Accession
PXD040580

### Title
Intracellular peptides identified in plasma from SARS-CoV-2 infected patients

### Description
Intracellular peptides (InPeps), generated by the orchestrated action of the proteasome and intracellular peptidases, were suggested to have both biological and pharmacological significance as G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) agonists or inverse agonists. InPeps profile alters whenever there is a challenge or associated disease. In the present study, the relative concentration of InPeps was investigated in patients infected or not with SARS-CoV-2 virus. Altogether, the present results suggest variation of plasma relative concentration of specific InPeps, in a group of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 virus compared to SARS-CoV-2 non-infected patients. Therefore, it is exciting to suggest that human plasma have InPeps that may be playing a yet unknown function in SARS-CoV-2 virus infection.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples (300 µL) were transferred to a protein low-binding tube, an equal volume of sample buffer (0.5% BSA, 0.05% Tween in PBS, pH 7.2) was added plus two volumes of acetonitrile (in order to achieve 66% of acetonitrile to the final sample extraction volume). After vortexing, samples were incubated at room temperature for 60 min and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a clean protein low-binding tube, and the volume was reduced in speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 3 h at 30 °C. The semi-dried pellet was resuspended in 1.5 mL of ultrapure water, acidified to pH 2 with 0.1 M HCl (final concentration of 10 mM; Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) and transferred to Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Units of 10,000 Da cutoff (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA). After centrifugation at 1,500 x g, at 4 °C, for approximately 1 h, the pH of the flow through (containing peptides of molecular mass < 10,000 Da) was adjusted to 2-4 with 50% formic acid (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). This flow through material containing peptides was passed through Oasis HLB 1cc (30 mg) Extraction Cartridges (Waters, Etten-Leur, NB, NL) previously equilibrated with 100 % acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA, USA), and then with 5 % acetonitrile/0.10 % formic acid in ultrapure water. After washing with 5% acetonitrile/0.10 % formic acid, peptides were eluted in 100 % acetonitrile/0.15 % formic acid, collected in FisherbrandTM low-retention microcentrifuge tubes (Waltham, MA, USA), and dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). A peptide aliquot was resuspended in ultrapure water (100 μL) and quantified by 214nm absorbance (NanoDrop™, Thermo Fisher Scientific, São Paulo, Brazil), using a peptide mix of known composition and concentration as the standard reference for determining peptide concentration (standard curve)34.  Peptide samples were labeled using dimethyl isotopic labelling as previously described34. The labeling method employed is based on the dimethylation of amine and formaldehyde groups in the presence of cyanoborohydride. The combination of regular, deuteride and 13C formaldehyde with regular and deuteride cyanoborohydride allowed us to use four isotopic forms as the reactions adds 28, 30, 32 or 36 Da to the final mass of peptides at each available (lysine or N-terminal) labeling site, which can be observed in the MS spectrum34. Briefly, 10 μg of purified peptide extract was diluted in 100 μL of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) to a final concentration of 100 mM. In the hood, 4 μL of the different isotopic forms of the formaldehydes, at a concentration of 4%, were added according to the desired labeling scheme. Then, 4 μL of 0.6 M reducing sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) was added, and samples were incubated for 16 h in the dark at room temperature. The reaction was then quenched with 16 µL of NH3 1%. Samples were placed on ice and 8 µL of CH₂O₂ (formic acid; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) was added. Four differentially labeled samples were pooled, desalted using Oasis HLB 1cc (30 mg) Extraction Cartridges (Waters, Etten-Leur, NB, NL), and eluted with 100% acetonitrile containing 0.15% formic acid. The samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at −20 °C until use. The amount of 0.2 µg of peptides diluted in 5 µL of 100% acetonitrile containing 0.15% formic acid were injected for all mass spectrometry analyses. Mass spectrometry peptidomic analyses were performed on electron-spray mass spectrometer coupled to nano-liquid high-performance chromatography (nLC-MS/MS) were conducted at Mass Spectrometry Facility of FIOCRUZ PARANA, PR, Brazil. Briefly, identification of peptides (1 µg in 5 µL) sequences was conducted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptide separation was performed on 360μm OD x 150 mm a column, with 3-µm C-18 beads (Dr. Maisch, 72119 Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile, in 0.1% formic acid, for 120 min at 250 nL/min flow. Data were acquired after the generation of multiple peptides protonated by the ESI (electrospray ionization), according to the following conditions. Runtime, 120min, polarity positive, default charge state 2, full MS, resolution 120,000, AGC target standard, maximum IT 50 ms, scan range 300 to 1500 m/z. Dd-MS2 resolution 30,000 AGC target: standard, maximum IT 54 ms, 2 s duty cycle, isolation window 1.6 m/z, (N)CE 30. Intensity threshold for MS2 2.0e4, charge exclusion 1, and >7, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 60.0 s.

### Data Protocol
Data processing were performed in house using Xcalibur and Mascot Distiller software’s, as previously described34,49,50. Data analysis were performed from raw data files converted into a peak list format (mgf) by Mascot Distiller version 2.7.1 (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) and analyzed while using the search engine MASCOT version 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) to identify peptides. No cleavage site was specified and a fragment ion mass tolerance of ± 0.5 Da was applied to the MS and MS/MS ions. The search parameters were: no enzyme specificity; precursor mass tolerance set to ±15 ppm; no modifications included. The identified peptides were sorted by their average of local confidence to select the best spectra to annotate, and they were filtered by FDR ≤5%. In parallel, raw data analysis were also tudexamined in Peaks 7 software (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Waterloo, ON N2L 3K8, Canada). De novo peptide sequencing was performed using Peaks 7 software with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and mass accuracy of 0.1 Da for the parent and fragment ions, respectively. The average local confidence (ALC) was established in > 70%. A decoy database was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) which was set to < 1%. In order to increase the number of sequences, the Spider algorithm from Peaks software was used. This algorithm explores the best similarity between the de novo sequences determined by proteomics experiments (based on MS/MS spectra) and sequences stored in databases. The Swissprot database was used searching for homology.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human, Plasma, Peptidome

### Affiliations
University of São Paulo
Pharmacology Department, Biomedical Science Institute, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Luiz Felipe Martucci

### Lab Head
Dr Emer Suavinho Ferro
Pharmacology Department, Biomedical Science Institute, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil


