### Accession
PXD015235

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analyses of yeast cell cycle

### Description
This is to provide phosphoproteomic analyses to support multiple layers of phospho-regulation coordinate metabolism in yeast cell cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from yeasts at different time points in the cell cycle and digested to peptides. A small part of the resulting peptides were labeled with TMT, combined, fractionated and desalted for mass spectrometry analysis of the proteome. The majority of the peptides were enriched for phosphopeptides using TiO2, labeled with TMT, combined, fractionated and desalted for mass spectrometry analysis of the phosphoproteome.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 against a sequence database of yeast (strain W303, NCBI taxonomy ID 559292, downloaded on July 28, 2016).  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with at most two missed cleavage sites.  Precursor mass tolerance was set to +/- 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to +/- 0.6 Da.  At most three dynamic modifications were allowed per peptide.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT-labeled N-terminus and lysine (+229.163) were set as static modification. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and acetylation of protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da) were set as differential modification. For phosphoenriched dataset, phosphorylation of Serine, Tyrosine and Tyrosine was also set as differential modification. Percolator was applied to filter out the false MS2 assignments at a false discovery rate of 1% for both peptides and proteins.  For quantification, a mass tolerance of +/-20 ppm window was applied to the integration of report ions using the most confident centroid method and S/N values were reported as reporter abundances.  The threshold for average reporter S/N was set to 5 and the threshold for co-isolation was set to 30%. Quantification results were rejected with missing channels.  The data normalization mode was set to “total peptide amount” and scaling mode was set to “on channels average”.

### Publication Abstract
The coordination of metabolism and growth with cell division is crucial for proliferation. While it has long been known that cell metabolism regulates the cell division cycle, it is becoming increasingly clear that the cell division cycle also regulates metabolism. In budding yeast, we previously showed that over half of all measured metabolites change concentration through the cell cycle indicating that metabolic fluxes are extensively regulated during cell cycle progression. However, how this regulation is achieved still remains poorly understood. Since both the cell cycle and metabolism are regulated to a large extent by protein phosphorylation, we here decided to measure the phosphoproteome through the budding yeast cell cycle. Specifically, we chose a cell cycle synchronization strategy that avoids stress and nutrient-related perturbations of metabolism, and we grew the yeast on ethanol minimal medium to force cells to utilize their full biosynthetic repertoire. Using a tandem-mass-tagging approach, we found over 200 sites on metabolic enzymes and transporters to be phospho-regulated. These sites were distributed among many pathways including carbohydrate catabolism, lipid metabolism, and amino acid synthesis and therefore likely contribute to changing metabolic fluxes through the cell cycle. Among all one thousand sites whose phosphorylation increases through the cell cycle, the CDK consensus motif and an arginine-directed motif were highly enriched. This arginine-directed R-R-x-S motif is associated with protein-kinase A, which regulates metabolism and promotes growth. Finally, we also found over one thousand sites that are dephosphorylated through the G1/S transition. We speculate that the phosphatase Glc7/PP1, known to regulate both the cell cycle and carbon metabolism, may play an important role because its regulatory subunits are phospho-regulated in our data. In summary, our results identify extensive cell cycle dependent phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of metabolic enzymes and suggest multiple mechanisms through which the cell division cycle regulates metabolic signaling pathways to temporally coordinate biosynthesis with distinct phases of the cell division cycle.

### Keywords
Yeast, Cell cycle, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Molecular Cell Biology Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology (IFIZ) University of Tübingen
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub

### Submitter
Lichao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Ewald
Molecular Cell Biology Interfaculty Institute of Cell Biology (IFIZ) University of Tübingen


