### Accession
PXD045032

### Title
Loss of the NK Motif And AnKyrin Repeat Domain 1 (KANK1) leads to lymphoid compartment dysregulation in mice

### Description
The NK Motif And AnKyrin Repeat Domain 1 (KANK1) gene protein plays a role in the control of cytoskeleton formation by regulating actin polymerization. A t(5;9) translocation resulting in a fusion of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta gene (PDGFRB) and KANK1 was detected in a patient with myeloid neoplasm (MN) characterized with severe thrombocythemia[2]. The protein is thought to have a tumour suppressor function, as its expression is downregulated or missing in several tumor tissues, while over-expressing the protein was reported to inhibit the proliferation of tumor cells in solid cancer models [3-5]. We established a novel germline loss of heterozygosity (LOH) mutation encompassing the KANK1 gene in a young Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) patient and his healthy father, with no additional MDS-related mutations or chromosomal abnormalities. Clinical investigation suggested development of MDS following severe infection, likely triggered by an autoimmune mechanism. The Kank1-/- mice remained healthy and did not develop any hematological abnormality. loss of Kank1 expression led to alteration in the cologenic and proliferative potential of murine BM cells and decrease in HSPCs population frequency.  Comprehensive marker expression analysis of lineage cell populations indicated a role for Kank1 in lymphoid cells differentiation. Total protein analysis suggests the involvement of Kank1 in BM cells’ cytoskeleton formation and mobility.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate preparation and digestion was done as described in [19]. Briefly, a total of 0.5x106 Kank1+/+ and Kank1-/- BM cells were lysed using 20 ul of lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 50 mM HEPES pH8.5). Samples were boiled at 95oC for 5 minutes, after which they were sonicated on high for 3x 10 seconds in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4oC. After determining protein concentration with Bradford (Sigma), 50ug was taken forward for digestion. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37oC for 4hrs. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37oC. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were desalted on in-house packed C18 Stagetips[20]. For each sample, 2 discs of C18 material (3M Empore) were packed in a 200ul tip, and the C18 material activated with 40ul of 100% Methanol (HPLC grade, Sigma), then 40ul of 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The tips were subsequently equilibrated 2x with 40ul of 1%TFA, 3% Acetonitrile, after which the samples were loaded using centrifugation at 4,000x rpm. After washing the tips twice with 100ul of 0.1% formic acid, the peptides were eluted into clean 500ul Eppendorf tubes using 40% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.  MS data acquisition For each sample, peptides were loaded onto a 2cm C18 trap column (ThermoFisher 164705), connected in-line to a 15cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES804) using 100% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) at 750bar, using the Thermo EasyLC 1200 HPLC system, and the column oven operating at 30°C. Peptides were eluted over a 140 minute gradient ranging from 10 to 60% of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min, and the Exploris480 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a DD-MS2 setting with multi-CV FAIMS. A total of 3 CVs were used, -45V, -60V and -75V, with a cycle time of 3s each. For each CV, full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 60,000, with an AGC target of 300% or maximum injection time of auto and a scan range of 350–1500 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 15,000, with an AGC target value of 75% or maximum injection time of auto (23ms), a normalised collision energy of 28 and an intensity threshold of 5e3. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, and ions with a charge state <2 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the Mus Musculus database obtained from Uniprot. Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), and Acetyl, Met-loss and Met-loss+Acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR, and protein quantitation done using the built-in Minora Feature Detector and Precursor Ions Quantifier.

### Publication Abstract
The KN Motif and AnKyrin Repeat Domain 1 (<i>KANK1</i>) is proposed as a tumour suppressor gene, as its expression is reduced or absent in several types of tumour tissue, and over-expressing the protein inhibited the proliferation of tumour cells in solid cancer models. We report a novel germline loss of heterozygosity mutation encompassing the <i>KANK1</i> gene in a young patient diagnosed with myelodysplastic neoplasm (MDS) with no additional disease-related genomic aberrations. To study the potential role of KANK1 in haematopoiesis, we generated a new transgenic mouse model with a confirmed loss of KANK1 expression. KANK1 knockout mice did not develop any haematological abnormalities; however, the loss of its expression led to alteration in the colony forming and proliferative potential of bone marrow (BM) cells and a decrease in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) population frequency. A comprehensive marker expression analysis of lineage cell populations indicated a role for <i>Kank1</i> in lymphoid cell development, and total protein analysis suggests the involvement of <i>Kank1</i> in BM cells' cytoskeleton formation and mobility.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
The Epi-/Genome Lab, Department of Hematology, Rigshospitalet, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Kirsten Groenbaek
The Epi-/Genome Lab, Department of Hematology, Rigshospitalet, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


