### Accession
PXD001384

### Title
Rod-derived Cone Viability Factor

### Description
Rod-derived Cone Viability Factor stimulates aerobic glycolysis through BSG1/GLUT1

### Sample Protocol
The dataset contains 2 sample preparations: - 1D SDS-PAGE,  in-gel digestion with trypsin and nanoLC-MS/MS on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC-Chip/MS system coupled to an HCT Ultra ion trap - In solution digestion, SPE and nanoLC-MS/MS on an nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance LC® System coupled to a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
All nanoLC-MSMS analyses were processed using database searching with the Mascot algorithm run on a local server (Matrix Science). Identifications were validated at a FDR <1% using the Scaffold software (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
Rod-derived cone viability factor (RdCVF) is an inactive thioredoxin secreted by rod photoreceptors that protects cones from degeneration. Because the secondary loss of cones in retinitis pigmentosa (RP) leads to blindness, the administration of RdCVF is a promising therapy for this untreatable neurodegenerative disease. Here, we investigated the mechanism underlying the protective role of RdCVF in RP. We show that RdCVF acts through binding to Basigin-1 (BSG1), a transmembrane protein expressed specifically by photoreceptors. BSG1 binds to the glucose transporter GLUT1, resulting in increased glucose entry into cones. Increased glucose promotes cone survival by stimulation of aerobic glycolysis. Moreover, a missense mutation of RdCVF results in its inability to bind to BSG1, stimulate glucose uptake, and prevent secondary cone death in a model of RP. Our data uncover an entirely novel mechanism of neuroprotection through the stimulation of glucose metabolism.

### Keywords
Rdcvf, Bsg1, Glut1, Glucose

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, IPHC, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Francois Delalande

### Lab Head
Dr Delalande Francois
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, IPHC, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


