### Accession
PXD021832

### Title
Proteomic approache of the response to iron-limited condition in Staphylococcus lugdunensis

### Description
Staphylococcus lugdunensis is a coagulase-negative Staphylococcus part of the commensal skin flora but emerge as an important opportunistic pathogen. Because iron limitation is a crucial stress during infectious process, we performed phenotypic study and compared proteomic profiles of this species incubated in absence and in presence of the iron chelator 2,2'-dipyridyl (DIP).  No modification of cell morphology nor cell wall thickness were observed in presence of DIP. However iron-limitation condition promoted biofilm formation and reduced the ability to cope with oxidative stress (1 mM H2O2). In addition, S. lugdunensis N920143 cultured with DIP was significantly less virulent in the larvae of Galleria mellonella model of infection than that grown under standard conditions. We verified that these phenotypes were due to an iron limitation by complementation experiments with FeSO4. By mass spectrometry after trypsin digestion, we characterized the first iron-limitation stress proteome in S. lugdunensis. Among 1426 proteins identified, 349 polypeptides were differentially expressed. 222 were more and 127 less abundant in S. lugdunensis incubated in iron-limitation condition, and by RT-qPCR, some of the corresponding genes have been shown to be transcriptionally regulated. Our data revealed that proteins involved in iron metabolism and carriers were over-expressed, as well as several ABC transporters and polypeptides linked to cell wall metabolism. Conversely, enzymes playing a role in the oxidative stress response (especially catalase) were repressed.  This phenotypic and global proteomic study allowed characterization of the response of S. lugdunensis to iron-limitation. We showed that iron-limitation promoted biofilm formation, but decrease the oxidative stress resistance that may, at least in part, explained the reduced virulence of S. lugdunensis observed under low iron condition.

### Sample Protocol
In order to extract total proteins, 200 ml of bacterial cell culture were centrifuged (6,000 x g) for 15 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were washed twice with recovery buffer (Tris HCl 50 mM, Na2SO4 50 mM, glycerol 15%) and incubated for 12h at -80°C. Cell pellets were transferred into screw top tubes containing 500 µl of glass beads. Cells were disrupted using the Fast Prep instrument (MP Biomedical LLC, Santa Ana, CA, USA) for 3 min at 6.5 m/s. The lysate was centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g at 4°C to remove the cell debris and the supernatant was transferred into a new tube. Proteins were prepared from three independent biological replicates. The protein dosage was realised using the "Pierce BCA protein assay kit" (Thermofisher, Waltham, MA, USA).  Five µg of each protein extract were first prepared using a modified GASP protocol [30]. Samples were digested with trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
For nano-LC fragmentation, protein or peptide samples were first desalted and concentrated onto a µC18 Omix (Agilent) before analysis. The chromatography step was performed on a NanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) ultra-high pressure nano flow chromatography system.  MS experiments were carried out on a TIMS-TOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) with a modified nano electrospray ion source (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics). A 1400 spray voltage with a capillary temperature of 180°C was typically employed for ionizing. MS spectra were acquired in the positive mode in the mass range from 100 to 1700 m/z. In the experiments described here, the mass spectrometer was operated in PASEF mode with exclusion of single charged peptides. A number of 10 PASEF MS/MS scans was performed during 1.25 seconds from charge range 2-5.  Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot S. lugdunensis database. A maximum of two missing cleavages were allowed, the required minimum peptide sequence length was 7 amino acids, and the peptide mass was limited to a maximum of 4600 Da.  Decoy database hits, proteins identified as potential contaminants, and proteins identified exclusively by one site modification were excluded from further analysis. Label-free protein quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm that allows accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction requiring a minimum ratio count of 1 [31]. All other MaxQuant parameters were kept at their default values. Bioinformatic analysis and visualization was performed in Perseus. Two sample tests were performed using Student’s T test with a Permutation-based FDR of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Virulence, Proteomic, Iron limitation, Oxydative stress

### Affiliations
Pr Jean-Christophe Giard Unité de Recherche Risques Microbiens (U2RM) Equipe "Antibio-résistance" Laboratoire de Microbiologie CHU Côte de Nacre 14033 Caen Cedex
PhD Student U2RM

### Submitter
Aubourg Marion

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Christophe GIARD
Pr Jean-Christophe Giard Unité de Recherche Risques Microbiens (U2RM) Equipe "Antibio-résistance" Laboratoire de Microbiologie CHU Côte de Nacre 14033 Caen Cedex


