### Accession
PXD025968

### Title
Comparative analysis of serum proteins between hepatitis B virus genotype B and C infection DIA-based quantitative proteomics

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an enveloped, coated, non-cytopathic and hepatotropic partially double-stranded DNA virus in the family Hepadnaviridae genus Orthohepadnavirus. Despite significant progress in the availability of safe vaccines and antiviral therapies against HBV, it still affects approximately 257 million people worldwide and is responsible for about 887,000 deaths per year around the world [4]. HBV infection, which are associated with acute and chronic liver failure responses to viruses attacked the liver, can result in inactive carrier state, chronic hepatitis, or fulminant hepatitis and put them at high risk to develop advanced liver fibrosis and cirrhosis, and even hepatocellular cancer. Many viral factors, which could affect the disparity of clinical outcomes or disease prognosis during chronic HBV infection, have been reported in previous studies; among them, the viral genotype, as well as HBV mutations ascribing the virus to a certain phenotype, was reported to be the most important factor influencing viral pathogenesis, including the change of host immune recognition, the enhanced virulence with increased HBV replication and the facilitation of cell attachment or penetration.

### Sample Protocol
All serum samples were collected and immediately processed according to standard operating procedures to minimize preanalytical variation. The serum samples from 18 healthy controls and 36 patients with HBV infection were divided into 3 groups: healthy control (Group A, n=18), HBV-B (Group B, n=18) and HBV-C (Group C, n=18). For each group, every 6 individual samples containing equal volumes of serum were mixed, and the pooled serum was then separated into the high- and low-abundance protein fractions on a Human Multiple Affinity Removal System Column (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Six replicates of protein extracts per group were used to minimize the individual differences among patients.

### Data Protocol
A 5 kDa ultrafiltration centrifuge tube (Sartorius, Germany) was used for desalination and concentration of the components in the high- and low-abundance fractions. The proteins were precipitated with SDT lysis buffer at 95 °C for 15 min. After centrifugation at 14,000×g for 20 min, the protein concentration in the supernatant was quantified with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). Protein digestion was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described previously. In brief, the protein samples (200μg) for each condition were dissolved in UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)) and transferred into a new ultrafiltration centrifuge tube by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then, 100 μl of iodoacetamide (IAA; 100 mM in UA buffer) was added to the protein samples, and the samples were further incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Then, the filters were washed three times with 100 μl of UA buffer and two times with100 μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer. For trypsin digestion, the protein suspensions were incubated with 4 μg of trypsin (Promega, USA) in 40 μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer at 37 °C overnight. After trypsin digestion, the resulting peptides were desalted on a C18 cartridge column (Sigma, USA) and vacuum dried.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum proteins  hbv  genotype b and c infection  dia-based quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
The Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University

### Submitter
Dahai Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Dahai Wei
The Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University


