### Accession
PXD026724

### Title
Cavin3 released from caveolae interacts with BRCA1 to regulate the cellular stress response

### Description
Caveolae-associated protein 3 (cavin3), a putative tumor suppressor protein, is inactivated in most cancers. The molecular basis for its actions remains poorly understood. We characterized the effects on the proteome of cavin3 loss by utilizing genome-edited cells together with label-free quantitative proteomics. These studies revealed a prominent role for cavin3 in DNA repair pathways with downregulation of BRCA1 and the BRCA1 A-complex components. Using cellular and cell-free expression assays, we show a direct interaction between BRCA1 and cavin3. Association of BRCA1 and cavin3 occurs when cavin3 is released from disassembling caveolae by multiple stressors such as UV and mechanical stress. Cavin3-deficient cells were sensitised to PARP inhibition and showed a loss of components of the BRCA1 A-complex associated with UV DNA damage foci. Overexpression and RNAi-depletion strategies in several cancer cell lines revealed that cavin3 sensitized a variety of cancer cells to UV-induced apoptosis. We conclude that cavin3 functions together with BRCA1 in multiple pathways that contribute to tumorigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry and analysed as previously described (Stroud et al., 2016). Briefly, cells were lysed in 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.1), Tris(2-carboxyethy)phosphine (TCEP), 20 mM chloroacetamide and incubated at 99 ˚C for 10 min.  Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested into peptides using trypsin by incubation at 37˚C overnight, according to manufacturer’s instructions (Promega). Detergent was removed from the peptides using SDB-RPS stage tips as described (Kulak et al., 2014; Stroud et al., 2016). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% ACN and analysed by online nano-HPLC/electrospray ionization-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus connected to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim C18 PepMap nano Trap x 2 cm, 100 μm I.D, 5 μm particle size and 300 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific) at 15 μL/min for 3 min before switching the pre-column in line with the analytical column (Acclaim RSLC C18 PepMap Acclaim RSLC nanocolumn 75 μm x 50 cm, PepMap100 C18, 3 μm particle size 100 Å pore size; ThermoFisher Scientific). The separation of peptides was performed at 250 nL/min using a non-linear ACN gradient of buffer A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN) and buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN), starting at 2.5% buffer B to 35.4% followed by ramp to 99% over 278 minutes. Data were collected in positive mode using Data Dependent Acquisition using m/z 375 - 1575 as MS scan range, HCD for MS/MS of the 12 most intense ions with z ≥ 2. Other instrument parameters were: MS1 scan at 70,000 resolution (at 200 m/z), MS maximum injection time 54 ms, AGC target 3E6, Normalized collision energy was at 27% energy, Isolation window of 1.8 Da, MS/MS resolution 17,500, MS/MS AGC target of 2E5, MS/MS maximum injection time 54 ms, minimum intensity was set at 2E3 and dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform, Tyanova et al., 2016) version 1.6.5.0 using default settings for a label-free experiment with the following changes. The search database was the Uniprot human database containing reviewed canonical sequences (June 2019) and a database containing common contaminants. “Match between runs” was enabled with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cavin proteins, Caveolae, Brca1, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry & Pharmacology, University of Melbourne


