### Accession
PXD023851

### Title
IgE antibodies increase honeybee venom responsiveness and detoxification efficiency of mast cells

### Description
In contrast to their clearly defined roles in allergic diseases, the physiologic functions of Immunoglobulin E antibodies (IgEs) and mast cells (MCs) remain enigmatic. Recent research supports the toxin hypothesis, showing that MCs and IgE-related type 2 immune responses can enhance host defense against certain noxious substances, including honeybee venom (BV). However, the mechanisms by which MCs can interfere with BV toxicity are unknown. In this study, we assessed the role of IgE and certain MC products in MC-mediated BV detoxification.  We applied in vitro and in vivo fluorescence microscopy imaging, and flow cytometry, fibroblast-based toxicity assays and mass spectrometry to investigate IgE-mediated detoxification of BV cytotoxicity by mouse and human MCs in vitro. Pharmacologic strategies to interfere with MC-derived heparin and proteases helped to define the importance of specific detoxification mechanisms.  Venom-specific IgE increased the degranulation and cytokine responses of MCs to BV in vitro. Passive serum sensitization enhanced MC degranulation in vivo. IgE-activated mouse or human MCs exhibited enhanced potential for detoxifying BV by both proteolytic degradation and heparin-related interference with toxicity. Mediators released by IgE-activated human MCs efficiently degraded multiple BV toxins.  Our results both reveal that IgE sensitization enhances the MC’s ability to detoxify BV and also assign efficient toxin-neutralizing activity to MC-derived heparin and proteases. Our study thus highlights the potential importance of IgE, MCs, and particular MC products in defense against BV.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (triplicates of (1) untreated BV; (2) BV treated with supernatant of IgE/anti-IgE-stimulated hu PBCMCs; (3) supernatant of IgE/anti-IgE-stimulated hu PBCMCs) were processed using adapted Single-Pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) methodology (Hughes et al., Mol Syst Biol, 2014). Forty percent of each recovered digest was then desalted and concentrated using stage tips with two stacked C18 plugs (Empore; MERCK KgaA) (Rappsilber et al., Nat Protoc, 2007). Eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1% TFA. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via nanoflex ion source interface. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3μm, 5 × 0.3 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nl/min and a 90 min gradient applied (4 to 24% solvent B within 82 min, 24 to 36% solvent B within 8 min and, 36 to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before re-equilibrating at 4% solvent B for 18 min). Q Exactive MS was operated in a top 10 data-dependent acquisition mode with a MS1 scan range of 375 to 1,650 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 55 msec. MS2-scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z) with AGC settings of 1E5 and a maximum injection time of 110 msec. Precursor isolation width was set to 1.6 Da and the HCD normalized collision energy to 28%. The threshold for selecting precursor ions for MS2 was set to ~2,000 counts. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 90 sec. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed (Olsen et al., Mol Cell Proteomics, 2005), XCalibur version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 2.11.3006 were used to operate the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 platform, utilizing the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used for validation and results filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Searches for bee venom samples were performed with full tryptic digestion against the Apis mellifera UniProtKB data base v2020.06 (17,151 sequences and appended known contaminants) and Apis mellifera SwissProt database v2020.06 (73 sequences) with up to two miscleavage sites. Hu PBCMC supernatant samples were searched against the human SwissProt database v2020.06 (20,395 sequences and appended known contaminants) or in combination with Apis mellifera databases for bee venom treated with hu PBCMC supernatant with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus (+42.0110 Da) were set as variable modifications, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.025 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1, proteins with more than 1 unique peptide, and quant valuesa peak  detected in at least all samples. For calculation of protein intensities Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer, were used. Automated chromatographic alignment and feature linking mapping were enabled with the total peptide amount used for normalization between individual runs. Exported data was then analyzed using R version 4.0.3. Proteins not found in any of the Apis mellifera databases were excluded. Additionally, one of the detected peptide sequences matched to Apis mellifera superoxide dismutase also matched to Homo sapiens superoxide dismutase. Since this protein was detected with higher abundance in MC supernatant-treated BV, we assume that this represents a false positive match (secreted by activated hu PBCMCs) and excluded it from further analysis.  The remaining abundances were log2-transformed and differential abundance of proteins was analyzed using the limma package (Ritchie et al., Nucleci Acids Res, 2015). Features with an absolute log2 fold change > 1 and FDR < 0.1 were considered differentially abundant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Honeybee venom; host defense; ige; mast cells; toxin hypothesis

### Affiliations
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 94305-5176, USA

### Submitter
Andre Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J. Galli
Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 94305-5176, USA


