### Accession
PXD009294

### Title
Identification of proteins that interact with extracellularly applied fibrillar Tau assemblies

### Description
The microtubule associated protein Tau (MAPT) expressed in neurons is involved in microtubules stabilization, cell morphogenesis and axonal transport. In pathological conditions, Tau assembles into high molecular weight assemblies leading to  neuropathological Tau deposits, the hallmark of several neurodegenerative diseases collectively named “tauopathies”, including Alzheimer’s disease. These pathologic Tau assemblies are released by affected neuronal cells and taken up by naïve neighbor cells, propagate from one cell to another and amplify by seeding the aggregation of endogenous Tau.  In order to identify plasma membrane proteins exposed extracellularly that interact with extracellularly applied fibrillar Tau assemblies, we exposed pure-neuronal cultures to fibrillar Tau for 10 min, pulled down the associated proteins, and identified them using a proteomic-based approach. Of the six Tau isoforms produced by alternative splicing of the MAPT gene and differing from each other by the presence or absence of one or two inserts in the N-terminal part (0N, 1N or 2N) of the protein and by the presence of either three or four repeated microtubule binding motifs in the protein C-terminal part (3R or 4R), we have expressed and purified 1N3R and 1N4R Tau isoforms and further assembled them into 1N3R and 1N4R Tau fibrils. Using pull-down of whole cell lysates and mass spectrometry, we have identified proteins interacting with extracellularly applied Tau fibrils. We have performed two different experiments with either 1N3R Tau fibrils or 1N4R Tau fibrils (condition 1 and condition 2 respectively). Each condition consists in six experimental replicates of cells exposed 10 min to Tau fibrils and of the non-treated cells used as controls.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant wild type and full-length human 1N3R and 1N4R Tau were purified and assembled at 40µM. In order to identify specific partners of fibrillar Tau assemblies, 1N3R and 1N4R Tau fibrils were biotinylated using Sulfo-NHS-S-S-Biotin. Two weeks old pure cortical mouse neuron cultures were exposed for 10 min to biotinylated 1N3R or 1N4R Tau fibrils (conditions 1 and 2 respectively). For each condition, control samples were prepared from neurons unexposed to Tau fibrils grown under the same conditions. Tau fibrils and associated proteins were pulled down from whole cell lysates using Streptavidin magnetic beads. Interacting proteins were recovered in Laemmli buffer, concentrated in a single band on a SDS-PAGE gel and in-gel digested using trypsin after reduction-alkylation. Resulting tryptic peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a Data Dependent Acquisition method (with a Triple-TOF 4600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex) coupled to the nanoRSLC ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a 25cm C18 PepMap analytical column).

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS raw data were processed using the MS Data Converter software (AB Sciex) for generating mgf data files. Database searching for protein identifications was performed using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1) and the SwissProt database selected for Rodentia (SwissProt_2017_06 database release), including a decoy database search. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.05 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 25 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, Glu->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, Gln->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.5.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Identified proteins were quantified by a label-free proteomic approach using spectral counting. Only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides in at least four replicates out of six were quantified. All statistical analyses were performed on six replicates using Scaffold software and calculation of the p-value using the Fisher's Exact Test. Scaffold computed the false discovery rate (FDR) using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Selected proteins were identified with p-values <0.05, FDR < 0.1% Decoy. Only proteins with a total spectral count ratio, between the cells exposed to Tau fibrils and the control cells, above 2 and a p-value <0.05 were considered as significantly increased in the pull-down and thus considered as proteins interacting with Tau fibrils.

### Publication Abstract
Tau assemblies have prion-like properties: they propagate from one neuron to another and amplify by seeding the aggregation of endogenous Tau. Although key in prion-like propagation, the binding of exogenous Tau assemblies to the plasma membrane of na&#xef;ve neurons is not understood. We report that fibrillar Tau forms clusters at the plasma membrane following lateral diffusion. We found that the fibrils interact with the Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup>-ATPase (NKA) and AMPA receptors. The consequence of the clustering is a reduction in the amount of &#x3b1;3-NKA and an increase in the amount of GluA2-AMPA receptor at synapses. Furthermore, fibrillar Tau destabilizes functional NKA complexes. Tau and &#x3b1;-synuclein aggregates often co-exist in patients' brains. We now show evidences for cross-talk between these pathogenic aggregates with &#x3b1;-synuclein fibrils dramatically enhancing fibrillar Tau clustering and synaptic localization. Our results suggest that fibrillar &#x3b1;-synuclein and Tau cross-talk at the plasma membrane imbalance neuronal homeostasis.

### Keywords
Interacting protein partners, 1n4r isoform, Lc-msms, Proteomics, Tau fibrils, 1n3r isoform, Pull-down

### Affiliations
CNRS
Paris-Saclay Institute of Neuroscience, and CEA, Institut François Jacob, Université Paris-Saclay, Team Melki, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Virginie Redeker

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald Melki, Virginie Redeker
Paris-Saclay Institute of Neuroscience, and CEA, Institut François Jacob, Université Paris-Saclay, Team Melki, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


