### Accession
PXD020911

### Title
Deciphering the kinesin-8B role during Plasmodium berghei gametogenesis by a proteomic approach

### Description
We focused on the iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic characterization of rodent parasite Plasmodium berghei mutants with disrupted kinesin-8B gene compared to wild type within the gamete differentiation. Time-course analyses were performed 7 and 15 min after gametogenesis induction (Time 0).

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was lysed in 10 volumes of 8.0 M urea containing a complete mixture of protease and phosphatase inhibitors 2X (Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 100X, Thermo Scientific), through three rapid cycles of freezing in liquid nitrogen and thawing on ice. Lysates were lyophilized and stored at -80 °C until use. Lyophilized samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (Fluka), vigorously vortexed and diluted with 4 volumes of ice-cold ethanol. After homogenization, 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone were added. Sample was vigorously vortexed and incubated overnight at -20 °C for protein precipitation. Sample was then centrifuged at 13,000 x g, 15 min, at 4 °C and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed three times with ice-cold ethanol/acetone/water solution (4/4/2). Proteins were resolubilized in 8 M urea in 100 mM TEAB, centrifuged at 13,000 x g, 15 min, at 4 °C and the supernatant transferred into a new tube. Proteins were reduced by 20 mM DTT at RT for one hour and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for another hour. Proteins were first digested at RT by endoproteinase Lys-C (Sigma-Aldrich) for 12 h with 0.01 AU for 100 µg of proteins. The solution was then diluted with 100 mM TEAB and 10% acetonitrile to a final urea concentration of 1 M, supplemented with 1 µg of trypsin per 100 µg of proteins (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega), for 4 h, at RT. The peptide sample was acidified with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, final concentration, and desalted using homemade 2 cm long Poros 20 R2 and Oligo R3 (Applied Biosystems) microcolumns packed in p200 tips (Gobom, Nordhoff et al. 1999). Peptides were eluted with 70% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Dried up samples were solubilized in 300 mM TEAB and peptide concentration was determined by Qubit® quantification assay (Thermo Fischer). Samples were labelled by 4-plex iTRAQ Reagent Multi-plex Kit (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The iTRAQ labelled-sample combinations were designed to allow separate analysis of the WT P. berghei and of the Pbkin8B line in their respective biological and experimental replicates during the inducted gametogenesis as following: isotope 114: time 0, isotope 115: time 7 min, isotope 116: time 15 min for WT as previously reported (Garcia, Depoix et al. 2018) and isotope 117: time 0, isotope 114: time 7 min, isotope 115: time 15 min for Pbkin8B, and finally between both lines. Labelling efficiency was controlled by micro-analysis by mass spectrometry for each labelled sample (1 µL). After normalization, labelled samples were mixed in equal proportion

### Data Protocol
PatternLab v.4.0.0.27 was used for identification and quantitative comparison of proteins. The search was done using Comet which is embedded into PatternLab. The database used was a combination of 5,143 protein sequences of Plasmodium berghei ANKA downloaded from PlasmoDB, 55,957 sequences of Mus musculus downloaded from NCBInr plus 127 common contaminants to mass spectrometry automatically included by Patternlab. The .raw files were searched according to the following parameters: semi-tryptic and tryptic peptides hydrolytic enzyme specificity, tolerance of two missed cleavages, cabamidomethylation of cysteines and N-terminus iTRAQ-4plex tagging of lysine residues as fixed modification, iTRAQ-4plex in tyrosine as variable modification, Fragment bin tolerance of 0.02, MS/MS and precursor tolerance of 40 ppm, the search mass range was of 550 to 5,500 Da. We then used PatternLab’s SEPro to converge to a final list of confident identifications satisfying a 1% FDR at the protein level. Identifications with more than 10ppm at the precursor lever were also discarded.  The PSM results from all replicates were mapped to protein groups. Our quantitative analysis only considered proteins with two or more unique peptides and peptides with fold changes greater than 20% and p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium; gametogenesis; exflagellation; quantitative proteomics; kinesin; mutant

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF BRASILIA
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, DF 70910–900, Brazil

### Submitter
SEBASTIEN CHARNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Sébastien Charneau
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, DF 70910–900, Brazil


