### Accession
PXD001403

### Title
Proteome profiling of ovarian cancer and cirrhosis ascites

### Description
Proteome-metabolome profiling of ovarian cancer ascites reveals novel components involved in intercellular communication http://www.mcponline.org/content/early/2014/09/30/mcp.M114.041194.full.pdf+html?sid=78e7a955-fa54-4ded-b296-89f1fb6adbec

### Sample Protocol
Ascitic fluid samples The ascitic fluids from both groups were taken in standard tubes of 9-ml volume without any filler. The ascitic fluids were centrifuged at 1900 g (3000 rpm) for 15 min at room temperature in order to remove the cells. The samples were stored at -70°C and transported in liquid nitrogen. Prior to proteomic analysis, the samples were centrifuged at 16000 g for 30 min for removal of the cellular debris. Combinatorial peptide-ligand library treatment Reagent and column preparation, sample binding, and sample wash were carried out according to the manufacturer's protocol ("ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment Kit", Bio-Rad Laboratories). The sorbed proteins were twice eluted with 100 uL of four different solutions: 1) 1 M NaCl, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.5); 2) 200 mM glycine-HCl (pH 2.4); 3) 60% ethylene glycol; 4) 13.3% isopropyl alcohol, 7% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The acidic protein fraction was neutralized by adding the solution of 3 M Tris-HCl immediately after the elution. All fractions were pooled together and added to a 5 kDa molecular weight cut-off Agilent spin concentrators (Agilent Technologies, USA) for buffer exchange. Concentration of each sample pool was measured, and then 240 ug of each sample was put into new microtubes, concentrated on a speed vacuum centrifuge to 10 uL, and separated by SDS-PAGE. SDS-PAGE Biological samples were separated by 9% SDS-PAGE (20×20 cm) to prefractionate the proteins. Electrophoresis was stopped when the dye front reached 5 cm below the stacking gel. Subsequently, the gel was divided into 12 slices, each slice was subjected to in-gel protein digestion, and extracted peptide samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for protein identification. In-gel trypsin digestion of protein samples Gel slices were excised into small (1 × 1 mm) pieces and transferred into sample tubes. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT (in 100 mM ammonium acetate) at 50?C for 30 min and afterwards alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (in 100 mM ammonium acetate) at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. After alkylation, the gel samples were destained with 50% ACN (in 50 mM ammonium acetate) and dehydrated by addition of 100% ACN. After removal 100% ACN, the samples were subjected to the in-gel trypsin digestion. The digestion buffer contained 13 ng/uL trypsin (in 50 mM ammonium acetate). The trypsin digestion proceeded overnight at 37?C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel by adding 5% FA into the samples (incubation during1 h.), and, then, 50% ACN (incubation during 1 h.). Finally, the extracted peptides were dried in vacuum prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (ABSciex) coupled with a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system (Eksigent). The HPLC system was configured in a trap-elute mode. For sample loading buffer and buffer A, the mix of 98.9% water, 1% methanol, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) was used. Buffer B was 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Samples were loaded on a Chrom XP C18 trap column (3 um 120 Å 350 um*0.5 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 3 ul/min for 10 min and eluted through a 3C18-CL-120 separation column (3 um, 120 Å, 75 um*150 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was from 5 to 40% of buffer B in 120 min. Between different samples, a blank 45 min run consisting of 5*5min waves (5%B-95%-95%-5%) was required to wash the column.  Information-dependent mass-spectrometer experiment included 1 survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were as follows: mass range for MS2 analysis was 300-1250 m/z, signal accumulation time was 250 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity with the threshold of 400 cps and the charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters were as follows: resolution of quadrupole was set to UNIT (0.7 Da), measurement mass range was 200-1800 m/z, signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision-activated dissociation was performed with nitrogen gas with collision energy ramping from 25 to 55 V within signal accumulation time of 50 ms. Analyzed parent ions were sent to dynamic exclusion list for 15 sec in order to get an MS2 spectra at the chromatographic peak apex.

### Data Protocol
This is a raw data! LC-MS/MS data analysis Raw MS/MS analyzes were converted to an mgf peaklists with the ProteinPilot (version 4.5). For this procedure we run ProteinPilot in identification mode with the following parameters: Cys alkylation by iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, TripleTOF 5600 instrument, thorough ID search with detected protein threshold 95.0% against UniProt human Protein knowledgebase (version 2013_03, with 150600 entries). For thorough protein identification the generated peaklists were searched with the MASCOT (version 2.2.07) and the X! Tandem (CYCLONE, 2013.2.01) search engine against the UniProt human Protein knowledgebase (version 2013_03) with concatenated reverse decoy dataset (with 301200 entries altogether). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 0.04 Da, respectively. Database-searching parameters included the following: tryptic digestion with 1 possible miss cleavage, static modifications for carbamidomethyl (C) and dynamic/flexible modifications for oxidation (M). For X! Tandem we also selected parameters that allow quickly check for protein N-terminal residue acetylation, peptide N-terminal glutamine ammonia loss or peptide N-terminal glutamic acid water loss. Result files were submitted to the Scaffold 4 software (version 4.0.7) for validation and meta analysis. We used LFDR scoring algorithm with standard experiment wide protein grouping. For the evaluation of peptide and protein hits, a false discovery rate of 5% was selected for both. False positive identifications were based on reverse database analysis. We also set protein annotation preferences in Scaffold to highlight Swiss-Prot accessions among others in protein groups. The homologous proteins were searched with the use of the blastp (version 2.2.28+) program in the UniProt human Protein knowledgebase (version 2013_03) and the International Protein Index human database (version 3.87) for a comparison of the proteins identified in our study with those described in Sarah Elschenbroich et al. (10), Gortzak-Uzan et al. (3) and Drabovich A.P. et al. (8) The sequences were considered to be homologous if the identity value was >=90%.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer ascites is a native medium for cancer cells that allows investigation of their secretome in a natural environment. This medium is of interest as a promising source of potential biomarkers, and also as a medium for cell-cell communication. The aim of this study was to elucidate specific features of the malignant ascites metabolome and proteome. In order to omit components of the systemic response to ascites formation, we compared malignant ascites with cirrhosis ascites. Metabolome analysis revealed 41 components that differed significantly between malignant and cirrhosis ascites. Most of the identified cancer-specific metabolites are known to be important signaling molecules. Proteomic analysis identified 2096 and 1855 proteins in the ovarian cancer and cirrhosis ascites, respectively; 424 proteins were specific for the malignant ascites. Functional analysis of the proteome demonstrated that the major differences between cirrhosis and malignant ascites were observed for the cluster of spliceosomal proteins. Additionally, we demonstrate that several splicing RNAs were exclusively detected in malignant ascites, where they probably existed within protein complexes. This result was confirmed in vitro using an ovarian cancer cell line. Identification of spliceosomal proteins and RNAs in an extracellular medium is of particular interest; the finding suggests that they might play a role in the communication between cancer cells. In addition, malignant ascites contains a high number of exosomes that are known to play an important role in signal transduction. Thus our study reveals the specific features of malignant ascites that are associated with its function as a medium of intercellular communication.

### Keywords
Ovarian cencer, Ascites, Intercellular communication

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganik Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Science

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Arapidi
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganik Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Science


