### Accession
PXD008127

### Title
Identification of tumor antigens among the HLA peptidomes of Glioblastoma tumors and plasma

### Description
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive brain tumor with poor prognosis to most patients. Immunotherapy of GBM is a potentially beneficial treatment option, whose optimal implementation may depend on familiarity with tumor specific antigens, presented as HLA peptides by the GBM cells. Furthermore, early detection of GBM, such as by a routine blood test, may improve survival, even with the current treatment modalities. This study includes large-scale analyses of the HLA peptidome (immunopeptidome) of the plasma-soluble HLA molecules (sHLA) of 142 plasma samples and the membranal HLA of GBM tumors of 10 tumor samples of the same patients. Tumor samples were fresh-frozen immediately after surgery and plasma samples were collected before, and at multiple visits after surgery. In total, this HLA peptidome analysis involved 52 different HLA allotypes and resulted in the identification of more than 35,000 different HLA peptides. Strong correlations were observed in the signal intensities and in the repertoires of identified peptides between the tumors and plasma-soluble HLA peptidomes of the same patients; yet, low correlations were observed between these HLA peptidomes and the tumors’ proteomes. HLA peptides derived from Cancer/Testis Antigens (CTAs) were selected based on their presence among the HLA peptidomes of the patients and absence of expression of their source genes from any healthy and essential human tissues, except from immune-privileged sites. Additionally, peptides were selected as potential biomarkers if their levels in the plasma-sHLA peptidome were significantly reduced after the removal of tumor mass. The CTAs identified among the analyzed HLA peptidomes provide new opportunities for personalized immunotherapy and for early diagnosis of GBM.

### Sample Protocol
Membranal HLA class I molecules were purified from GBM tumor tissues by immunoaffinity from the cells after lysis with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Mixture (Sigma), 1 mM PMSF, and 1% octyl-D-glucopyranoside (Sigma) in PBS at 4 °C for 1 hour. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 45 min at 18,000 rpm, at 4 °C. HLA class I molecules from the cleared lysate or from the fresh human plasma were immunoaffinity purified using the W6/32 mAb bound to Amino-Link beads (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The HLA molecules with their bound peptides were eluted from the affinity column with five column volumes of 1% TFA. The eluted HLA class I proteins, and the released peptides were loaded on disposable C18 micro-columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA), and the peptides fraction was recovered with 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA, while the protein fraction was recovered with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The peptide fractions were dried using vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in 100 μl of 0.1% TFA, reloaded on C18 Stage-Tips, eluted with 80% acetonitrile, dried, and reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Proteomics analysis was performed after trypsin digestion of the proteins in gel slices. Briefly, 40 microgram protein from each tissue was ran in 10% acrylamide gel, stained with Coomassie, and each lane of the gel was sliced into five slices. The proteins in the gel slices were reduced with 2.8 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 min and carbamidomethylated with 8.8 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 min and digested overnight at 37 °C in 10% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-substrate ratio. This was repeated for another 4 hours with a similar amount of trypsin, followed by 150 min gradients of LC-MS/MS of the tryptic peptides from each gel slice.  Identification of the HLA and tryptic peptides: Both the HLA and tryptic peptides were resolved by capillary chromatography and electrospray tandem mass spectrometry using a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer fitted with a capillary Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-capillary UHPLC (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The reversed phase capillary chromatographs were 30 cm long, 75 micron inner diameter columns, home-packed with 3.5 m silica ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). HLA and tryptic peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5–28% of acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic acid. For both the HLA peptides and for the in-gel digested fractions, the Capillary HPLC gradients were run at flow rates of 0.15 µl/minutes during 120 min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent “top 10” method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Full scan MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3*106 ions. MS/MS ions were accumulated to an AGC target value of 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 msec. For the HLA peptides with unassigned precursor ion charge states, or charge states of four and above, no fragmentation was performed. For tryptic peptides, the fragmentation was performed on charge states between 2 to 7. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded from further selection for 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis: The MS data was analyzed by the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform version 1.5.3.8 and searched with the Andromeda search engine. Peptide identifications were based on the human section of the Uniprot database (http://www.uniprot.org/) of July 2015 containing 69,693 entries. Proteins were declared positive identification with at least two identified tryptic peptides per protein. Mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the precursor masses and 20 ppm for the fragments were allowed. Methionine oxidation was accepted as variable modification for both tryptic and HLA peptides. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was accepted as a fixed modification for the proteomics data and as a variable modification for the HLA peptidome data. Methionine sulfoxide and n-acetylation were set as variable modifications for both the proteomics and HLA peptidomics analyses. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed for tryptic peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set for tryptic peptides to 0.01 for protein identifications, and 0.05 for the HLA peptides. The resulting identified protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications derived from the reverse database, as well as common contaminants.  Normalization of the HLA peptidome and proteome Data: The HLA peptidome of each of the LC-MS/MS runs was normalized according to its median. The medians were zeroed, and down-regulated HLA peptides were defined as those changing by at least two folds in the plasma samples collected immediately before surgery relative to samples collected at later clinic visits. The proteome LC-MS/MS data was normalized using the LFQ and iBAQ tools of the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most aggressive brain tumor with poor prognosis to most patients. Immunotherapy of GBM is a potentially beneficial treatment option, whose optimal implementation may depend on familiarity with tumor specific antigens, presented as HLA peptides by the GBM cells. Further, early detection of GBM, such as by a routine blood test, may improve survival, even with the current treatment modalities. This study includes large-scale analyses of the HLA peptidome (immunopeptidome) of the plasma-soluble HLA molecules (sHLA) of 142 plasma samples, and the membranal HLA of GBM tumors of 10 of these patients' tumor samples. Tumor samples were fresh-frozen immediately after surgery and the plasma samples were collected before, and at multiple visits after surgery. In total, this HLA peptidome analysis involved 52 different HLA allotypes and resulted in the identification of more than 35,000 different HLA peptides. Strong correlations were observed in the signal intensities and in the repertoires of identified peptides between the tumors and plasma-soluble HLA peptidomes of the individual patients, whereas low correlations were observed between these HLA peptidomes and the tumors' proteomes. HLA peptides derived from Cancer/Testis Antigens (CTAs) were selected based on their presence among the HLA peptidomes of the patients and absence of expression of their source genes from any healthy and essential human tissues, except from immune-privileged sites. Additionally, peptides were selected as potential biomarkers if their levels in the plasma-sHLA peptidome were significantly reduced after the removal of tumor mass. The CTAs identified among the analyzed HLA peptidomes provide new opportunities for personalized immunotherapy and for early diagnosis of GBM.

### Keywords
Plasma, Mhla, Glioblastoma, Hla peptidome, Shla, Early detection

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
Department of Biology, Technion- Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Bracha Shraibman

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Department of Biology, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel


