### Accession
PXD043946

### Title
Inceptor facilitates acrosomal vesicle formation in spermatids and is required for male fertility

### Description
Spermatogenesis is a crucial biological process that enables the production of functional sperm, allowing for successful reproduction. Proper germ cell differentiation and maturation require tight regulation of hormonal signals, cellular signaling pathways, and cell biological processes. The acrosome is a lysosome-related organelle at the anterior of the sperm head that contains enzymes and receptors essential for egg-sperm recognition and fusion. Even though several factors crucial for acrosome biogenesis have been discovered, the precise molecular mechanism of pro-acrosomal vesicle formation and fusion is not known. In this study, we investigated the role of the insulin inhibitory receptor (inceptor) in acrosome formation. Inceptor is a single-pass transmembrane protein with similarities to mannose-6-phosphate receptors (M6PR). Inceptor knockout mice are infertile due to malformations in the acrosome and defects in the nuclear shape of spermatozoa. We show that inceptor is expressed in early spermatids and mainly localizes to vesicles between the Golgi apparatus and acrosome. We propose that inceptor is an important factor in the intracellular transport of trans-Golgi network (TGN)-derived clathrin-coated vesicles delivering acrosomal cargo in maturing spermatids, and its absence results in vesicle-fusion defects, acrosomal malformation, and male infertility. These findings support our hypothesis of inceptor as a universal lysosomal or lysosome-related organelle sorting receptor expressed in several secretory tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Isolated murine testes (n = 6) were homogenized in a Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer in 125 mM KCl, 10 mM EDTA, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.2), 1 % protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The protein concentration was measured by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce). 1 % NP-40 substitute was added before incubation with anti-Inceptor antibodies or isotype antibodies (2G6 and 11A7, respectively (Ansarullah et al., 2021)) coupled to protein G SureBeads (BioRad). The co-immunoprecipitated protein was eluted into Laemmli buffer at 60 °C.  Mass spectrometry  For total proteome, NP-40 substitute (Merck Millipore) was added to homogenized testis. For the interactome analysis, the eluate from immunoprecipitation was used. The samples were further proteolysed with LysC and trypsin as described (Grosche et al., 2016; Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Acidified eluted peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex) on a C18 analytical column, separated by a 90-min non-linear acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60000 with an AGC target of 3 x 1e6 and a maximum injection time of 30 ms from 300 to 1500 m/z.  From the MS scan, the 15 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation via HCD with a normalized collision energy of 28, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 with a AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Unassigned charges, and charges of +1 and >8 were excluded from precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data of the total testis proteome samples was analyzed in the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 SP1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against the SwissProt Mouse database (Release 2020_02, 17061 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage site. The Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007) was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides. The final list of proteins satisfying the strict parsimony principle included only protein groups passing an additional protein confidence false discovery rate < 5% (target/decoy concatenated search validation). Protein groups with >= 50% missing values were disregarded. In the remaining protein groups, missing values were imputed by GMSimpute (Li et al., 2020). We deem proteins with an adjusted p value < 0.05 significant. Significant hits were analyzed for GO term enrichment via the g:Profiler tool g:GOSt (Raudvere et al., 2019) against the annotated mouse genome or against the custom reference gene list containing all detected proteins after imputation in the total proteome sample (see figure legends).  Raw data for the interactome analysis was imported into Progenesis QI software (version 4.1). After feature alignment and normalization, spectra were exported as Mascot Generic files and searched against SwissProt Mouse database (Release 2020_02, 17061 sequences) with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.8.2) with the following search parameters: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 20 mmu fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation, and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery rate < 0.5 % for PSMs when searches were performed applying the mascot percolator score and a significance threshold p<0.05. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software and the abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. The resulting normalized abundances of the individual proteins were used for calculation of fold-changes of protein ratios between experimental conditions and statistical analysis was performed on log2 transformed normalized abundance values using one way ANOVA. Values are corrected for multiple testing by an optimized FDR approach. Potential interactors with a q value < 0.05, a fold change between inceptor and control IP > 2, and less than seven missing values (corresponding to 60 %) were selected and a GO:term analysis was performed. GO:BP terms were reduced with the rrvgo R package 1.10.0 (Sayols, 2020) with a threshold of 0.6.

### Publication Abstract
Spermatogenesis is a crucial biological process that enables the production of functional sperm, allowing for successful reproduction. Proper germ cell differentiation and maturation require tight regulation of hormonal signals, cellular signaling pathways, and cell biological processes. The acrosome is a lysosome-related organelle at the anterior of the sperm head that contains enzymes and receptors essential for egg-sperm recognition and fusion. Even though several factors crucial for acrosome biogenesis have been discovered, the precise molecular mechanism of pro-acrosomal vesicle formation and fusion is not yet known. In this study, we investigated the role of the insulin inhibitory receptor (inceptor) in acrosome formation. Inceptor is a single-pass transmembrane protein with similarities to mannose-6-phosphate receptors (M6PR). Inceptor knockout male mice are infertile due to malformations in the acrosome and defects in the nuclear shape of spermatozoa. We show that inceptor is expressed in early spermatids and mainly localizes to vesicles between the Golgi apparatus and acrosome. Here we show that inceptor is an essential factor in the intracellular transport of <i>trans</i>-Golgi network-derived vesicles which deliver acrosomal cargo in maturing spermatids. The absence of inceptor results in vesicle-fusion defects, acrosomal malformation, and male infertility. These findings support our hypothesis of inceptor as a universal lysosomal or lysosome-related organelle sorting receptor expressed in several secretory tissues.

### Keywords
Vesicle, Male fertility, Spermatogenesis, Localization, Acrosome, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen
Helmholtz Zentrum München GmbH

### Submitter
Sara Bilekova

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Hauck
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen


