### Accession
PXD030609

### Title
Two closely related white rot fungi, Obba rivulosa and Gelatoporia subvermispora, produce orthologous plant cell wall degrading enzymes for spruce wood degradation

### Description
Unique ability of basidiomycete white rot fungi to degrade all components of plant cell walls makes them indispensable organisms in global carbon cycle. In this study, we analyzed proteomes of two closely related white rot fungi, Obba rivulosa and Gelatoporia subvermispora, while growing on solid spruce wood, and defined a core set of CAZymes that was shared between these species including the orthologous enzymes. Similar production pattern of these CAZymes indicate their key role in plant biomass degradation and need for their further biochemical characterization. The obtained results give an insight into specific enzymes and enzyme sets that are produced during the degradation of solid spruce wood. These findings expand the knowledge on enzyme production in nature-mimicking conditions and may contribute to exploitation of white rot fungi and their enzymes in biotechnological applications.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, duplicate fungal spruce wood cultures incubated for 2, 4 and 8 weeks were ground under liquid nitrogen. The milled cultures were extracted with 40 mL 25 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, under agitation (150 rpm) at 4°C for 2 h. The extract was filtered (GF/C glass fiber filters, Whatman) and proteins in the liquid fraction were precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid, 20 mM dithiothreitol and 80% acetone solution, resuspended and reprecipitated with 20 mM DTT and 80% acetone solution. Ten micrograms of protein was resuspended in 0.25% Anionic Acid Labile Surfactant 26 I (AALS I, ProgentaTM, Protea Biosciences, Inc., USA) detergent prepared in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 7.8, loaded and separated on 12% SDS-PAGE gels for subsequent in-gel trypsin digestion. Protein separation was stopped as soon as the 250 kDa marker could be seen entering the separating gel. The complete lane, delimited by the bromophenol blue front at the bottom and the start of the separating gel at the top (about 1.5 cm), was cut and processed for in-gel digestion as a whole. In-gel digested peptide extracts from two biological replicate cultures were analyzed by LC-MS?MS. Five µl of sample containing trypsin digested bovine serum albumin at 4 femtomoles/microlitre as an internal standard was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy-LC II Nano-HPLC system connected in-line with a Velos LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.  Sample chromatographic separation was done using a 120 mm x 0.075 mm capillary column packed with Jupiter 5µm C18 reversed-phase resin and a gradient starting at 95% water:5% Acetonitrile and reaching 10% water:90% acetonitrile in 90 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min.  MS/MS acquisitions were done using a data dependent acquisition method that selects the top ten 2+, 3+ and 4+ charged precursor ions from each full MS scan between 350 and 2000 m/z range for collisional induced fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were searched against the O. rivulosa and G. subvermispora databases from JGI Mycocosm (https://genome.jgi.doe.gov/programs/fungi/index.jsf) containing 13,206 and 12,125 putative protein sequences, respectively, for peptide/protein identification. Normalized Protein Area values were calculated using the top 5 most abundant identified peptides for each protein determined using the Precursor Quantitation Workflow from Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo-Fisher) and were used to quantify relative levels of total proteins. Carboamidomethylation of cysteines was used as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine was used as variable modification.  Precursor mass tolerance was 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da.  A minimum of two peptides of high confidence (FDR < 0.01) was selected as minimum requirement for protein identification.    Normalized individual protein area values were reported as a fold value of the protein area value determined for the BSA internal standard.

### Publication Abstract
The unique ability of basidiomycete white rot fungi to degrade all components of plant cell walls makes them indispensable organisms in the global carbon cycle. In this study, we analyzed the proteomes of two closely related white rot fungi, <i>Obba rivulosa</i> and <i>Gelatoporia subvermispora</i>, during eight-week cultivation on solid spruce wood. Plant cell wall degrading carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) represented approximately 5% of the total proteins in both species. A core set of orthologous plant cell wall degrading CAZymes was shared between these species on spruce suggesting a conserved plant biomass degradation approach in this clade of basidiomycete fungi. However, differences in time-dependent production of plant cell wall degrading enzymes may be due to differences among initial growth rates of these species on solid spruce wood. The obtained results provide insight into specific enzymes and enzyme sets that are produced during the degradation of solid spruce wood in these fungi. These findings expand the knowledge on enzyme production in nature-mimicking conditions and may contribute to the exploitation of white rot fungi and their enzymes for biotechnological applications.

### Keywords
Lignin biodegradation, Gelatoporia subvermispora, Obba rivulosa, Lc-ms/ms, Cazymes, Proteome, White rot fungi

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry University of Helsinki Latokartanonkaari 7 Helsinki Finland
Concordia University

### Submitter
Marcos Di Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Kristiina Sari Hildén
Department of Microbiology Faculty of Agriculture and Forestry University of Helsinki Latokartanonkaari 7 Helsinki Finland


