### Accession
PXD020155

### Title
ARAF interactome in mouse melanoma by LC-MS/MS

### Description
This project aims to investigate the role of ARAF in NRAS mutated melanoma by identifying new partners using LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
ARAF only or control cells were lysed in NP40 buffer (Tris pH7.5 50mM, NaCl 150mM, 0.5% NP40, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). 5 or 4 biological replicates were prepared for each condition respectively, to increase data accuracy and perform relative quantification. Endogenous ARAF was immunoprecipitated by using ARAF antibody (#75804, Cell Signaling) and PierceTM protein-A magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) for 1mg of total protein for each replicate. Immunoprecipitation was performed on rotating wheel at 4°C during 4 hours and pellets were washed 3 times in NP40 buffer. Two additional washes in 100 μL of ABC buffer (25 mM NH4HCO3) were performed keeping the beads in the magnet and with no incubation. Finally, beads were resuspended in 100 μl of ABC buffer and digested by adding 0.20 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded onto homemade Tips packed with Empore™ C18 Extraction Disks (3M™ Discs 2215) for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic, vacuum concentrated to dryness and were re-dissolved in solvent A (2% MeCN, 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis. Spectra were recorded on a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanospay Flex ion source mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Mus Musculus UniProt canonical database (22082017 containing 16888 sequences) using Sequest–HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.0). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine carbamidomethyl cysteines and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.5 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator (Spivak et al., 2009) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.0.1 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching), missed cleavages and carbamidomethyl cysteine modified peptides were used. Global MAD normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (n=4 for the control and n=5 for ARAF only). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) based on two-tailed T-tests was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR. Protein with at least nine total peptides in all replicates, a 2-fold enrichment and an adjusted p-value < 0.001 were considered significantly enriched in sample comparison. Unique proteins were considered with at least four total peptides in all replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Melanoma, Araf

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute's mass spectrometry platform (LSMP)

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute's mass spectrometry platform (LSMP)


