### Accession
PXD023510

### Title
Methylation of Q105 on histone H2A is part of a dynamic regulatory mechanism integrating metabolism with ribosome biogenesis through recruitment of Nhp2

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is an essential process within cells that requires integration of extracellular cues such as metabolic states through signaling with transcriptional regulation and maintenance of accessible chromatin at the ribosomal DNA. Here, we demonstrate that the recently identified histone modification, methylation of H2AQ105 is an integral part of a dynamic chromatin network at the rDNA locus. Its deposition depends on a functional mTor signaling pathway and acetylation of histone H3 at position K56, thus integrating signals from cell cycle and proliferative states. Furthermore, we identify a first epigenetic reader of this modification. The ribonucleoprotein Nhp2 specifically recognizes methylation H2AQ105me. Based on functional and proteomic data we suggest that Nhp2 functions as an adapter to bridge chromatin and components of the small subunit processome and might help to efficiently coordinate transcription of rRNA with its post-transcriptional processing.

### Sample Protocol
Following peptide pulldown of SILAC-labelled cultures, beads from heavy and light experiments were mixed and washed further 2x in 1 ml of 1x TBS to remove excess detergent. Proteins were eluted in 50ul of mass spec elution buffer (6M Guanidine hydrochloride, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris (pH 8.5)), for 1 hour at room temperature, regularly shaking to prevent the beads from settling, and then diluted 10-fold in 20 mM Tris/10 % acetronile. The protein concentration was measured using a nanodrop (260/280) and 5 ug of LysC was added to 100 ug of protein. Proteins were digested on the beads at 37°C overnight with gentle shaking so as to prevent the beads from settling. Following protein digestion, peptides were purified using FASP peptide purification (Coleman et al, 2017), followed by Mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch,) using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. For the Qme IP , peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 5% to 20% buffer B for 100 min, from 20% to 25% buffer B for 10 min, and from 25% to 40% buffer B for 10 min at 200 nl / min. For the Nhp2 IP peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 45 min, and from 31% to 44% buffer B for 8 min at 200 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a QExactive Plus (Qme IP) or QExactive HF (Nhp2 IP) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 70000 (Qme IP) or 60000 (Nhp2 IP) resolution in the 300 to 1800 (Qme IP) or 300 to 1500 (Nhp2 IP) m/z range. The top ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% (Qme IP) or 27% (Nhp2 IP) normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 17500 (Qme IP) or 15000 (Nhp2 IP) using 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann 2008) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox, Neuhauser et al. 2011). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical and isoform sequences of the yeast reference proteome (proteome ID UP000002311, downloaded February 2015 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “Specific” and “LysC/P” (Qme IP) or “Trypsin/P” (Nhp2 IP). The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on. For the analysis of the Qme IP, “Re-quantify” was enabled. . For the analysis of the Nhp2 IP, successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. SILAC quantification (Qme IP) was performed using a minimum ratio count of two. Label-free quantification (Nhp2 IP) (Cox et al., 2014) was performed using a minimum ratio count of two. Downstream data transformation, filtering and differential abundance analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.5.0.0 (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016). For the Qme IP data, log2 transformed SILAC ratios were analyzed using a one-sided t-test against zero. For the Nhp2 IP data, label-free intensities were filtered for at least three valid values in at least one group and imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Imputed values were analyzed with a two-sided t-test, using a S0 parameter of one. Functional category enrichment analysis was done using DAVID (Huang, Sherman et al. 2009). Visualization of the differential abundance results was done in R (R Core Team 2017) using ggplot2 (Wickham 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq, Ip, Silac

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Stress Responses in ageing-associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 15Cologne, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Tessarz
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931 Cologne, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Stress Responses in ageing-associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 15Cologne, Germany


