### Accession
PXD019316

### Title
Vulnerability of Progeroid Smooth Muscle Cells to biomechanical forces is mediated by MMP13

### Description
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a premature aging disease in children that leads to early death. Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are the most affected cells in HGPS patients, although the reason for such vulnerability remains poorly understood. In this work, we developed a chip formed from HGPS-SMCs that were generated from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to study their vulnerability to flow shear stress. HGPS-iPSC SMCs cultured under arterial flow conditions detached from the chip after a few days of culture; this process was mediated by the up-regulation of metalloprotease 13 (MMP13). Importantly, double mutant LmnaG609G/G609GMmp13-/- mice or LmnaG609G/G609GMmp13+/+ mice treated with a MMP inhibitor showed lower SMC loss in the aortic arch than controls. MMP13 up-regulation appears to be mediated, at least in part, by the up-regulation of glycocalyx. Our results offer a new platform for developing treatments for HGPS patients that may complement previous pre-clinical and clinical treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets from HGPS-iPSC-SMC cells were processed for quantitative proteome analysis using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT), as described in (Heinze, et al., 2018). Briefly, samples were lysed with 100 µL of 2%SDS, 50mM DTT, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode). Following reduction and alkylation, proteins were precipitated with ice cold acetone. Protein pellets were reconstituted in digestion buffer containing 3M urea in 0.1M HEPES, pH 8 and LysC (1:100) (Wako). After 4 h of incubation at 37°C with shaking at 650 rpm, the samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water (to reach 1.5M urea) and were incubated with trypsin (1:100) for 16 h at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm, dried down using a vacuum centrifuge and labelled using TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following verification of labelling efficiency, samples were pooled and fractionated by high pH reverse chromatography using an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC System. Forty-eight fractions were collected along the chromatographic separation, which were subsequently pooled into 16 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried and then stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Each fraction was analysed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online connected with a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) using a Synchronus Precursor Selection (SPS)-MS3 method (McAlister, et al. 2014).

### Data Protocol
TMT-10plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher). Data were searched against a human database (Uniprot database, Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable. Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modification from the quantification method used. The quantification method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm). The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator.  Reporter ion intensity values for the PSMs were exported and processed with procedures written in R (version 3.4.1), as described in (Heinze, et al., 2018). Briefly, PSMs mapping to reverse or contaminant hits, or having a Mascot score below 15, or having reporter ion intensities below 1 x 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were discarded. TMT channels intensities from the retained PSMs were then log2 transformed, normalised and summarised into protein group quantities by taking the median value. At least two unique peptides per protein were required for the identification and only those peptides with one missing values across all 10 channels were considered for quantification. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package. Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t test moderated by the empirical Bayes method. P values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR, denoted as “adj p”).

### Publication Abstract
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a premature aging disease in children that leads to early death. Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are the most affected cells in HGPS individuals, although the reason for such vulnerability remains poorly understood. In this work, we develop a microfluidic chip formed by HGPS-SMCs generated from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), to study their vulnerability to flow shear stress. HGPS-iPSC SMCs cultured under arterial flow conditions detach from the chip after a few days of culture; this process is mediated by the upregulation of metalloprotease 13 (MMP13). Importantly, double-mutant Lmna<sup>G609G/G609G</sup>Mmp13<sup>-/-</sup> mice or Lmna<sup>G609G/G609G</sup>Mmp13<sup>+/+</sup> mice treated with a MMP inhibitor show lower SMC loss in the aortic arch than controls. MMP13 upregulation appears to be mediated, at least in part, by the upregulation of glycocalyx. Our HGPS-SMCs chip represents a platform for developing treatments for HGPS individuals that may complement previous pre-clinical and clinical treatments.

### Keywords
Therapies, Induced pluripotent stem cells, Progeria, Aging, Disease modelling

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging  – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstrasse 11 07745 Jena, Germany


