### Accession
PXD004015

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of Murine Norovirus infected BV-2 cells

### Description
SILAC-labelling analysis of murine BV-2 cells infected at high multiplicity of infection (10 TCID50/cell) and harvested at 4h or 9h post-infection. Represents the first quantitative proteomics analysis of norovirus-infected cells. A paired AP-MS dataset investigates the effects of MNV infection on eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) complex formation with this dataset providing data on the overall abundance of eIF components in infected cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were labelled in SILAC DMEM containing R0K0 (0h/Mock), R6K4 (4h post-infection) or R10K8 (9h post-infection). For one repeat the R6K4 and R10K8 labelled cells were swapped. Cells were harvested in RIPA buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100 and 0.1% SDS supplemented with protease inhibitors) at the indicated timepoint and subject to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis on precast gels. Gels were cut into 10 slices which were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a ProGest automated digestion unit. The resulting peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Dionex). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Dionex) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 3min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.1 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an LTQ- Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The Orbitrap was set to analyze the survey scans at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 300 to 2000 and the top six multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap.  Charge state filtering, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30s; exclusion list size, 500) were used.  Fragmentation conditions in the LTQ were as follows: normalized collision energy, 40%; activation q, 0.25; activation time 10ms; and minimum ion selection intensity, 500 counts.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.2 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the Uniprot Mouse database (81998 entries) plus additional MNV-1 protein sequences using the SEQUEST (Ver. 28 Rev. 13) algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.8Da.  Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) and appropriate SILAC labels (13C6-Arg, 13C615N4-Arg, 2H4-Lys and 13C615N2-Lys) as variable modifications.  Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. Quantitation was done using a mass precision of 2ppm. The presented protein ratios represent the median of the raw measured peptide ratios for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Norovirus, Mnv, Bv-2, Initiation, Murine, Microglia

### Affiliations
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Edward Emmott

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Goodfellow
Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, UK


