### Accession
PXD020491

### Title
Pathological pathways and biomarker in Mucolipidosis type IV mice and post mortem patient.

### Description
In this study we present data from the only available post-mortem mucolipidosis type IV (MLIV) patient. We characterise the brain pathology of the MLIV patient and compare it to pathology from the mice model of MLIV. Moreover, we  characterise the proteins found in the MLIV patient CSF and compare it to the mice MLIV CSF. We define possible biomarkers for this devastating disease.

### Sample Protocol
For brain samples, each sample was loaded onto S-Trap microcolumns and subjected to digestion with trypsin. The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry. The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography  coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry. For CSF samples, proteins were subjected to digestion with trypsin, digestions were stopped by addition of trifluoracetic acid. Peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB, μElution format.  The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the mouse or human or mouse proteome database as downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.com), and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Pathway analysis was done using gene Gene Analytics. Proteins were assigned into categories based on the Human Protein Atlas.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Csf, Mice

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science 
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Amir Prior

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony H. Futerman
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann institute of Science, Israel


