### Accession
PXD001636

### Title
RhoA ko BMDC -  Control of Homeostasis and Dendritic Cell Survival by the GTPase RhoA

### Description
Differential protein expression between RhoA ko and wt bone marrow-derived dendritic cells

### Sample Protocol
5x CRE (WT control), 5x RhoA (KO), 20 Mio cells/tube, ~2000 µg protein/tube Cell pellet was mixed with 400 µl SDT buffer, boiled for 5 minutes at 95 C, sonified for 5 minutes in sonication bath, boiled for 5 minutes at 95 C. Sample was than cleared by centrifugation at 13.000 rpm for 5 min.  FASP: 40 µl SDT (200 µg protein) + 300 µl UA buffer. 2 µg Trypsin were used. Protocol “FASP Protocol (Single-Digest, 30 k Amicon Ultra 0.5 ml filter; 30 k Vivacon 500 0.5 ml filter). SAX: 3 fractions, pH 11, 6, and 3. 15 µg of protein was subjected to SAX. LC-MS/MS: 3µg of proteins were injected per run. 2 technical replicates were measured. Easy nLC1000, LTQ Velos Orbitrap, 15 cm homemade column, 2.4 µm Beads. A gradient of 210 min was used for LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed by Maxquant (version 1.3.0.5). MS spectra were searched against a reversed concatenated database of Mus musculus (Uniprot, download August 21st 2012). Carbamidomethylation was defined as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and acetylation of the protein N-termini were defined as variable modifications. The label free quantification algorithm of Maxquant was used to relatively quantify protein abundance differences between RhoA and WT BMDCs. Only proteins that were quantifiable in at least 3 out of 5 biological replicates were included for statistical analysis. A ttest p-value was  calculated for every protein. The p-value was corrected after FDR based multiple hypothesis testing.

### Publication Abstract
Tissues accommodate defined numbers of dendritic cells (DCs) in highly specific niches where different intrinsic and environmental stimuli control DC life span and numbers. DC homeostasis in tissues is important, because experimental changes in DC numbers influence immunity and tolerance toward various immune catastrophes and inflammation. However, the precise molecular mechanisms regulating DC life span and homeostasis are unclear. We report that the GTPase RhoA controls homeostatic proliferation, cytokinesis, survival, and turnover of cDCs. Deletion of RhoA strongly decreased the numbers of CD11b(-)CD8(+) and CD11b(+)Esam(hi) DC subsets, whereas CD11b(+)Esam(lo) DCs were not affected in conditional RhoA-deficient mice. Proteome analyses revealed a defective prosurvival pathway via PI3K/protein kinase B (Akt1)/Bcl-2-associated death promoter in the absence of RhoA. Taken together, our findings identify RhoA as a central regulator of DC homeostasis, and its deletion decreases DC numbers below critical thresholds for immune protection and homeostasis, causing aberrant compensatory DC proliferation.

### Keywords
Dendritic cells, Rhoa

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology LMU Munich Germany
Institute for Immunology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität

### Submitter
Shuai Li

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Brocker
Institute for Immunology LMU Munich Germany


