### Accession
PXD010724

### Title
Nitric Oxide Enhances Resistance to PEG-induced Water Deficiency is Associated with the Primary Photosynthesis Reaction in Triticum aestivum L.

### Description
Photosynthesis is affected by water deficiency (WD) stress, and nitric oxide (NO) is a free radical that participates in the photosynthesis process. Previous studies have suggested that NO regulates the excitation energy distribution of photosynthesis under WD stress. Here, quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling was conducted using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation. Differentially phosphorylated protein species (DEPs) were identified in leaves of NO or polyethylene glycol (PEG)-treated wheat seedlings (D) and in control seedlings, 2,257 unique phosphorylated peptides and 2,416 phosphorylation sites were identified from 1,396 unique phosphoproteins. Of these, 96 DEPs displayed significant changes (≥ 1.50-fold, p < 0.01). These DEPs are involved in photosynthesis and signal transduction, etc. Furthermore, phosphorylation of several DEPs were up-regulated by both D and NO treatments, but down-regulated only in NO treatment. These differences affected the chlorophyll A-B binding protein, chloroplast post-illumination chlorophyll fluorescence increase protein, and SNT7, implying that NO indirectly regulated the absorption and transport of light energy in photosynthesis in response to WD stress. The significant difference of chlorophyll (Chl) content, Chl a fluorescence transient, photosynthesis index, and trapping and transport of light energy further indicated that exogenous NO under D stress enhanced the primary reaction of photosynthesis compared to D treatment. A putative pathway is proposed to elucidate NO regulation of the primary reaction of photosynthesis under WD.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of common wheat (Triticum aestivum L. cultivar “Zhoumai 18”) were germinated for 14 h in glass petri dishes (15 cm) in an illuminated incubator (Ningbo Laifu Technology)Standard growth conditions for wheat were used (14-h light:10-h dark photoperiod; 25°Cday and 15°C night; relative humidity of 60% during the day and 75% at night). Uniform seedlings were transferred to full-strength Hoagland’s liquid growth medium and each petri dish contained approximately 60 seedlings. After 15 further days of growth, three dishes of each sample group were treated: For the C treatment, seedlings were incubated in Hoagland medium without SNP and PEG; For the D treatment, seedlings were incubated in Hoagland medium supplemented with 20% PEG (6000)(-0.8 MPa osmotic potential) (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA); For the S treatment, seedlings were incubated in Hoagland solution supplemented with 150 µmol/L SNP (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA); For the S+D treatment, seedlings were incubated in Hoagland medium supplemented with 150µmol/L SNP for 3 d before also adding 20% PEG solution. At all stages of the experiment and for all sample groups, liquid media were changed daily.

### Data Protocol
Protein digestion was performed using a method involving filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion). After the resulting peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min, the filters were then rinsed with 40 µL 106 DS buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate at pH 8.5) and centrifuged a final time. The peptide content was then measured via Parallel Reaction Monitoring [38]. For iTRAQ labeling, 100 μg of sample peptides were separately labeled for each biological replicate using an iTRAQ Reagent4plex Multiplex Kit (AB SCIEX). 114, 115, 116, and 117 labels were used, for the C, S, D, and S+D sample groups, respectively. Labeling was conducted according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthesis is affected by water-deficiency (WD) stress, and nitric oxide (NO) is a free radical that participates in the photosynthesis process. Previous studies have suggested that NO regulates excitation-energy distribution of photosynthesis under WD stress. Here, quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling was conducted using iTRAQ. Differentially phosphorylated protein species (DEPs) were identified in leaves of NO- or polyethylene glycol (PEG)-treated wheat seedlings (D), and in control seedlings. From 1396 unique phosphoproteins, 2257 unique phosphorylated peptides and 2416 phosphorylation sites were identified. Of these, 96 DEPs displayed significant changes (&#x2265;1.50-fold, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.01). These DEPs are involved in photosynthesis, signal transduction, etc. Furthermore, phosphorylation of several DEPs was upregulated by both D and NO treatments, but downregulated only in NO treatment. These differences affected the chlorophyll A&#x207b;B binding protein, chloroplast post-illumination chlorophyll-fluorescence-increase protein, and SNT7, implying that NO indirectly regulated the absorption and transport of light energy in photosynthesis in response to WD stress. The significant difference of chlorophyll (Chl) content, Chl a fluorescence-transient, photosynthesis index, and trapping and transport of light energy further indicated that exogenous NO under D stress enhanced the primary photosynthesis reaction compared to D treatment. A putative pathway is proposed to elucidate NO regulation of the primary reaction of photosynthesis under WD.

### Keywords
Nitric oxide; 20% peg-induced water deficiency; phosphoproteomic; triticum aestivum l.; primary reaction of photosynthesis

### Affiliations
Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops and State Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science/College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China 450001
Henan Agricultural University

### Submitter
Ruixin Shao

### Lab Head
Dr Shao Ruixin
Collaborative Innovation Center of Henan Grain Crops and State Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science/College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China 450001


