### Accession
PXD001350

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals the effect of protein glycosylation in soybean root under flooding stress

### Description
Flooding stress has a negative impact on soybean cultivation because it severely impairs growth and development. To understand the flooding responsive mechanism in early stage soybeans, a glycoproteomic technique was used

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were flooded for 2 days. Proteins were extracted from root of soybean plants, and glycoproteins were enriched using  glycoprotein isolation kit-ConA. Total protein and glycoprotein samples were cleaned up with chloroform/methanol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin and lysyl endopeptidase.

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nano LC system (Dionex), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and their separation and spraying were done using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm ID × 120 mm, nanoLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, NikkyoTechnos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. Peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Flooding stress has a negative impact on soybean cultivation because it severely impairs growth and development. To understand the flooding responsive mechanism in early stage soybeans, a glycoproteomic technique was used. Two-day-old soybeans were treated with flooding for 2 days and roots were collected. Globally, the accumulation level of glycoproteins, as revealed by cross-reaction with concanavalin A decreased by 2 days of flooding stress. Glycoproteins were enriched from total protein extracts using concanavalin A lectin resin and analyzed using a gel-free proteomic technique. One-hundred eleven and 69 glycoproteins were identified without and with 2 days of flooding stress, respectively. Functional categorization of these identified glycoproteins indicated that the accumulation level of proteins related to protein degradation, cell wall, and glycolysis increased, while stress-related proteins decreased under flooding stress. Also the accumulation level of glycoproteins localized in the secretory pathway decreased under flooding stress. Out of 23 common glycoproteins between control and flooding conditions, peroxidases and glycosyl hydrolases were decreased by 2 days of flooding stress. mRNA expression levels of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum and N-glycosylation related proteins were downregulated by flooding stress. These results suggest that flooding might negatively affect the process of N-glycosylation of proteins related to stress and protein degradation; however glycoproteins involved in glycolysis are activated.

### Keywords
Root, Proteomics, Flooding stress, Glycoproteins, Soybean

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


