### Accession
PXD002781

### Title
Fetal to adult ontogeny of human cytochrome P450 activity, abundance, and expression

### Description
Activity-based and global proteomic analysis of fetal through late adulthood human samples, with a primary focus on cytochrome P450 enzyme expression and functional activity

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin then labeled with activity-based probes

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Cytochrome P450s are oxidative metabolic enzymes that play critical roles in the biotransformation of endogenous compounds and xenobiotics. The expression and activity of P450 enzymes varies considerably throughout human development; the deficit in our understanding of these dynamics limits our ability to predict environmental and pharmaceutical exposure effects. In an effort to develop a more comprehensive understanding of the ontogeny of P450 enzymes, we employed a multi-omic characterization of P450 transcript expression, protein abundance, and functional activity. Modified mechanism-based inhibitors of P450s were used as chemical probes for isolating active P450 proteoforms in human hepatic microsomes with developmental stages ranging from early gestation to late adult. High-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was used to identify and quantify probe-labeled P450s, allowing for a functional profile of P450 ontogeny. Total protein abundance profiles and P450 rRNA was also measured, and our results reveal life-stage-dependent variability in P450 expression, abundance, and activity throughout human development and frequent discordant relationships between expression and activity. We have significantly expanded the knowledge of P450 ontogeny, particularly at the level of individual P450 activity. We anticipate that these results will be useful for enabling predictive therapeutic dosing, and for avoiding potentially adverse and harmful reactions during maturation from both therapeutic drugs and environmental xenobiotics.

### Keywords
Activity-based proteomics, Cytochrome p450, Ontogeny

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron T. Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA


