### Accession
PXD029441

### Title
Role of EVs in inflammation propagation and oxidative stress during vascular calcification

### Description
Role of EVs in inflammation propagation and oxidative stress during vascular calcification

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on 10µg of extracellular vesicles from macrophage according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 20mM TCEP and alkylated with 50mM CAA (chloracetamide) for 15min at room temperature. Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 1.2% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Two extra washing steps were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 1µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 45µl of 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water prior to MS analysis. A volume of 1µL of the peptide suspension was injected on a nanoelute (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) mass spectrometer. HPLC separation (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, 2% acetonitrile; Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was carried out at 250nL/min using a packed emitter column (C18, 25 cm×75μm 1.6μm) (Ion Optics, Australia) using a gradient elution (2 to 11% solvent B during 19min; 11 to 16% during 7min; 16% to 25% during 4min; 25% to 80% for 3min and finally 80% for 7min to wash the column). Mass-spectrometric data were acquired using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. The measurements were carried out over the m/z range from 100 to 1700 Th. The range of ion mobilities values from 0.8 to 1.3 V s/cm2(1/k0). The total cycle time was set to 1.2s and the number of PASEF MS/MS scans was set to 10.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus database (release 02-04-2020, 17040 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (1). The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein. Match between runs was allowed. Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org (2). For statistical comparison, we set five groups, each containing up to 5 biological replicates. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 4 valid values in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed an ANOVA test, FDR<0.05, S0=0.5. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus on logarithmised LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Vascular calcification (VC) is a cardiovascular complication associated with a high mortality rate among patients with diseases such as atherosclerosis and chronic kidney disease. During VC, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) undergo an osteogenic switch and secrete a heterogeneous population of extracellular vesicles (EVs). Recent studies have shown involvement of EVs in the inflammation and oxidative stress observed in VC. We aimed to decipher the role and mechanism of action of macrophage-derived EVs in the propagation of inflammation and oxidative stress on VSMCs during VC. <b>Methods:</b> The macrophage murine cell line RAW 264.7 treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS-EK) was used as a cellular model for inflammatory and oxidative stress. EVs secreted by these macrophages were collected by ultracentrifugation and characterized by transmission electron microscopy, cryo-electron microscopy, nanoparticle tracking analysis, and the analysis of acetylcholinesterase activity, as well as that of CD9 and CD81 protein expression by western blotting. These EVs were added to a murine VSMC cell line (MOVAS-1) under calcifying conditions (4&#xa0;mM Pi-7 or 14&#xa0;days) and calcification assessed by the o-cresolphthalein calcium assay. EV protein content was analyzed in a proteomic study and EV cytokine content assessed using an MSD multiplex immunoassay. <b>Results:</b> LPS-EK significantly decreased macrophage EV biogenesis. A 24-h treatment of VSMCs with these EVs induced both inflammatory and oxidative responses. LPS-EK-treated macrophage-derived EVs were enriched for pro-inflammatory cytokines and CAD, PAI-1, and Saa3 proteins, three molecules involved in inflammation, oxidative stress, and VC. Under calcifying conditions, these EVs significantly increase the calcification of VSMCs by increasing osteogenic markers and decreasing contractile marker expression. <b>Conclusion:</b> Our results show that EVs derived from LPS-EK-treated-macrophages are able to induce pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidative responses in surrounding cells, such as VSMCs, thus aggravating the VC process.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Extracellular vesicles, Macrophage

### Affiliations
SFR Necker
Necker Proteomic Platform, SFR Necker, Paris, France

### Submitter
Vincent Jung

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Necker Proteomic Platform, SFR Necker, Paris, France


