### Accession
PXD026575

### Title
TAF8 regions important for TFIID lobe B assembly are required for embryonic stem cell survival

### Description
The human general transcription factor TFIID is composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). In eukaryotic cells, TFIID is thought to nucleate RNA polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complex formation on all protein coding gene promoters and thus, be crucial for Pol II transcription. TFIID is composed of three lobes, named A, B and C. Structural studies showed that TAF8 is forming a histone fold pair in lobe B and connecting lobe B to lobe C. In the present study, we have investigated the requirement of the different regions of TAF8 for in vitro TFIID assembly, and the importance of certain TAF8 regions for mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) viability. We have identified a TAF8 region, different from the histone fold domain of TAF8, important for assembling with the 5TAF core complex in lobe B, and four regions of TAF8 each individually required for interacting with TAF2 in lobe C. Moreover, we show that the 5TAF core-interacting TAF8 domain, and the proline rich domain of TAF8 interacting with TAF2, are both required for mouse embryonic stem cell survival. Thus, our study demonstrates that TAF8 regions involving in the connection of lobe B to lobe C are crucial for TFIID function and consequent ESC survival.

### Sample Protocol
1.2mL anti-TBP immunopurfied proteins (~1.14mg) were crosslinked by addition of BS3 (Thermo Scientific; freshly prepared as 100 mM in pure water) to 2 mM for 2hrs at 25º C. The reactions were quenched by addition of 10 uL of 1M ammonium bicarbonate.  Then 20 uL SP3 beads (20ug/uL) described by Hughes et al., 2014 (PMID: 25358341) were added, followed by an equal volume of acetonitrile to the crosslinked samples and incubated at 60º C for 30 minutes with shaking. Then the beads were concentrated with a magnet and washed with 100% acetonitrile. The beads were then suspended in 100 uL 8M Urea in 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and treated with TECP/IAA for 2 hrs at 37º C in the dark. Then the samples were diluted 10 times with water and digested by addition of trypsin (20:1, protein:trypsin) overnight at 37º C.   The peptide sample was desalted by passage over 1cc C18 cartridges (Waters),  and dried by Speed-Vac. The peptides were resuspended in 50 uL Buffer A (25 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.8). 1 ug of each sample was reserved for direct MS analysis and the remaining sample was fractionated using an in-house prepared microcapillary strong cation exchange column (Proteomix SCX 3um, Sepax Technologies). We used a binary HPLC pump with split flow with microcapillary flowrate at 2-3 uL/min.  Peptides were loaded onto the microcapillary column equilibrated in Buffer A and washed with Buffer A. Bound peptides were eluted with 20 μl of Buffer A containing 50% and 85% Buffer B (800 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8), followed by 50 μl elutions with Buffer B containing 5% of Buffer D (0.5 M ammonium acetate, 30% acetonitrile),or just 20 μl of Buffer D. All fractions were dried in a Speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% acetonitrile.   Peptides were analyzed by electrospray ionization microcapillary reverse phase HPLC on a Thermo Scientific Fusion with HCD fragmentation and serial MS events that included one FTMS1 event at 30,000 resolution followed by FTMS2 events at 15,000 resolution. Other instrument settings included: MS1 scan range (m/z): 400-1500; cycle time 3 sec; Charge states 4-10; Filters MIPS on, relax restriction = true; Dynamic exclusion enabled: repeat count 1, exclusion duration 30s; Filter IntensityThreshold, signal intensity 50000; Isolation mode, quadrupole; Isolation window 2Da; HCD normalized collision energy 28%, isolation width 2 Da; AGC target 500,000, Max injection time 200ms. A 90 min gradient from 5% ACN to 40% ACN was used.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were converted to mzXML files by Rawconverter (He et al., 2015, PMID: 26499134). For crosslinked peptide searches, we used two different crosslink database searching algorithms: pLink (Yang et al, 2012, PMID: 22772728) and an in-house designed Nexus.  Crosslinking data were analyzed using pLink (Yang et al, 2012) with default settings (precursor monoisotopic mass tolerance: ±10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ±20 ppm; up to 4 isotopic peaks; max evalue 1; static modification on Cysteines; 57. 0215 Da; differential oxidation modification on Methionines; 15. 9949 Da)  against a database containing TFIID, TFIIIC and SL1/TIF-IB protein sequences. The Nexus program can be directly downloaded from https://www.dropbox.com/sh/o7z1h12sf3nu89f/AAD5tR_iEXaf8IUDcYZjSj3ja?dl=0.  For Nexus searches, the same databases were used with the following parameter settings: (a) up to three miscleavages; (b) static modification on Cysteines (+57.0215 Da); (c) differential oxidation modification on Methionines (+15.9949 Da); (d) differential modification on the peptide N-terminal Glutamic acid residues (-18.0106 Da) or N-terminal Glutamine residues (-17.0265 Da); (e) differential mono-BS3 modification on Lysine residue (+156.0806 Da). A 5% of FDR cutoff was used for both pLink and Nexus. After performing the pLink and Nexus analyses, the search results were combined and each spectrum was manually evaluated for the quality of the match to each peptide using the COMET/Lorikeet Spectrum Viewer (TPP). Crosslinked peptides are considered confidently identified if at least 4 consecutive b or y ions for each peptide are observed and the majority of the observed ions are accounted for. Search results that did not meet these criteria were removed. Intralinks involving a crosslink between identical residues were only kept if the spectral evidence strongly supported the identification; that is, the major fragment ions correspond to the intralinked peptide sequence and no/few other fragment ions were observed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryonic stem cell (esc), Taf8, Cxms, Tfiid

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biology, Seattle, WA.
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute of Systems Biology, Seattle, WA.


