### Accession
PXD030325

### Title
Proteomic analysis distinguishes extracellular vesicles produced by cancerous versus healthy pancreatic organoids

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are produced and released by both healthy and malignant cells and bear markers indicative of ongoing biological processes. In the present study we utilized high resolution flow cytometry to detect EVs in the plasma of patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and in the supernatants of PDAC and healthy control (HC) pancreatic organoid cultures. Using ultrafiltration and size exclusion chromatography, PDAC and HC pancreatic organoid EVs were isolated for mass spectrometry analysis. Proteomic and functional analysis showed a striking distinction in that EV proteins profiled in pancreatic cancer organoids were involved in vesicular transport and tumorigenesis while EV proteins in healthy organoids were involved in cellular homeostasis. Thus, the most abundant proteins identified in either case represented non-overlapping cellular programs. Tumor-promoting candidates LAMA5, SCDB1 and TENA were consistently upregulated in PDAC EVs. Validation of specific markers for PDAC EVs versus healthy pancreatic EVs will provide the biomarkers and enhanced sensitivity necessary to monitor early disease or disease progression, with or without treatment. Moreover, disease-associated changes in EV protein profiles provide an opportunity to investigate alterations in cellular programming with disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Human plasma samples were obtained through the Brenden-Colson Center for Pancreatic Care (BCCPC) in accordance with regulations set forth by the Institutional Review Board at Oregon Health & Science University (Oregon Pancreas Tissue Registry, protocol #3609). Informed consent was obtained from all subjects. Blood samples were collected into vacutainer tubes containing EDTA to prevent coagulation and all samples were processed within two hours of the draw. Samples were centrifuged twice at 2500 x g for 15 mins at room temperature to obtain platelet-poor plasma (PPP) and supernatant was transferred into clean tubes after each spin, taking care to avoid contamination from the blood cell pellet. PPP was then aliquoted and stored at -80C. Samples were thawed only once before analysis.  Normal healthy pancreatic organoids were established in an identical manner from islet preparations obtained through the Integrated Islet Distribution Program (https://iidp.coh.org).  Cells were obtained by sequential digestion with collagenase and trypsin; a portion of these cells was used to initiate organoid cultures and the remainder were cryopreserved for future culture and analysis.  Organoid culture: Pancreatic organoids were initiated, cultured, and cryopreserved with human growth factors in the liquid media. A total of 10^5 cells were embedded per 50 microliter Matrigel droplet in a 24-well plate, with 500 microliters of defined media added once the droplets had hardened. Cultures were maintained with biweekly media changes until the droplet was packed with organoids, after which the droplet and organoids were dispersed to fragments by trypsinization and re-embedded in a new Matrigel droplet. For harvest of EVs, cryopreserved patient-specific organoids from passage 8-12 were thawed and cultured starting with four multiple 50 microliter droplets. Supernatant was collected and replaced with fresh media every two days and stored at -80C after sequential centrifugation at 300 x g for 10 minutes and at 2000 x g for 10 minutes, both at room temperature, to clarify supernatants. Media replacement and culture passage was continued until 20-30 ml of frozen supernatant was accumulated for further processing.  For the isolation of EVs prior to mass spectrometry analysis, organoid culture supernatant was collected and screened for EV production by flow cytometry. Supernatants were pre-filtered through 0.8-micron Whatman cellulose acetate disc filters (GE Life Sciences, Marlborough, MA, USA) and then concentrated in Amicon-15 CA filters (100 KDa MWCO, Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA) at 2000 x g for 15 minutes per spin until samples were reduced to <2 mls. Samples were then washed for 3 additional spins with 0.1 micron filtered PBS. 500 mµl of concentrated sample was applied to a qEV original SEC column (Izon Science, Medford, MA, USA) and fractions collected according to manufacturer’s recommendation. The first 3 mls were collected as the void volume followed by the collection of at least six fractions at 0.5 ml each. Void volume and fractions were assessed for EV detection by flow cytometry and by Nanodrop measurement of OD at 280 nm.  Dried pancreatic organoid EV samples (pooled from fractions 1 and 2 after SEC isolation) were digested using PreOmics iST-NHS Kit 12x (Product# PO00026) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Following digestion, all samples were taken to dryness by vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 50 microliters each of HPLC water and peptide concentrations determined using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific).  Sample digests (~4 microgram) were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 0.1 x 20 mm NanoViper C18 peptide trap (Thermo Scientific) for 5 min at a 10 microliter/min flow rate in a 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid mobile phase and peptides separated using a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron particle, 75-micron x 50-cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific) using a 7.5–30% acetonitrile gradient over 200 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid and a 300 nl/min flow rate using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLC nano UPLC. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) configured for data dependent analysis. MS1 scan resolution was set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and MS1 automatic gain control (AGC) target was 4E5 with a maximum injection time of 50ms. Mass range was set at 375-1500. MS1 data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity. The linear ion trap AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 1E4, and intensity threshold was kept at 5E3. Quadrupole isolation width was set at 1.6 m/z. Normalized CID collision energy was set at 35%. Peptide match was set to off, and isotope exclusion was on. Dynamic exclusion was set to plus/minus 10 ppm with a duration of 60s.

### Data Protocol
Comet (v. 2016.01, rev. 3) was used to search MS2 Spectra against an April 2020 version of a UniProt FASTA protein database containing 20,600 canonical Homo sapiens sequences, concatenated sequence-reversed entries to estimate error thresholds and 179 common contaminant sequences and their reversed forms. The database processing was performed with python scripts available at https://github.com/pwilmart/fasta_utilities.git and Comet results processing used the PAW pipeline from https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git.  Comet searches for all samples were performed with trypsin enzyme specificity. Monoisotopic parent ion mass tolerance was 1.25 Da. Monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance was 1.0005 Da. A static modification of +113.084 Da was added to all cysteine residues and a variable modification of +15.9949 Da to methionine residues. Comet scores were combined into linear discriminant function scores, and discriminant score histograms created separately for each peptide charge state (2+, 3+, and 4+). Separate histograms were created for matches to forward sequences and for matches to reversed sequences for all peptides of 7 amino acids or longer. The score histograms for reversed matches were used to estimate peptide false discovery rates (FDR) and set score thresholds for each peptide class. Differential protein abundance between groups was determined by comparing the spectral counts of identified proteins between experimental groups using the Bioconductor package edgeR. Comparisons between groups were performed using Fisher's exact test, and a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction used to limit the candidate false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are produced and released by both healthy and malignant cells and bear markers indicative of ongoing biological processes. In the present study we utilized high resolution flow cytometry to detect EVs in the plasma of patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and in the supernatants of PDAC and healthy control (HC) pancreatic organoid cultures. Using ultrafiltration and size exclusion chromatography, PDAC and HC pancreatic organoid EVs were isolated for mass spectrometry analysis. Proteomic and functional protein network analysis showed a striking distinction in that EV proteins profiled in pancreatic cancer organoids were involved in vesicular transport and tumorigenesis while EV proteins in healthy organoids were involved in cellular homeostasis. Thus, the most abundant proteins identified in either case represented non-overlapping cellular programs. Tumor-promoting candidates LAMA5, SDCBP and TENA were consistently upregulated in PDAC EVs. Validation of specific markers for PDAC EVs versus healthy pancreatic EVs will provide the biomarkers and enhanced sensitivity necessary to monitor early disease or disease progression, with or without treatment. Moreover, disease-associated changes in EV protein profiles provide an opportunity to investigate alterations in cellular programming with disease progression.

### Keywords
Pdac, High resolution flow cytometry, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Ev markers, Extracellular vesicles, Biomarkers, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Abigail C. Buenafe
Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


