### Accession
PXD043806

### Title
CURTAIN – A Unique Web-based tool for exploration and sharing of MS-based proteomics data

### Description
To facilitate analysis and sharing of mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics data we created two tools called CURTAIN (https://curtain.proteo.info) and CURTAIN-PTM (https://curtainptm.proteo.info). They are designed to enable the non-MS expert to interactively pursue volcano plots, deconvolute primary experimental data so that replicates can be visualized in bar charts or violin plots allowing statistical analysis and export of plots in SVG format. They also permit assessment of experimental quality by correlation matrix and profile plot. Within CURTAIN, the user can analyze domain structure, AlphaFold predicted structure, reported interactors, relative expression and UniProt disease, pharmaceutical and mutagenesis information on all selected hits. CURTAIN-PTM permits comparison of all identified PTM sites on protein(s) of interest with selected databases. For phosphorylation site analysis CURTAIN-PTM links with the Kinase Library to predict upstream kinases that phosphorylate sites of interest. We provide examples of the utility of CURTAIN and CURTAIN-PTM in analyzing how targeted degradation of the PPM1H Rab phosphatase that counteracts the Parkinson’s LRRK2 kinase impacts cellular protein levels and phosphorylation sites. We re-analyzed a ubiquitinylation dataset, characterizing PINK1-Parkin pathway in primary neurons, revealing new data of interest not previously highlighted. CURTAIN and CURTAIN-PTM are free to use and open-source and will enable researchers to share their data and maximize the impact of proteomics data. We advocate that published proteomic data be submitted containing a shareable CURTAIN web-link, allowing readers to better explore the data.

### Sample Protocol
3 mg of protein lysate reduced (10mM TCEP) and alkylated (40mM Iodoacetamide) and processed using STrap-based On-column tryptic digestion. Digested samples were purified using Sep-Pak cartridges, a small aliquot was taken for total proteomics analysis. The reminder was enriched using TiO2-based Phosphopeptide enrichment, Sep-Pak purified and further subjected to 16-plex TMT labelling, high-pH fractionation and acquired data on Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer in MS2 mode (FT-FT-HCD) for Phosphoproteomics and FT-IT-HCD-FT (SPS-MS3) for total proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Total proteome data was processed with MS-Fragger search algorithm using integrated TMT-Pro 16-plex workflow. Phosphoproteomics data was processed using MaxQuant. The search output files further processed in Perseus environment for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
How activation of PINK1 and Parkin leads to elimination of damaged mitochondria by mitophagy is largely based on cell lines with few studies in neurons. Here, we have undertaken proteomic analysis of mitochondria from mouse neurons to identify ubiquitylated substrates of endogenous Parkin. Comparative analysis with human iNeuron datasets revealed a subset of 49 PINK1 activation&#x2013;dependent diGLY sites in 22 proteins conserved across mouse and human systems. We use reconstitution assays to demonstrate direct ubiquitylation by Parkin in vitro. We also identified a subset of cytoplasmic proteins recruited to mitochondria that undergo PINK1 and Parkin independent ubiquitylation, indicating the presence of alternate ubiquitin E3 ligase pathways that are activated by mitochondrial depolarization in neurons. Last, we have developed an online resource to search for ubiquitin sites and enzymes in mitochondria of neurons, MitoNUb. These findings will aid future studies to understand Parkin activation in neuronal subtypes.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ptm, Bromotag, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, U.K.
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Dario R. Alessi
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, U.K.


