### Accession
PXD025830

### Title
Genetic Architecture of Protein Expression and its Regulation in the Mouse Brain

### Description
Natural variation in protein expression is common in all organisms and contribute to phenotypic differences among individuals. While variation in gene expression at the transcript level has been extensively investigated, the genetic mechanisms underlying variation in protein expression have lagged considerably behind. Here we investigate genetic architecture of protein expression by profiling a deep mouse brain proteome of two inbred strains, C57BL/6J (B6) and DBA/2J (D2), and their reciprocal F1 hybrids using two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC/LC-MS/MS) technology. By comparing protein expression levels in the four mouse strains, we observed 329 statistically significant differentially expressed proteins between the two parental strains and identified four common inheritance patterns, including dominant, additive, over- and under-dominant expression. We further applied the proteogenomic approach to detect variant peptides and define protein allele-specific expression (pASE).

### Sample Protocol
The mouse brain samples from C57BL/6J, DBA/2J, and two reciprocal F1 hybrids (i.e. B6D2F1 and D2B6F1) with replicates were lysed, digested and labeled with 11 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with equal amount of each and fractionated into 42 fractions in a concatenated fashion on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. each fraction was run sequentially on a column (75 μm x 20 cm for the whole proteome, 50 μm x ∼30 cm for phosphoproteome, 1.9 μm C18 resin from Dr. Maisch GmbH, 65°C to reduce backpressure) interfaced with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap or Fusion MS (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted by a 2-3 hr gradient (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile). MS settings included the MS1 scan (410-1600 m/z, 60,000 or 120,000 resolution, 1 × 106 AGC and 50 ms maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (fixed first mass of 120 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 1 × 105 AGC, 100-150 ms maximal ion time, HCD, 35%–38% normalized collision energy, ∼1.0 m/z isolation window).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database.  Searches were performed using 8 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15 ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) was used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Expression pattern, Protein regulation, Proteome, Protein expression

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA.

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xusheng Wang
Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA.


