### Accession
PXD044484

### Title
UHPLC-MS/MS analysis of S-nitrosylated proteins involved in autophagy in Triticum aestivum roots

### Description
In the present work, we analyzed the patterns of protein S-nitrosylation during the inductionof autophagy in сommon wheat (Triticum aestivum) roots. S-nitrosylated proteins were accumulated in plant tissues as a result of artificially induced autophagy, visualized usingWestern blot and identified by bottom-up proteomics methods. Further, the obtained data was analyzed by bioinformatics methods to predict possible S-nitrosylation sites and protein-protein interactions between S-nitrosylated proteins and possible targets. These resultscontribute to the development of the efficient protocols for identification and analysis of S-nitrosylated proteins in plants.

### Sample Protocol
A protein band from the gel was cut into small 1-2 mm sized pieces and after rinsing with LC-Grade H2O, sample was destained with 30% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in 100 mmol/L NH4HCO3 and dried under reduced pressure in the vacuum concentrator CentriVapVacuum Concentrator (Labconco, USA) at 4°C. For reduction of disulfides, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM NH 4 HCO 3 was supplemented and the samples were incubated for 15 min at 22°C under continuous shaking in dark. Afterwards, the alkylation solution (54 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH 4 HCO 3 ) was added, and the samples were incubated under the same conditions. Further, the liquid phase was discarded, 100 µL of destaining solution was added, and gel pieces were shaken at 22°C for 10 min, 450 rpm. This step was repeated twice. The stock solution of trypsin(0.5 µg/µL) was freshly prepared in 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate buffer, added to the solutions (enzyme-to protein-ratio w/w 1:20), and then incubated under continuous shaking (450 rpm, 37°C, 4 h). After that an additional portion of trypsin stock solution (enzyme-to protein-ratio w/w 1:50) was added and the samples were left shaken overnight (450 rpm, 37°C). Next day 70 µL of the extraction solution (4 % v/v trifluoroacetic acid in 30 % v/v ACN) was added to the digest mixture and shaken at 22°C for 40 min, and then the supernatants were collected. This step was repeated twice, and after that samples were dried under the reduced pressure in the vacuum concentrator at 4°C. To identify S-nitrosylated proteins, electrophoretically separated protein bands, which corresponded to those visualized by immune blots, were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion according to Bassal et al. (2020) with minor modifications. The proteolytic hydrolysates were pre-cleaned by reversed phase solid phase extraction (RP-SPE) using the elution scheme of Spiller et al. [2017] with minormodifications [Shumilina et al., 2023]. The pooled eluate was dried (4°C) under the reduced pressure in the CentriVap Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco, USA). The protein hydrolysates were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 5 mm Trap Cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a Bruker FORTY separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 40 cm 75 m, 1.9 m, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) using nanoElute UHPLC chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics) coupled on-line to a TimsToF Pro quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (QqTOF-MS) via a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker Daltonics). The UHPLC-QqTOF-MS/MS analysis relied on data-dependent acquisition experiments performed in the positive ion mode, comprising a survey TOF-MS scans and dependent MS/MS scans for the most abundant signals with the charge states ranging from 2 to 5 at the acquisition rate of 8 to 32 Hz in the cycle time of 3 s.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the LC-MS and MS/MS data was accomplished with the Peaks Xpro software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). Identification of peptide sequences and annotation of the proteins relied on the common sequence database of the plants representing Triticum aestivum and Arabidopsis thaliana species (UniProt database, downloaded on the 28.07.2022). Possible sample contaminations were excluded using the CRAP database of common protein contaminations (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The following amino acid modifications were included in the search: carbamidomethylation of cysteines (mass increment = 57.0215); variabl amino acid modifications included in the search: methionine oxidation (15.9949), N-terminal acetylation (42.0106), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (0.9840), S-nitrosylation of cysteines (28.9902). The MS1 and MS2 tolerance was 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. FDR (false discovery rate) correction was employed at the level of 0.02. The proteins were identified with at least two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy is a highly conserved catabolic process in eukaryotic cells. Reactive nitrogen species play roles as inductors and signaling molecules of autophagy. A key mechanism of NO-mediated signaling is S-nitrosylation, a post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins at cysteine residues. In the present work, we analyzed the patterns of protein S-nitrosylation during the induction of autophagy in <i>Triticum aestivum</i> roots. The accumulation of S-nitrosylated proteins in the cells during autophagy induced with KNO<sub>2</sub> and antimycin A was visualized using monoclonal antibodies with a Western blot analysis, and proteins were identified using a standard bottom-up proteomics approach. Protein S-nitrosylation is a labile and reversible PTM, and therefore the SNO group can be lost during experimental procedures. A subsequent bioinformatic analysis using predictive algorithms and protein-ligand docking showed that identified proteins possess hypothetical S-nitrosylation sites. Analyzing protein-protein interaction networks enabled us to discover the targets that can directly interact with autophagic proteins, and those that can interact with them indirectly via key multifunctional regulatory proteins. In this study, we show that S-nitrosylation is a key mechanism of NO-mediated regulation of autophagy in wheat roots. A combination of in silico predictive algorithms with a mass spectrometry analysis provides a targeted approach for the identification of S-nitrosylated proteins.

### Keywords
S-nitrosylation of proteins, Nitric oxide, Autophagy, Triticum aestivum

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Analytical Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Timiryazev Institute of Plant Physiology, Russian Academy of Sciences
Saint-Petersburg State University

### Submitter
Egor Repkin

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Aleksandrovich Frolov
Laboratory of Analytical Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Timiryazev Institute of Plant Physiology, Russian Academy of Sciences


