### Accession
PXD010938

### Title
Comparative proteomics using iodoTMT to identify changes in protein expression and cysteine oxidation in Leishmania mexicana

### Description
Two cell-lines of Leishmania mexicana were investigated using a TMT-based approach; wild-type and an attenuated H-line. Half of each sample was fully reduced and all cysteine residues were labelled with the cysteine-reactive iodoTMT reagent, while the other half was reacted with N-ethylmaleimide to block all free cysteines before the remaining reversibly modified cysteines were reduced and labelled with iodoTMT. This allowed direct comparisons to be made between the level of modified cysteines and the total cysteine count.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type (WT) promastigotes of the Leishmania mexicana strain M379 were grown in the presence of gentamicin to create an attenuated line (H) [Daneshvar et al., J. Infect. Dis. 2003, 187, 1662-1668.]  Three biological replicates of the each cell-line were cultured and split into two equal samples of approximately 5x107 cells. One sample from each replicate was resuspended in SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris base and 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.6) to reduce all reversibly modified cysteines (labelled ‘a’ samples). The other half of each replicate was resuspended in an NEM buffer (250 mM HEPES, 10 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM Neocuproine, 2% SDS and 100 mM NEM, pH 7.0) to irreversibly block all reduced cysteines, and incubated at 37C in the dark for 90 mins with gentle mixing (labelled ‘b’ samples). All samples were then lysed using probe sonication.    After acetone precipitation, all samples were resuspended in HEPES buffer (50 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA and 0.1% SDS, pH 8.0), reduced using TCEP, split into two samples of equal protein concentrations (30 µg) and then labelled using iodoTMT as per manufacturer’s protocols.   Labelling order; WT1a - iodoTMT 129 WT2a - iodoTMT 130 WT3a - iodoTMT 131 H1a - iodoTMT 126 H2a - iodoTMT 127 H3a - iodoTMT 128  WT1b - iodoTMT 126 WT2b - iodoTMT 127 WT3b - iodoTMT 128 H1b - iodoTMT 129 H2b - iodoTMT 130 H3b - iodoTMT 131   Samples were then combined as follows; Red; Fully reduced and labelled samples - WT1a, WT2a, WT3a, H1a, H2a, H3a. Ox; NEM-blocked, reduced and labelled samples - WT1b, WT2b, WT3b, H1b, H2b, H3b.  WT; All wild-type samples, fully reduced (a) vs oxidised/NEM blocked (b). H; All H-line samples, fully reduced (a) vs oxidised/NEM blocked (b).   Samples were purified using anti-TMT resin (IP samples) as per manufacturer’s protocol, then digested using FASP trypsin protocol. The flowthrough and wash buffers from the affinity purification steps were retained (wash samples) and analysed alongside the IP samples.   Samples were then analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system (Dionex) and an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with nano spray ionisation. A C18 trap column (5 mm x 300 µm ID, 5 µm, 100 Å) and Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (150 mm x 75 µm ID, 3 µm, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific) were used for chromatography.  The following mobile phase solvents were used for chromatography; Buffer A: Water + 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80 % MeCN + 0.08% formic acid (v/v). A gradient of 5% - 45% Buffer B was used with a solvent flow rate of 300 nL min-1 over 150 minutes. High resolution MS scans were acquired in positive ionisation mode (resolving power 60,000 at m/z 400) over a mass range of m/z 380 - 1800. The three most abundant ions (charge = 2 or higher) in each MS scan were then isolated and targeted for MS/MS analyses using HCD and CID. HCD was carried out at collision energy (CE) 50,  with a stepped CE width 10% and an activation time 0.1 ms. CID was carried out at CE 35, stepped CE width 10%, activation time 10 ms. A dynamic exclusion of 180 seconds was used.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was carried out using Proteome Discoverer™ software version 2.1 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Mascot version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science).  The database LmexicanaMHOMGT2001U1103 database (version 32, 16th April 2017) was used. Searches were carried out using the following parameters; full trypsin digest, up to 2 missed cleavages allowed, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da, quantitation method: iodoTMT 6plex, reporter ion integration tolerance: 20 ppm, isolation interference threshold: 20%.  Variable modifications; oxidation (M), iodoTMT (C), N-ethylmaleimide (C), N-ethylmaleimide+water (C/K) and Protein N-terminal acetylation.  Unique peptides only were used for protein quantitation, and peptides with missing quantitation channels were excluded from quantitation.  A 5% FDR cutoff was used to filter peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cysteine oxidation, Tmt, Comparative proteomics, Leishmania mexicana

### Affiliations
Head of Proteomics at Glasgow Polyomics, College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, UK
University of Glasgow

### Submitter
Aruna Prakash

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Burchmore
Head of Proteomics at Glasgow Polyomics, College of Medical Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, UK


