### Accession
PXD006914

### Title
Proteomics study of skin tissues from RDEB cSCC, low-risk cSCC and metastasizing cSCC

### Description
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the leading cause of death in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) patients but remains poorly studied on a proteomic level. We aim to characterize the RDEB-SCC proteome by comparing it to the proteomes of UV-light induced cSCC of non-aggressive and aggressive behavior with which RDEB cSCC share either the well-differentiated morphology or the aggressive behavior, respectively. We applied a direct trypsinization protocol using an acid labile surfactant and label-free quantitation to study formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues from patients with RDEB cSCC (n=6), low-risk cSCC (n=5) and metastasizing cSCC (n=13) by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
One or two 10 µm FFPE cSCC tissue slices per patient were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis with a direct trypsinization protocol using the acid labile surfactant RapiGest. FFPE tissues were deparaffinized and boiled in 100 µl of an aqueous buffer containing 0.1 % RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), 0.1 M HEPES pH 8 (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) and 0.2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) for 4 hours at 95°C and 750 rpm for heat induced antigen retrieval and protein extraction. Sequencing grade trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA) was added in ratio of at least 2 µg per mm3 tissue and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. Afterwards the samples were centrifuged at 19000 g for 15 min to remove remaining cell debris. The peptide concentration in the supernatant was estimate with the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). The remaining supernatant was treated with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at 37 °C, followed by 30 mM iodacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 15 min at 37 °C and again 10 mM DTT for 15 min at 37 °C to reduce and alkylate the cysteine residues of the peptides. Then the samples were brought to a final concentration of 3M guanidinium chloride (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany), acidified (pH < 3) with hydrochloric acid (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C to destroy RapiGest. Centrifugation at 19000 g for 10 min was performed to remove any precipitate. 15 µg of peptides per sample were desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA). BCA assay was performed and 3 µg peptides per sample were vacuum dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and stored at -80 °C until measured by LC-MS/MS. Each sample was dissolved in 40 µl aqueous buffer containing 2 % acetonitrile and 0.3 % acetic acid. 5 µl of the sonicated sample were analyzed by an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min . Buffer A (0.3 % (v/v) acetic acid) and buffer B (B 0.3 % (v/v) acetic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) were applied with an increasing gradient of acetonitrile over time (0 – 60 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 100 min). This gradient serves to separate the peptides by their hydrophobicity on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Scientific)), 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, length 150 mm, inner diameter 50 µm). The mass spectrometer analyzed the mass range from 300 to 2000 Dalton in a data dependent mode and with a top10 method, so that each MS scan is followed by a maximum of ten MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis was performed with the MaxQuant (V1.5.2.8) software. Peptides were identified with the implemented Andromeda search engine using the reviewed human database without isotopes downloaded from Uniprot on 15th April 2016 (20193 entries). The revert function was used to generate decoys for the database search. The false discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set to 1%. The initial search was performed with 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance. For the main search it was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Two missed cleavages were tolerated for the tryptic cleavage specifity. A minimal peptide length of seven amino acids was required. The only fixed modification was Carbamidodimethyl at cysteines. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) on at least one peptide per protein was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm.  A second analysis was performed in order to identify mutated peptides. Therefore, an analogous MaxQuant analysis was performed with the only difference that the search was performed against the XMan mutated-peptide database (Yang and Lazar 2014), which was appended to the uniprot database used for the main analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In this study we used a genetic extracellular matrix (ECM) disease to identify mechanisms associated with aggressive behavior of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC). cSCC is one of the most common malignancies and usually has a good prognosis. However, some cSCCs recur or metastasize and cause significant morbidity and mortality. Known factors that are associated with aggressiveness of cSCCs include tumor grading, size, localization and microinvasive behavior. To investigate molecular mechanisms that influence biologic behavior we used global proteomic and histologic analyses of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue of primary human cSCCs. We compared three groups: non-recurring, non-metastasizing low-risk sporadic cSCCs; metastasizing sporadic cSCCs; and cSCCs from patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB). RDEB is a genetic skin blistering and ECM disease caused by collagen VII deficiency. Patients commonly suffer from high-risk early onset cSCCs that frequently metastasize. The results indicate that different processes are associated with formation of RDEB cSCCs compared to sporadic cSCCs. Sporadic cSCCs show signs of UV damage, whereas RDEB cSCCs have higher mutational rates and display tissue damage, inflammation and subsequent remodeling of the dermal ECM as tumor initiating factors. Interestingly the two high-risk groups - high-risk metastasizing sporadic cSCCs and RDEB cSCCs - are both associated with tissue damage and ECM remodeling in gene-ontology enrichment and Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins analyses. In situ histologic analyses validate these results. The high-risk cSCCs also show signatures of enhanced bacterial challenge. Histologic analyses confirm correlation of bacterial colonization with worse prognosis. Collectively, this unbiased study - performed directly on human patient material - reveals that common microenvironmental alterations linked to ECM remodeling and increased bacterial challenges are denominators of high-risk cSCCs. The proteins identified here could serve as potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets in high-risk cSCCs.

### Keywords
['Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa;  cutaneus squamous cell carcinoma; formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue;label-free quantitation; liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry']

### Affiliations
['Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research University of Freiburg, Stefan Meier Strasse 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany', 'Institute for Surgical Pathology, University Medical Center Freiburg']

### Submitter
['Melanie Christine Föll']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research University of Freiburg, Stefan Meier Strasse 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany', 'email': 'oliver.schilling@mol-med.uni-freiburg.de', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Oliver Schilling', 'id': '75690100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['skin']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['Low-risk cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma'
 'metastasizing cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma'
 'recessive dystrophyic epidermolysis bullosa cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1002634;NT=Q Exactive Plus']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
factor value[disease]: ['Low-risk cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma'
 'metastasizing cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma'
 'recessive dystrophyic epidermolysis bullosa cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma']

