### Accession
PXD029141

### Title
AC016745.3 RNA pulldown mass spectrometry data

### Description
In order to find the protein specifically bound by lncRNA-AC016745.3, we identified it through RNA pulldown combined with Protein Mass Spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Prepare prostate cancer cell lysate, transcribe biotin-labeled RNA（sense and antisense） in vitro, the RNA probe and streptavidin magnetic beads are incubated together to form a complex, biotin RNA probe-streptomyces Avidin magnetic bead complex enriches protein, eluates protein, electrophoresis, and silver staining. The protein electrophoresis bands of the sense experimental group and the antisense control group were identified by mass spectrometry respectively.

### Data Protocol
By analyzing sense and antisense binding proteins, antisense is used as the control group to screen sense specific binding proteins

### Publication Abstract
The androgen receptor (AR) and its related signaling pathways play an important role in the development of prostate cancer (PCa). Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are involved in the regulation of tumorigenesis and development, but their specific mechanism of action remains unclear. This study examines the function and mechanisms of action of lncRNA <i>AC016745.3</i> in the development of PCa. It shows that dihydrotestosterone (DHT) results in the AR-dependent suppression of <i>AC016745.3</i> expression in the LNCaP androgen-sensitive human prostate adenocarcinoma cell line. In addition, overexpression of <i>AC016745.3</i> inhibits the proliferation and migration of PCa cells, and suppresses the expression of AR target genes. This research also demonstrates that the protein NONO interacts with AR and functions as an AR co-activator, promoting AR transcriptional activity. Furthermore, using RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP)-PCR experiments, the study demonstrates that both NONO and AR can bind <i>AC016745.3</i>. Moreover, cell phenotypic experiments reveal that NONO can promote cellular proliferation and migration, and that <i>AC016745.3</i> can partially antagonize the pro-oncogenic functions of NONO in PCa cells. In summary, the results indicate that <i>AC016745.3</i> can bind NONO, suppressing its ability to promote AR-dependent transcriptional activity. Furthermore, DHT-dependent suppression of <i>AC016745.3</i> expression can enhance NONO's promotion effect on AR.

### Keywords
Human, Protein mass spectrometry, Prostate

### Affiliations
School of Life Science, Fudan University
Fudan university

### Submitter
Yali Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yao Li
School of Life Science, Fudan University


