### Accession
PXD026780

### Title
Proteomics analysis for RBM17 in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients suffer from chemo-resistance, high relapse frequency, and low overall survival rate, outcomes driven by leukemic stem cells (LSCs). Understanding the molecular mechanisms that support these primitive leukemic cells is crucial for developing effective AML therapeutics. In the present study, we demonstrate that upregulation of the splicing factor RBM17 preferentially marks and sustains the primitive compartment of AML. We performed shotgun proteomics to characterize the proteome changes upon RBM17 knockdown in AMl cells. In addition, we used proteomics to analyze the proteome changes after knockdown of EIF4A2, a direct splicing substrate of RBM17 in AML cells.

### Sample Protocol
One million K562 cells transduced with shscramble or shRNA (#1, #2) targeting RBM17 were harvested (day 5 after transduction, replicates for each condition), washed three time with ice cold 1xDPBS. Cell pellets we lysed in 200µl of lysis buffer composing of 8M urea (Sigma-Aldrich) and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were then vortexed at 2,800rpm using Mini S-2 Vortex Mixer (Fisher Scientific) for ten seconds, followed by ten seconds of incubation on ice. This procedure was repeated six times. The lysate was then centrifuged at 21,000xg for five minutes at 4°C. Protein reduction was conducted using 5mM of tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 minutes at 37°C. Subsequently, 10mM of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for protein alkylation for 45 minutes at room temperature (dark). Following alkylation, cell lysate was diluted five-fold with 100mM of ammonium bicarbonate to lower urea concentration. Based on protein amount, Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) was then added in (trypsin: protein(w:w) at 1:50) for overnight digestion at 37°C. Trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Scientific) was added to reduce pH, and desalting was conducted with SOLA Solid Phase Extraction 2mg 96-well plates (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted twice using 200µL 80% Acetonitrile - 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Eluted peptides were speed-vacuum dried using Labconco CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Kansas City, MO).   TMTsixplex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher) was resuspended in LC-MS grade anhydrous acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich) following manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 0.8mg of TMT reagent was resuspended in 41µL of acetonitrile and incubated at room temperature for ten minutes. During the incubation, dried peptide samples were resuspended in 100mM of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma-Aldrich) to 1µg/µL. Then, TMT reagents were mixed with peptide samples at 4:1 (wt/wt) ratio and incubated at room temperature for one hour. Following incubation, each TMT reaction was quenched with 8µL of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 minutes at room temperature. Labeled samples were pooled together at equal ratio and then fractionated on a home-made high-pH C18 column (200µm x 30cm, packed with Waters BEH130 C18 5µm resin) into 36 cuts. All cuts were then injected and separated on homemade trap (200µm x 5cm, packed with POROS 10R2 C18 10µm resin) and analytical column (50µm x 50cm, packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 5µm resin), with 3hr reverse-phase gradient delivered by a Thermo Fisher Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano UPLC system coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. A parent ion scan was performed using a resolving power of 120,000 and then up to the 20 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS (minimum ion count of 1000 for activation), using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was activated such that MS/MS of the same m/z (within a range of 10ppm; exclusion list size=500) detected twice within 5s were excluded from analysis for 40s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data generated was analyzed against a UniProt human protein database (42,173 entries) for protein identification and quantification by Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2.0). Identified proteins have at least one unique peptide, while peptide FDR (less than 0.01) and protein FDR (less than 0.01) cutoffs were used. The Significant B values were calculated using the PERSEUS (v.1.6.5) software (Cox and Mann, 2008). Significance B value preset with an FDR<0.01 was used to identify proteins that are significantly differentially abundant and used for downstream integrative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Chemo-resistance in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients is driven by leukemic stem cells (LSCs) resulting in high rates of relapse and low overall survival. Here, we demonstrate that upregulation of the splicing factor, RBM17 preferentially marks and sustains LSCs and directly correlates with shorten patient survival. RBM17 knockdown in primary AML cells leads to myeloid differentiation and impaired colony formation and in vivo engraftment. Integrative multi-omics analyses show that RBM17 repression leads to inclusion of poison exons and production of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD)-sensitive transcripts for pro-leukemic factors and the translation initiation factor, EIF4A2. We show that EIF4A2 is enriched in LSCs and its inhibition impairs primary AML progenitor activity. Proteomic analysis of EIF4A2-depleted AML cells shows recapitulation of the RBM17 knockdown biological effects, including pronounced suppression of proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis. Overall, these results provide a rationale to target RBM17 and/or its downstream NMD-sensitive splicing substrates for AML treatment.

### Keywords
Aml, Rbm17, Splicing, Eif4a2, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
McMaster University
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University

### Submitter
Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Lu
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University


