### Accession
PXD038730

### Title
Caulobacter crescentus flagellins glycopeptides analyses

### Description
Caulobacter crescentus is an alphaproteobacterium that divides assymetrically. Each cell cycle results in the production of a motile flagellated cell and a sessile cell called the swamer cell and the stalked cell, respectively. The flagellar filament is composed of thousands polymerized flagellins. We showed that glycosylation of flagellins is required for the assembly of the flagellum. This glycosylation is performed by soluble FlmG glycosyltransferases that transfer nonulosonic acids (pseudaminic acid or legionaminic acid) directly to the flagellins. Such glycosylation system is also present in a close relative of Caulobacter crescentus, Brevundimonas subvibrioides. The project is to identify the site of glycosylation and the potential sugar added on this site.

### Sample Protocol
3xflag-tagged flagellins have been expressed in wild-type (WT) or mutant unable to produce the nonulosonic acid (pseudaminic acid for C. crescentus and legionaminic acid for B. subvibrioides). Pull downs were performed from cells collected during exponential growth phase with the FLAG immunoprecipitation Kit using Flag peptide for elution. LC-MS/MS-based glycopeptide analyses were done at the Functional Genomics Center of Zurich (FGCZ). Samples were concentrated by ultrafiltration using an Amicon 3K MWCO membrane centrifugation filter and then digested by sequence-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. The digested samples were dried and dissolved in 20 µl double distillated H2O containing 0.1 % of formic acid, transferred to the autosampler vials for Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) and 2 µl were injected on a nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Byonic The search parameters were listed below: • Mass tolerance of MS1: 10 ppm; MS2: 0.03 Da. These parameters were used for all types of data analysis. • The first run of search was used to understand the complexity of samples. Therefore, the acquired MS data were searched against fasta data containing from Caulobacter from Uniprot plus the user’s sequence via Byonic engine. (Byonic 4.5) with the consideration of Oxidation at Methionine. In addition, Byonic generated a focused database, containing only identified proteins for further wildcard search. • For glycan, wildcard search was performed. The software considered any mass adduct between 130-400 Da at Threonine.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation of surface structures diversifies cells chemically and physically. Nucleotide-activated sialic acids commonly serve as glycosyl donors, particularly pseudaminic acid (Pse) and its stereoisomer legionaminic acid (Leg), which decorate eubacterial and archaeal surface layers or protein appendages. FlmG, a recently identified protein sialyltransferase, O-glycosylates flagellins, the subunits of the flagellar filament. We show that flagellin glycosylation and motility in Caulobacter crescentus and Brevundimonas subvibrioides is conferred by functionally insulated Pse and Leg biosynthesis pathways, respectively, and by specialized FlmG orthologs. We established a genetic glyco-profiling platform for the classification of Pse or Leg biosynthesis pathways, discovered a signature determinant of eubacterial and archaeal Leg biosynthesis, and validated it by reconstitution experiments in a heterologous host. Finally, by rewiring FlmG glycosylation using chimeras, we defined two modular determinants that govern flagellin glycosyltransferase specificity: a glycosyltransferase domain that either donates Leg or Pse and a specialized flagellin-binding domain that identifies the acceptor.

### Keywords
Flagellins, Caulobacter crescentus, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology & Molecular Medicine and Geneva Center for Inflammation Research (GCIR), Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Rue Michel Servet 1, 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland.
University of Geneva

### Submitter
Nicolas Kint

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Viollier
Department of Microbiology & Molecular Medicine and Geneva Center for Inflammation Research (GCIR), Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Rue Michel Servet 1, 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland.


