### Accession
PXD022482

### Title
Defining the cell surface proteomic landscape of multiple myeloma reveals immunotherapeutic strategies and biomarkers of drug resistance

### Description
The myeloma cell surface proteome (“surfaceome”) not only determines tumor interaction with the microenvironment but serves as an emerging arena for therapeutic development. Here, we use glycoprotein capture proteomics to first define surface markers most-enriched on myeloma when compared to B-cell malignancy models, revealing unexpected biological signatures unique to malignant plasma cells. We next integrate our proteomic dataset with existing transcriptome databases, nominating CCR10 and TXNDC11 as possible monotherapeutic targets and CD48 as a promising co-target for increasing avidity of BCMA-directed cellular therapies. We further identify potential biomarkers of resistance to proteasome inhibitors and lenalidomide including changes in CD53, EVI2B, CD10, and CD33. Comparison of short-term treatment with chronic resistance delineates large differences in surface proteome profile under each type of drug exposure. Finally, we develop a miniaturized version of the surface proteomics protocol and present the first surface proteomic profile of a primary malignant plasma cell sample of MM patient. Our dataset provides a unique resource to advance the biological, therapeutic, and diagnostic understanding of myeloma.

### Sample Protocol
30e6 cells were collected for cell surface proteomics and washed twice with cold PBS. To oxidize glycoproteins, cells were incubated with 1.6mM Sodium metaperiodate (NaIO4) for 20 minutes with end-over-end rotation at 4°C in the dark, followed by three washes with ice cold PBS. To label oxidized glycoproteins, cells were incubated with 10mM Aniline and 1mM Biocytin hydrazide for 1.5 hours at 4°C with end-over-end rotation. Cells were washed three times with ice cold PBS, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80C prior to processing. Pellets were lysed in 2x RIPA Buffer with HALT Protease Inhibitors and 2mM EDTA and sonicated on ice with occasional vortexing. Lysates were mixed with 500uL Neutravidin (Pierce 29202) bead slurry and incubated on end over end rotary for 120 minutes at 4°C. Slurry was washed on columns with 1x RIPA, 1mM EDTA, PBS with 1M NaCl, and 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate with 2M Urea. Bead slurry was transferred to an eppendorf column with 50mM Tris pH 8.5, 10mM TCEP, 20mM IAA, 1.6M Urea. 2ug Trypsin was added to each sample for overnight digestion at RT. Supernatant contained digested peptides was removed from bead slurry and acidified prior to desalting on SOLA columns or Stagetips. Eluted peptides were dried down by speedvac and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA for mass spectrometry analysis. 1 ug of peptides were injected into a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC instrument with 15-cm Acclaim PEPMAP C18 (Thermo) reverse phase column coupled to a Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. A linear gradient from 2.4% Acetonitrile to 40% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid over 195 minutes at flow rate of 0.2uL/min, with increase to 80% Acetonitrile for column wash prior to re-equilibration. For MS1 acquisition, spectra were collected in data dependent mode with full MS scan resolution of 70,000, AGC target was set to 3e6, and maximum IT set to 100ms. For MS2 acquisition, resolution was set to 17,500, AGC set to 5e4, and maximum IT to 180ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was processed in Maxquant (12) (version 1.6.2.1) with settings as follows: enzyme specificity as trypsin with up to two missed cleavages, PSM/Protein FDR 0.01, cysteine carbidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, minimum peptide length = 7, matching time window 0.7 min, alignment time 20 min, with match between runs, along with other default settings. Data was searched against the Uniprot Swiss-Prot human proteome (obtained Sept. 3, 2018). Proteingroups files were exported from Maxquant, filtered to remove contaminants, and filtered for proteins with at least two unique peptides for analysis. Data analysis was performed in Perseus (64) and R. Identified proteins were filtered against curated lists of Uniprot-annotated membrane proteins or those identified in the analysis of Bausch-Fluck et al. (10), as described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Plasma cell, Multiple myeloma, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA

### Submitter
Ian Ferguson

### Lab Head
Dr Arun P. Wiita
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA


