### Accession
PXD025875

### Title
Dynamic 23S rRNA modification ho5C2501 benefits Escherichia coli under oxidative stress

### Description
Post-transcriptional modifications are added to ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) to govern ribosome biogenesis and to fine-tune protein biosynthesis. RlhA, a dedicated modification enzyme, adds a unique 5-hydroxycytidine (ho5C) at 23S rRNA position 2501 in E. coli and related bacteria. However, the molecular and biological functions as well as the regulation of ho5C2501 remain unclear. We conducted extensive growth curves with the modification-deficient ∆rlhA strain and quantified the extent of the modification during different conditions by mass spectrometry and reverse transcription. The levels of ho5C2501 in E. coli ribosomes turned out to be highly dynamic and growth phase-dependent, with the most effective hydroxylation yields observed in the stationary phase. We demonstrated a direct effect of ho5C2501 on translation efficiencies in vitro and in vivo. High ho5C2501 levels reduced protein biosynthesis which however turned out to be beneficial for E. coli for adapting to oxidative stress. This functional advantage was small under optimal conditions or during heat or cold shock, but becomes pronounced in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. Taken together, these data provided first functional insights into the role of this unique 23S rRNA modification for ribosome functions and bacterial growth under oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomes of E. coli strains with either ho5C2501-modified or unmodified ribosomes were analyzed under both optimal and oxidative stress conditions. Therefore, 1 ml samples were taken from exponentially growing E. coli cultures in LB medium before and one hour after the addition of 2 mM H2O2. The samples were washed three times with 1 ml of 1x PBS. Cell pellets were re-suspended in 50µL lysis buffer (8M Urea / 100mM Tris-HCl pH8, with proteases inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated with 10 short bursts of 10 sec followed by intervals of 30 sec for cooling on ice. The protein concentration was measured by Qubit Protein Assay (Invitrogen). 10µg protein were reduced, alkylated and digested with LysC 2 hours at 37°C followed by Trypsin at room temperature overnight. The digests were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography on a Dionex, Ultimate 3000, (Thermo Fischer) coupled to a tribrid orbitrap mass spectrometer, (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) with two repetitive injections of 500 ng protein digest for each sample. Samples were processed and loaded in random order onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 50µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto a homemade packed C18 CSH Waters column (1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm × 10 cm) by applying a 90-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data interpretation was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) using a strict Trypsin cleavage rule and allowing up to three missed cleavages. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini, and fixed modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine. First search mass accuracy for precursor ions was set at 10 ppm, reducing to 4.5 ppm for main search, and 0.4 Da mass deviation for the fragment ions. Data was searched against an E.coli_K12_Strain_BW25113 protein sequence database downloaded from Uniprot.org in October 2020, with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a false discovery rate (FDR) set at 0.01 on peptide spectrum match, peptide and protein levels. Furthermore, only proteins identified with at least two different peptide sequences were accepted. Protein identifications considered as contaminations (e.g. trypsin) as well as proteins identified only by site were removed for statistical validation. The normalized label-free quantification (LFQ) protein group intensities as calculated by MaxQuant and a top3 approach were used for relative proteome quantifications. For top3, peptide intensities were median-normalized to the global median, then missing peptide imputation was done per sample by drawing values from a gaussian distribution of width 0.3x sample standard deviation centered at the sample distribution mean minus 1.8x sample standard deviation if there were at least two peptide intensities in a group, otherwise a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) method was applied, followed by summation of the three most intense peptides per protein group to a surrogate of the real protein abundance, named iTop3. For LFQ values, we imputed with the same left-censored method as for peptides if there was a single missing protein LFQ value in the three biological replicates. Any remaining missing values were again imputed by the MLE method. In order to perform statistical tests, missing iTop3 or LFQ values were further imputed at the protein level using the MLE method, and the final imputed LFQ or iTop3 values were called iLFQ or iiTop3, respectively.  Differential expression tests were performed by applying the (Welch-) Student's t-test (unequal variance). Log2-fold changes and adjusted p-values (FDR-controlled Benjamini and Hochberg correction) were reported. Furthermore, a check was performed by repeating the imputation cycle and significance testing 20 times. Protein groups with a persistent reporting of differential expression were considered as true differentially expressed between the two groups. A log2-fold change of at least one and a corrected p-value of ≦0.05 were required to be considered as significant. Statistical testing and imputation were made with a home-made R script run under R-Studio.

### Publication Abstract
Post-transcriptional modifications are added to ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) to govern ribosome biogenesis and to fine-tune protein biosynthesis. In Escherichia coli and related bacteria, RlhA uniquely catalyzes formation of a 5-hydroxycytidine (ho5C) at position 2501 of 23S rRNA. However, the molecular and biological functions as well as the regulation of ho5C2501 modification remain unclear. We measured growth curves with the modification-deficient &#x394;rlhA strain and quantified the extent of the modification during different conditions by mass spectrometry and reverse transcription. The levels of ho5C2501 in E. coli ribosomes turned out to be highly dynamic and growth phase-dependent, with the most effective hydroxylation yields observed in the stationary phase. We demonstrated a direct effect of ho5C2501 on translation efficiencies in vitro and in vivo. High ho5C2501 levels reduced protein biosynthesis which however turned out to be beneficial for E. coli for adapting to oxidative stress. This functional advantage was small under optimal conditions or during heat or cold shock, but becomes pronounced in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. Taken together, these data provided first functional insights into the role of this unique 23S rRNA modification for ribosome functions and bacterial growth under oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Ribosome, Rlha, Dps, Rna modifications, E. coli

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Norbert Polacek
Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland


