### Accession
PXD030332

### Title
Prion-like low complexity regions enable avid virus-host interactions during HIV-1 infection

### Description
Cellular proteins CPSF6, NUP153 and SEC24C play crucial roles in HIV-1 infection. While weak interactions of short FG peptides to isolated capsid hexamers have been characterized, how these proteins engage biologically relevant extended HIV-1 capsid lattices is unknown. We have identified that prion-like low complexity regions (LCR) enable avid binding of CPSF6, NUP153 and SEC24C to curved hexameric capsid lattices. Structural studies reveal that LCR-LCR interactions mediate multivalent CPSF6 assembly, which are templated by binding of CPSF6 FG peptides to a subset of hydrophobic capsid pockets positioned along adjoining hexamers. CPSF6 LCR mediated avid binding to HIV-1 cores is essential for functional virus-host interactions in infected cells. Investigational drug lenacapavir can access unoccupied hydrophobic pockets in the CPSF6-HIV-1 complex and potently impair HIV-1 inside the nucleus without displacing the tightly bound cellular cofactor from virus cores. These results elucidate previously undescribed mechanisms of virus-host interactions and potent inhibition of HIV-1.

### Sample Protocol
Solution-phase amide HDX experiments were carried out with a fully automated system (CTC HTS PAL, LEAP Technologies, Carrboro, NC; housed inside a 4°C cabinet) as described (1) with slight modifications. Peptides were identified using tandem MS (MS/MS) experiments performed on a QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) over a 70 min gradient. Product ion spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode and the five most abundant ions were selected for the product ion analysis per scan event. The MS/MS *.raw data files were converted to *.mgf files and then submitted to MASCOT (version 2.3 Matrix Science, London, UK) for peptide identification. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 4 with the mass tolerance for precursor ions ± 0.6 Da and for fragment ions ± 8ppm. Oxidation to methionine was selected for variable modification. Pepsin was used for digestion and no specific enzyme was selected in MASCOT during the search. Peptides included in the peptide set used for HDX detection had a MASCOT score of 20 or greater. The MS/MS MASCOT search was also performed against a decoy (reverse) sequence and false positives were ruled out if they did not pass a 1% false discovery rate. CA(A92E) tubes were initially formed overnight at 25 °C and then incubated with GST-CPSF6261-358 or GST-CPSF6261-358,ΔFG for up to 2 min at 25 °C. For the differential HDX experiments, we compared; 1) GST-CPSF6261-358 ± CA(A92E) at a final CPSF6 to CA ratio of 1:12; 2) GST-CPSF6261-358,ΔFG ± CA(A92E) at a final CPSF6 to CA ratio of 1:12; 3) CA(A92E) ± GST-CPSF6261-358 at a final CPSF6 to CA ratio of 1:3; 4) CA(A92E) ± GST-CPSF6261-358,ΔFG at a final CPSF6 to CA ratio of 1:3. The reactions (5 μl) were mixed with 20 μl of D2O-containing HDX buffer (100 mM MOPS pD 6.9, 1 M NaCl, 200 μM IP6) and incubated at 4°C for 0, 10, 30, 60, 900 or 3,600 s. Only the 0, 10, and 30s timepoint are plotted for GST-CPSF6261-358 and GST-CPSF6261-358,ΔFG as CPSF6 peptides are disordered and thus fully saturated with deuterium by 30s. Following on-exchange, unwanted forward- or back-exchange was minimized, and the protein was denatured by the addition of 25 μl of a quench solution (0.1 M Na Phosphate, 50 mM TCEP, pH 2). Samples were then immediately passed through an immobilized pepsin column (prepared in house) at 50 μl min-1 (0.1% v/v TFA, 4°C) and the resulting peptides were trapped and desalted on a 2 mm × 10 mm C8 trap column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher). The bound peptides were then gradient-eluted (4-40% CH3CN v/v and 0.3% v/v formic acid) across a 2.1 mm × 50 mm C18 separation column (Hypersil Gold, ThermoFisher) for 5 min. Sample handling and peptide separation were conducted at 4°C. The eluted peptides were then subjected to electrospray ionization directly coupled to a high resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive, ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Each differential HDX experiment was performed with two biological replicate each with three technical replicates. The intensity weighted mean m/z centroid value of each peptide envelope was calculated and subsequently converted into a percentage of deuterium incorporation. This is accomplished by determining the observed averages of the undeuterated and fully deuterated spectra using the conventional formula described elsewhere (2). The fully deuterated control, 100% deuterium incorporation, was calculated theoretically, and corrections for back-exchange were made on the basis of an estimated 70% deuterium recovery and accounting for 80% final deuterium concentration in the sample (1:5 dilution in D2O HDX buffer). Statistical significance for the differential HDX data is determined by an unpaired t-test for each time point, a procedure that is integrated into the HDX Workbench software (3).  The HDX data from all overlapping peptides were consolidated to individual amino acid values using a residue averaging approach. Briefly, for each residue, the deuterium incorporation values and peptide lengths from all overlapping peptides were assembled. A weighting function was applied in which shorter peptides were weighted more heavily and longer peptides were weighted less. Each of the weighted deuterium incorporation values were then averaged incorporating this weighting function to produce a single value for each amino acid. The initial two residues of each peptide, as well as prolines, were omitted from the calculations. This approach is similar to that previously described (4).      Deuterium uptake for each peptide is calculated as the average of % D for all on-exchange time points and the difference in average %D values between the unbound and bound samples is presented as a heat map with a color code given at the bottom of the figure (warm colors for deprotection and cool colors for protection). Peptides are colored by the software automatically to display significant differences, determined either by a >5% difference (less or more protection) in average deuterium uptake between the two states, or by using the results of unpaired t-tests at each time point (p-value < 0.05 for any two time points or a p-value < 0.01 for any single time point). Peptides with non-significant changes between the two states are colored grey. The exchange at the first two residues for any given peptide is not colored. Each peptide bar in the heat map view displays the average Δ %D values, associated standard deviation, and the charge state. Additionally, overlapping peptides with a similar protection trend covering the same region are used to rule out data ambiguity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Hdx-ms, Cpsf6

### Affiliations
Scripps Research
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.

### Submitter
Valentine Courouble

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick Griffin
Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA.


