### Accession
PXD023526

### Title
Pilot proteomic profiling of blood plasma obtained from lean and obese individuals

### Description
Obesity is a frightening chronic disease, which has tripled since 1975. It is not expected to slow down staying one of the leading cases of preventable death and resulting in an increased clinical and economic burden. Poor lifestyle choices and excessive intake of “cheap calories” are major contributors to obesity, triggering type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and other comorbidities. Understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for development of obesity is essential as it might result in development of early-stage obesity biomarkers, allowing distinguish between metabolic syndromes and anti-obesity targets. The complex nature of this disease, coupled with the phenomenon of metabolically healthy obesity, inspired us to perform data-centric, hypothesis-generating pilot research, aimed to find correlations between parameters of classic clinical blood tests and proteomic profiles of 104 lean and obese subjects. As the result, we assembled patterns of proteins, which presence or absence allows predicting the weight of the patient fairly well. We believe that such proteomic patterns with high prediction power should facilitate the translation of potential candidates into biomarkers of clinical use for early-stage stratification of obesity therapy.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred and four human plasma samples were obtained from the patients of the Clinic of "Federal Research Center of Nutrition and Biotechnology" (Moscow, Russia).  Venous blood samples were collected into EDTA tubes after overnight fasting and centrifuged at 1,500g x 10 min at room temperature. Plasma fractions were stored at −80°C in cryotubes until processing. Samples were randomized prior to proteomic investigation to avoid potential batch effects. The immunoaffinity depletion of the high abundance plasma proteins (albumin and IgG) was used to enhance the detection of lower abundance but more insightful proteins in further shotgun proteomic analysis. For plasma depletion, we used ProteoPrep Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). The depletion was carried out in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The depleted blood plasma samples (175 μg of total protein) were in-solution digested in accordance with a standard protocol. In brief, proteins were denatured and reduced with a solution containing sodium deoxycholate, tris-2-carboxyethyl-phosphine hydrochloride, and 1,4-dithiothreitol, and further alkylated with vinylpyridine. Trypsin was added to the sample (trypsin/total protein = 1/100) and then incubated within 2 hours at a temperature of 44 °C. After 2 hours, an aliquot of trypsin was added and then incubated for 2 hours at 37 °C. Trypsinolysis was quenched by adding formic acid to each sample to a final concentration of 5%, then a mixture of peptides was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm within 15 minutes. The supernatant was collected and subjected to further chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis. Separation and identification of the peptides were performed on a Ultimate 3000 nano-flow HPLC (Thermo Scientific, USA) connected to Orbitrap Exactive (Thermo Scientific, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex NG ion source (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptide separation was carried out on a RP-HPLC column Zorbax 300SB-C18 (C18 particle size of 3.5 μm, inner diameter of 75 μm and length of 150 mm, Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC, Thermo Scientific, USA) using a linear 90-min gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 60% solvent B over 95 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Mass spectra were registered in the positive ion mode. Data was acquired in the Orbitrap Exactive analyzer with resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 400) for MS and 15,000 (m/z 400) for MS/MS scans. For peptide fragmentation higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used, the signal threshold was set to 17,500 for an isolation window of 1 m/z and the first mass of HCD spectra was set to 100 m/z. The collision energy was set to 35%. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from targeting for 10 s. Singly charged ions and ion with not defined charge state were excluded from triggering MS/MS scans. Three LC-MS/MS repetitions were performed for each plasma sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted into mgf-files by MSConvert. Each of the 312 mgf files containing feature list for protein identification was processed by SearchGUI software (v. 4.0.4 [22]) using three search engines (X!Tandem, MS-GF+, OMMSA) against SwissProt library of human canonical and alternatively spliced protein sequences in automatic mode. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, maximum 2 missing cleavages were allowed. Pyridylethylation (C) was used as a constant modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable one. Charge states of +2, +3, and +4 were selected as parent ions. Mass tolerance was set to ± 15 ppm for precursor ions and ± 0.01 Da for fragment ions. Cut-off of false discovery rates for peptide-spectra matches, peptides, and proteins was ≤ 1%. Results were visualized in PeptideShaker (v. 2.0.5). The accession numbers of MS datasets will be provided during review.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is a frightening chronic disease, which has tripled since 1975. It is not expected to slow down staying one of the leading cases of preventable death and resulting in an increased clinical and economic burden. Poor lifestyle choices and excessive intake of "cheap calories" are major contributors to obesity, triggering type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and other comorbidities. Understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for development of obesity is essential as it might result in the introducing of anti-obesity targets and early-stage obesity biomarkers, allowing the distinction between metabolic syndromes. The complex nature of this disease, coupled with the phenomenon of metabolically healthy obesity, inspired us to perform data-centric, hypothesis-generating pilot research, aimed to find correlations between parameters of classic clinical blood tests and proteomic profiles of 104 lean and obese subjects. As the result, we assembled patterns of proteins, which presence or absence allows predicting the weight of the patient fairly well. We believe that such proteomic patterns with high prediction power should facilitate the translation of potential candidates into biomarkers of clinical use for early-stage stratification of obesity therapy.

### Keywords
Lean, Obese, Lc-ms/ms, Metabolic syndrome, Blood plasma

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Laboratory of Interactomics of Proteoforms, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry

### Submitter
Olga Kiseleva

### Lab Head
Dr Ekaterina Poverennaya
Laboratory of Interactomics of Proteoforms, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry


