### Accession
PXD000376

### Title
A Multi-Omic Analysis of Human Naive CD4 T cells

### Description
Technological advances in genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics and proteomics have enabled massively parallel measurements across thousands of genes and gene products. Such high-throughput technologies have been extensively used to carry out genome-wide studies particularly in the context of diseases. Nevertheless, a unified analysis of the genome, epigenome, transcriptome, and proteome of a single mammalian cell type to obtain a coherent view of the complex interplay between omes has not yet been undertaken. Here, we report the first multi-omic analysis of human primary naïve CD4+ T cells, revealing hundreds of unannotated mRNA transcripts, miRNAs, pseudogenes, and noncoding RNAs. Additionally, we carried out a comparative analysis of naïve CD4+ T cells with primary resting memory CD4+ T cells, which have provided novel insights into T cell biology. Overall, our data will serve as a baseline reference of a single pure population of cells for future systems level analysis of other defined cell populations.

### Sample Protocol
Naïve CD4+ T cells were isolated using magnetic beads following manufacturer’s instructions (Miltenyi Biotec #130.094.131) and assessed using FACS Calibur, with the average purity of each isolation being ~95%. Resting memory cells were isolated by enriching pan resting CD4+ T cells followed by CD45RO depletion of resting memory CD4+ T cells, with the average purity of each isolation being ~95% as well.   Whole cell lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE, gel bands were cut, and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces, dried, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Protein fractionation was also carried out on GELFREE 8100 fractionation system according to manufacturer’s protocol. Each fraction was then subjected to SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel tryptic digestion as described above. Strong-cation exchange (SCX) as well as basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) following in-solution trypsin digestion of protein lysate and LC MS/MS analysis. For iTRAQ based quantitative proteomics experiments, 75 µg of in-solution digested peptides from both naïve and memory T cells were labelled according to manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched using Mascot version 2.2 and Sequest search algorithms against a human RefSeq protein sequence database. Identified peptides were subjected to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) filter using the decoy database method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Naive cd4+ t cells, Memory cd4+ t cells

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Johns Hopkins University


