### Accession
PXD022997

### Title
Loss of α-actinin-3 during human evolution provides superior cold resilience and muscle heat generation

### Description
The fast skeletal muscle protein α-actinin-3 is absent in 1.5 billion people worldwide due to homozygosity for a nonsense polymorphism in the ACTN3 gene (R577X). The prevalence of the 577X allele increased as modern humans moved to colder climates, suggesting a link between α-actinin-3 deficiency and improved cold tolerance. Here, we show that humans lacking α-actinin-3 (XX) are superior in maintaining core body temperature during cold-water immersion due to changes in skeletal muscle thermogenesis. Muscles of XX individuals displayed a shift towards more slow-twitch isoforms of myosin heavy chain (MyHC) and sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) proteins, accompanied by altered neuronal muscle activation resulting in increased tone rather than overt shivering. Experiments on Actn3 knockout mice showed no alterations in brown adipose tissue (BAT) properties that could explain the improved cold tolerance in XX individuals. Thus, this study provides a clear mechanism for the positive selection of the ACTN3 X-allele in cold climates and supports a key thermogenic role of skeletal muscle during cold exposure in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and solubilization. Vastus lateralis muscle biopsies were homogenized in 16 µg/ml PBS and briefly centrifuged. After discarding the supernatant, 200 µl lysis buffer (8M Urea, 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5, Roche protease and phosphatase inhibitor) were added to the pellet and samples were vortexed and sonicated on ice. Cell lysates were then centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C and 15,000 rpm and cleared lysates were transferred to new tubes. The extracted proteins were precipitated with chilled acetone (1:4 vol) at -20 °C overnight and then centrifuged for 20 min at 14,000 g at 4 °C. The protein pellets were dissolved in 40 µl of 8 M urea and a 3 µl aliquot of each sample was diluted 10-fold to BCA-assay. A volume equivalent of 25 µg of proteins from each sample were adjusted to 43 µl with water and 5 µl of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) was added.  In solution digestion and TMT-labeling. Proteins were reduced with adding 1.5 µl of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) in 500 mM AmBic and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h with shaking at 400 rpm.  Alkylation was performed with adding 1.5 µl of 66 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 500 mM AmBic at room temperature for 30 min with shaking at 400 rpm. Thereafter 1 µg of sequencing grade modified Trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample (1:33 trypsin:protein) and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C.  The digestion was stopped by adding of formic acid at final concentration of 5% and incubating the solution for 20 min at 37 °C. Then the samples were cleaned on a C18 Hypersep plate (Thermo Scientific), dried using a Speedvac and re-suspended in 70 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer and 30 µl of TMT-10plex (Thermo Scientific) reagent was added in dry acetonitrile (ACN) following incubation for 2 h at room temperature with shaking at 550 rpm. Labeling reaction was quenched with 11 µl of 5% hydroxylamine. Labeled samples were combined and dried on Speedvac. Following a cleaning on StageTip C18 20 µl of the combined samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN. PRLC-MS/MS analysis. Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved using a 50 cm C18 Easy-C18 column (Thermo Scientific) connected to nanoLC-1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Approximately 1.3 µg peptides were loaded onto the column in a volume of 2 µl and then eluted at a 300 nl / min flow rate for 180 min at a linear gradient from 4% to 26% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. Orbitrap Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) analyzed the eluted peptides that were ionized with electrospray ionization. The survey MS spectrum was acquired at the resolution of 140,000 in the range of m/z 350-1600. MS/MS data were obtained with a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charge z=2-3 at a resolution of 70,000 using m/z 2 isolation width.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed on Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Scientific) identifying protein in SwissProt database and the extracted abundances were further evaluated using an in-house developed R algorithm calculating fold changes and P-values. Data were visualized using Qlucore Omics Explorer (Lund, Sweden).

### Publication Abstract
The protein &#x3b1;-actinin-3 expressed in fast-twitch skeletal muscle fiber is absent in 1.5 billion people worldwide due to homozygosity for a nonsense polymorphism in ACTN3 (R577X). The prevalence of the 577X allele increased as modern humans moved to colder climates, suggesting a link between &#x3b1;-actinin-3 deficiency and improved cold tolerance. Here, we show that humans lacking &#x3b1;-actinin-3 (XX) are superior in maintaining core body temperature during cold-water immersion due to changes in skeletal muscle thermogenesis. Muscles of XX individuals displayed a shift toward more slow-twitch isoforms of myosin heavy chain (MyHC) and sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) proteins, accompanied by altered neuronal muscle activation resulting in increased tone rather than overt shivering. Experiments on Actn3 knockout mice showed no alterations in brown adipose tissue (BAT) properties that&#xa0;could explain the improved cold tolerance in XX individuals. Thus, this study provides a mechanism for the positive selection&#xa0;of the ACTN3 X-allele in cold climates and supports a key thermogenic role of skeletal muscle during cold exposure in humans.

### Keywords
Α-actinin, Evolution, Muscle

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Hakan Westerblad
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.


