### Accession
PXD001372

### Title
Rat Liver Phosphoproteome -  An optimized platform for hydrophilic interaction chromatography-immobilized metal affinity chromatography enables deep coverage of the rat liver phosphoproteome

### Description
In depth analysis of rat liver phosphoproteome using optimized HILIC IMAC sample preparation

### Sample Protocol
Liver is homogenized and lysed in 4% SDS. Trypsin digestion carried out using FASP protocol. Tryptic peptides separated by HILIC chromatography. 28 HILIC fractions enriched using for phosphopeptides using PHosSelect resin in 96 well plates. Enriched fractions are pooled pairwise to give 14 samples. Samples analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Velos using 90 min gradients.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25. Protein ID using Andromeda and UniProtKB rat reference proteome.Parameters as described in attached Search file.

### Publication Abstract
While analysis of the phosphoproteome has become an important component of understanding how cells function, it remains a nontrivial task in terms of the number of sample preparation steps and instrument time needed to achieve sufficient depth of coverage to produce meaningful results. We previously described a multidimensional method that uses hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) followed by Fe(3+) immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) to reduce complexity, improve selectivity, and increase phosphopeptide identifications. Here we present refinements to our overall protocol that make it simpler and more efficient, while they provide greater coverage of the phosphoproteome. We introduce filter-aided sample prep (FASP) for cell lysis and trypsin digestion. Following HILIC separation, fractions are IMAC enriched using a 96-well filter plate. Finally, enriched samples are analyzed using an LC-MS strategy optimized for the fractionation scheme. The optimized protocol improves protein recovery, simplifies phosphopeptide enrichment, and optimizes instrument time, while it maintains deep coverage of the phosphoproteome. By using the refined protocol, we identified more than 16,000 unique phosphosites from rat liver in a single experiment, which used approximately 1 day of instrument time. All together, we present evidence for 24,485 rat liver phosphosites that represents the deepest coverage of a tissue phosphoproteome to date.

### Keywords
Rat, Liver, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
GlaxoSmithKline
Proteomics and Biological Mass Spectrometry Laboratory Department of Biomolecular Sciences GlaxoSmithKline

### Submitter
Roland Annan

### Lab Head
Dr Roland S Annan
Proteomics and Biological Mass Spectrometry Laboratory Department of Biomolecular Sciences GlaxoSmithKline


