### Accession
PXD017092

### Title
Complement C5a impairs phagosomal maturation in the neutrophil through phosphoproteomic remodelling.

### Description
Critical illness is characterised by organ failure, dysregulated immune activation and frequent secondary infections. Unbridled complement activation in these patients exposes immune cells to high levels of the anaphylotoxin, C5a. C5a suppresses antimicrobial functions of key immune cells, in particular the neutrophil, and this suppression is associated with poorer outcomes amongst critically ill adults. The intracellular signalling pathways which mediate C5a-induced neutrophil dysfunction are incompletely understood. Healthy donor peripheral blood neutrophils exposed to purified C5a demonstrated a prolonged defect in phagocytosis of the common nosocomial pathogen Staphylococcus aureus which persisted for 7 hours after exposure.  Phosphoproteomic profiling of 2712 unique phosphoproteins identified persistent C5a signalling at 1 hour, and selective impairment of phagosomal protein phosphorylation on exposure to S. aureus. Notable proteins included early endosomal marker ZFYVE16 and V-ATPase proton channel component ATPV1G1. A multi-function assay of bacterial ingestion and phagosomal acidification demonstrated C5a-induced impairment of phagosomal acidification in a whole blood model of Staphylococcal bacteraemia which was recapitulated in neutrophils from critically ill patients.  Examination of the C5a-impaired protein phosphorylation indicated a role for the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase VPS34 in phagosomal maturation.  Inhibition of VPS34 impaired neutrophil phagosomal acidification, late bacterial ingestion and killing of S. aureus in whole blood. This study provides a deep phosphoproteomic assessment of human neutrophil signalling in response to S. aureus, and demonstrates how some of these pathways are disrupted by exposure to C5a, identifying a defect in phagosomal maturation and providing new information on mechanisms of immune failure in critical illness.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in fresh lysis buffer (0.5 % SDS, 0.1 M TEAB containing 1 X HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and incubated at 90 °C for 5 minutes. Lysates were sonicated twice for 20 seconds. The insoluble fraction was removed by centrifugation at 20 000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Lysate protein concentration was determined by Bradford Protein Assay. 100 µg of protein per sample was reduced in 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine‎ (TCEP) for one hour at 60 °C, which was followed by alkylation of cysteines with 10 mM MMTS in the dark at room temperature. Lysates were then diluted 1:10 with 0.1 M TEAB before trypsin was added at a 1:30 trypsin:protein ratio by mass. Digestion was carried out overnight at room temperature. Tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (0.8 mg) were reconstituted in 40 µl anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and peptide samples were labelled according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Following incubation at room temperature for one hour, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 5% (v/v) for 15 min at room temperature. The TMT-labelled samples were pooled at 1: 1 ratio across all samples. The pooled sample was vacuum centrifuged to dryness. The TMT mixture was fractionated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system at high pH. The labelled peptide mixture was reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide in water (pH 10) and subjected to a 45 minutes linear gradient from 4.5% to 45% ACN in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide (pH 10) at a flow rate of 0.2 ml/min over an XBridge C18 column Reversed-Phase (3.5 µm particles, 2.1 mm ID, 150 mm in length; Waters). The peptide mixture was fractionated into 48 fractions. 15% (v/v) of each fraction was used for full proteome analysis. The remaining volume was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. All fractions were dried on a centrifugal vacuum concentrator. LC-MS/MS analysis of full proteome fractions: The initial 48 fractions were pooled into a final number of 32 fractions. Each fraction was reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 5 µl were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Å trapping column with the ulPickUp injection method at a loading flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. For peptide separation, an EASY-Spray analytical column 75 μm × 25 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å column was used for multi-step gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA; mobile phase (B) was composed of 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA. Peptides were eluted using a gradient as follows: 0-10 min, 5 % B; 10-95 min, 5-45% B; 95 -100 min, 45%-95% B; 100-108 min, 95% B; 108–110min, 95%-5% B; 110-120 min, 5% B. Data-dependent acquisition began with an MS survey scan in the Orbitrap (380-1500 m/z, resolution 120,000 full width half maximum (FWHM), automatic gain control (AGC) target 3E5, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of: collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, AGC target 1E4, normalized collision energy (NCE) 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 35 ms, an isolation window at 0.7, and a dynamic exclusion duration of 45 seconds. Following acquisition of MS2 spectrum, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) using 10 frequency notches and analysed in the Orbitrap (resolution 50,000 FWHM, AGC target 5E4, NCE 55, maximum injection time 86 ms, and isolation window at 0.7. Phosphopeptide enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis: The initial 48 fractions were consolidated into 14 and submitted to phosphopeptide enrichment by using the High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.1 % formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Fractions were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Å trapping column with the ulPickUp injection method at a loading flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. For peptide separation, an EASY-Spray analytical column 75 μm × 25 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å column was used for multi-step gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA, 5 % dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO); mobile phase (B) was composed of 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA, 5 % DMSO. Peptides were eluted using the same gradient described for full proteome fractions. Data-dependent acquisition began with an MS survey scan in the Orbitrap (400-1600 m/z, resolution 60,000 FWHM, AGC target 3E6, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top 10 precursors were then isolated and fragmented with CID. MS2 analysis consisted of: resolution 30,000 FWHM, AGC target 2E4, NCE  33, maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
Spectral .raw files from data dependent acquisition were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer™ 2.1 software. Data were searched against both human and S. aureus UniProt reviewed databases at a 1 % spectrum level false discovery rate (FDR) criteria using Percolator (University of Washington). MS1 mass tolerance was constrained to 20 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and methylthio (+45.988 Da) of cysteine residues (+45.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and deamidation (+0.984 Da) of asparagine and glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel. Parsimony principle was applied for protein grouping.  Peptide and phosphopeptide intensities were normalised across conditions using median scaling and then summed to generate protein and phosphoprotein intensities. Proteins and phosphoproteins were independently identified and quantified in all samples from all four donors; species not meeting these criteria were excluded from subsequent analysis. Log base 2 fold change (Log2FC) was calculated between conditions of interest, compared across n = 4 donors and tested for statistical significance by limma-based linear models with Bonferroni's correction for multiple testing.  Hierarchical clustering using Euclidean distance was undertaken on the entire dataset. Heatmaps and volcano plots were generated as shown in Results. Statistical analyses were performed in RStudio using the qPLEXanalyzer package, and plots were produced using the ggplot2 package.

### Publication Abstract
Critical illness is accompanied by the release of large amounts of the anaphylotoxin, C5a. C5a suppresses antimicrobial functions of neutrophils which is associated with adverse outcomes. The signaling pathways that mediate C5a-induced neutrophil dysfunction are incompletely understood. Healthy donor neutrophils exposed to purified C5a demonstrated a prolonged defect (7 hours) in phagocytosis of Staphylococcus aureus. Phosphoproteomic profiling of 2712 phosphoproteins identified persistent C5a signaling and selective impairment of phagosomal protein phosphorylation on exposure to S. aureus. Notable proteins included early endosomal marker ZFYVE16 and V-ATPase proton channel component ATPV1G1. An assay of phagosomal acidification demonstrated C5a-induced impairment of phagosomal acidification, which was recapitulated in neutrophils from critically ill patients. Examination of the C5a-impaired protein phosphorylation indicated a role for the PI3K VPS34 in phagosomal maturation. Inhibition of VPS34 impaired neutrophil phagosomal acidification and killing of S. aureus. This study provides a phosphoproteomic assessment of human neutrophil signaling in response to S. aureus and its disruption by C5a, identifying a defect in phagosomal maturation and mechanisms of immune failure in critical illness.

### Keywords
Neutrophils, Critical care, Phosphoproteome, Complement system proteins, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Carmen Gonzalez Tejedo

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Conway Morris
Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK


