### Accession
PXD036081

### Title
The ESX-4 type VII secretion system in required for efficient heme utilization by Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
In this study our primary objective was to identify unknown components that are required of Mtb Hm acquisition. Herein, we show that the ancestral ESX-4 type VII secretion system (T7SS) which was thought to be inactive in Mtb is required for efficient Hm utilization. We also identified that the culture filtrate proteins Rv0125 and Rv1085c and the alternative sigma factor SigM are necessary of Hm utilization. Finally, we present the first direct evidence that some mycobacterial PPE proteins are pore forming membrane proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested using the S-trap micro protocol (Protifi #C02-micro), as described by ProtiFi.  Samples were adjusted to contain 5% SDS, 5 mM TCEP, 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5, and incubated for 30 min a RT.  Samples were then alkylated by adding IAA to 10 mM and incubating for 20 min at RT.  The alkylated samples were acidified by adding phosphoric acid to a 1.2% Cf and diluted further by adding 6 volumes of buffered methanol.  Samples were centrifuged through the S-trap spin filtration devices, and the retentates washed further with buffered methanol.  To each washed retentate, 25 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 containing 0.8 micrograms of trypsin/LysC (Promega) was applied, and the digestions were incubated overnight at 37 degrees C. After digestion, peptides were collected via three successive 40-microliter elutions using 40 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 0.1% aqueous formic acid, or 50:50:0.1 acetonitrile/water/formic acid, and the pooled peptide eluates were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Fusion model, Thermo), using a by a “high/low” data-dependent MS/MS acquisition method.  For these analyses, peptides were dissolved in mobile phase A (0.1% aqueous formic acid), and a vented trap configuration was used for injection onto a 75-micron x 50-cm analytical column packed with 2-micron C18 particles (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, #20330952, Thermo).  The column was developed using 80:20:0.1 acetonitrile/water/formic acid as mobile phase B, transitioning linearly from 4% mobile phase B to 32% mobile phase B over a period of 120 minutes at a uniform 250 nL/min flow rate.  Eluting peptides were ionized in a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo) using a stainless-steel emitter.  Peptide ions were analyzed in the Orbitrap sector at a nominal resolution of 120,000, selected for MS/MS using the quadrupole sector, fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion routing multipole sector, and the fragment ions analyzed in the ion trap sector.  The specific instrument settings are available in the RAW files.

### Data Protocol
For all data and statistical analyses, MaxQuant v2.0.1.058 was used. The reference proteome of 3,993 M. tuberculosis H37Rv sequences was downloaded from Uniprot.  Searches utilized default settings, supplemented with the variable modification cyclization of glutamine to pyroglutamate, with the Match Between Runs enabled, and with LFQ and iBAQ quantitations enabled59. The derived LFQ values of 2,615 proteins (Table S4) were further used to compare proteomes. Incorrect identifications and contaminants were filtered out. Protein intensities were log2-transformed. Data normalization occurred by subtracting the median. SAM analysis60 was performed using the volcano plot tool. Significant differences in protein abundance was determined by performing Student’s t-test, using a permutation-corrected FDR of 5% to control for multiple hypothesis testing one-way and an S0 value of 0.1. Proteins that were in low abundance more than 2-fold change in ΔeccC4 with p<0.05 in were selected for downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Iron is essential for growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), but most iron in the human body is stored in heme within hemoglobin. Here, we demonstrate that the substrate-binding protein DppA of the inner membrane Dpp transporter is required for heme and hemoglobin utilization by Mtb. The 1.27&#xa0;&#xc5; crystal structure of DppA shows a tetrapeptide bound in the protein core and a large solvent-exposed crevice for heme binding. Mutation of arginine 179 in this cleft eliminates heme binding to DppA and prevents heme utilization by Mtb. The outer membrane proteins PPE36 and PPE62 are also required for heme and hemoglobin utilization, indicating that these pathways converge at the cell surface of Mtb. Albumin, the most abundant blood protein, binds heme specifically and bypasses the requirements for PPE36, PPE62 and Dpp. Thus, our study reveals albumin-dependent and -independent heme uptake pathways, highlighting the importance of iron acquisition from heme for Mtb.

### Keywords
Esx-4, Type vii secretion, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Ppe, Iron acquisition, Outer membrane, Heme, Channel protein

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University
Oklahoma State University

### Submitter
Steven Hartson

### Lab Head
Dr Avishek Mitra
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Oklahoma State University


