### Accession
PXD028050

### Title
Identification of SUMO targets required to maintain human stem cells in the pluripotent state. - Identification of SUMO modified proteins from hiPS cells

### Description
To determine the role of SUMO modification in the maintenance of pluripotent stem cells we used ML792, a potent and selective inhibitor of SUMO Activating Enzyme. Treatment of human induced pluripotent stem cells with ML792 initiated changes associated with loss of pluripotency such as reduced expression of key pluripotency markers. To identify putative effector proteins and establish sites of SUMO modification, cells were engineered to stably express either SUMO1 or SUMO2 with TGG to KGG mutations that facilitate GlyGly-K peptide immunoprecipitation and identification. A total of 976 SUMO sites were identified in 427 proteins. STRING enrichment created 3 networks of proteins with functions in regulation of gene expression, ribosome biogenesis and RNA splicing, although the latter two categories represented only 5% of the total GGK peptide intensity. The remainder have roles in transcription and chromatin structure regulation. Many of the most heavily SUMOylated proteins form a network of zinc-finger transcription factors centred on TRIM28 and associated with silencing of retroviral elements. At the level of whole proteins there was only limited evidence for SUMO paralogue-specific modification, although at the site level there appears to be a preference for SUMO2 modification over SUMO1 in acidic domains. We show that SUMO is involved in the maintenance of the pluripotent state in hiPSCs and identify many chromatin-associated proteins as bona fide SUMO substrates in human induced pluripotent stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Two repeats of this experiment were performed. The first used eleven 15cm diameter dishes of ChiPS4-6HisSUMO1-KGG-mCherry and ChiPS4-6HisSUMO2-KGG-mCherry cells per replicate. The second used sixteen 15cm diameter dishes per replicate. Samples were taken at different steps of the protocol to assess different fractions. These were; crude cell extracts, NiNTA column elutions and GlyGly-K immunoprecipitations. The last being the source of SUMO-substrate branched peptides. The whole procedure was carried out as described previously (Proteome-wide identification of SUMO modification sites by mass spectrometry. Tammsalu T, Matic I, Jaffray EG, Ibrahim AF, Tatham MH, Hay RT. Nat Protoc. 2015 Sep;10(9):1374-88. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2015.095. Epub 2015 Aug 20.). In brief, crude cell lysates were prepared of which approximately 100ug was retained for whole proteome analysis. For each replicate 25ug protein was fractionated by SDS-PAGE (NuPage 10% polyacrylamide, Bis-Tris with MOPS buffer— Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie blue. Each lane was excised into four roughly equally sized slices and peptides were extracted by tryptic digestion (Nat Protoc. 2006;1(6):2856-60. In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Shevchenko A, Tomas H, Havlis J, Olsen JV, Mann M.) including alkylation with chloroacetamide. The remaining lysate (~20 mg protein) was used for NiNTA chromatographic enrichment of 6His-SUMO conjugates. Elutions from the NiNTA columns were digested consecutively with LysC then GluC, of which 7% of each was retained for proteomic analysis and the remainder for GlyGly-K immunoprecipitation. The final enriched fractions of LysC and LysC/GluC GG-K peptides were resuspended in a volume of 20uL for proteomic analysis. Peptides from whole cell extracts were analysed once by LC-MS/MS using the same system and settings as described for experiments 1 and 2 above except a 180 minute gradient was used with a top 12 data dependent method. NiNTA elution peptides were analysed identically except a top 10 data dependent method was employed and maximum MS/MS fill time was increased to 120ms. GG-K immunoprecipitated peptides were analysed twice. Firstly, 4uL was fractionated over a 90 minute gradient and analysed using a top 5 data dependent method with a maximum MS/MS fill time of 200ms. Secondly, 11uL of sample was fractionated over a 150 minute gradient and analysed using a top 3 method with a maximum MS/MS injection time of 500ms.

### Data Protocol
Data from WCE and NiNTA elutions were processed together in MaxQuant using Trypsin/P enzyme specificity (2 missed cleavages) for WCE samples and LysC (2 missed cleavages), or LysC+GluC_D/E (considering cleavage after D or E and 8 missed cleavages) for NiNTA elutions. GlyGly (K) and phospho (STY) modifications were selected. The human database and sequences of the two exogenous 6His-SUMO-KGG-mCherry constructs described above were used as search space. In all cases every raw file was treated as a separate ‘experiment’ in the design template such that protein or peptide intensities in each peptide sample were reported, allowing for manual normalization. Matching between runs was allowed but only for peptide samples from the same cellular fraction (WCE, NiNTA elution or GG-K IP), the same or adjacent gel slice, the same protease and the same LC elution gradient. For example, spectra from adjacent gel slices in the WCE fraction across all lanes were matched, and spectra from all GG-K IPs that were digested by the same enzymes were matched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Hipsc, Stem cells

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Professor of Molecular Biology, Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, Life Sciences Research Complex, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Mike Tatham

### Lab Head
Dr Ronald T. Hay
Professor of Molecular Biology, Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, Life Sciences Research Complex, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH


