### Accession
PXD003190

### Title
COL1 database samples for the Late Pleistocene of Western Eurasia

### Description
The project aimed to characterize the collagen type I (COL1) sequences from various modern, Holocene and Pleistocene bone, antler and skin samples for phylogenetic purposes. All extractions were performed at BioArCh, University of York (UK) or the Department of Human Evolution, MPI-EVA (Germany). Analyses took place on Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap MS.

### Sample Protocol
Between 10-30 mg of bone, antler, dentine or skin tissue was sampled from modern, Holocene and Pleistocene specimens. Samples were gelatinized for 1 hour at 65°C in ammonium-bicarbonate buffer, and subsequently digested with trypsin overnight. Following, the same specimen was demineralized in 0.5M HCl, and re-extracted using the same procedure outlined above. Digestion was quenched by the addition of 5% TFA solution, with peptide extraction on C18 ZipTips (Agilent).

### Data Protocol
.raw files were converted to .mgf files and searched against available COL1 sequences in PEAKS (v. 7), with common lab contaminants included. Spectral matches were accepted with an FDR=0.5%, protein matches were accepted with a cumulative -10lgP ≥ 20.0 and 2 unique peptides. De novo only hits were only inspected manually when ALC% ≥ 50.0.

### Publication Abstract
In Western Europe, the Middle to Upper Paleolithic transition is associated with the disappearance of Neandertals and the spread of anatomically modern humans (AMHs). Current chronological, behavioral, and biological models of this transitional period hinge on the Ch&#xe2;telperronian technocomplex. At the site of the Grotte du Renne, Arcy-sur-Cure, morphological Neandertal specimens are not directly dated but are contextually associated with the Ch&#xe2;telperronian, which contains bone points and beads. The association between Neandertals and this "transitional" assemblage has been controversial because of the lack either of a direct hominin radiocarbon date or of molecular confirmation of the Neandertal affiliation. Here we provide further evidence for a Neandertal-Ch&#xe2;telperronian association at the Grotte du Renne through biomolecular and chronological analysis. We identified 28 additional hominin specimens through zooarchaeology by mass spectrometry (ZooMS) screening of morphologically uninformative bone specimens from Ch&#xe2;telperronian layers at the Grotte du Renne. Next, we obtain an ancient hominin bone proteome through liquid chromatography-MS/MS analysis and error-tolerant amino acid sequence analysis. Analysis of this palaeoproteome allows us to provide phylogenetic and physiological information on these ancient hominin specimens. We distinguish Late Pleistocene clades within the genus Homo based on ancient protein evidence through the identification of an archaic-derived amino acid sequence for the collagen type X, alpha-1 (COL10&#x3b1;1) protein. We support this by obtaining ancient mtDNA sequences, which indicate a Neandertal ancestry for these specimens. Direct accelerator mass spectometry radiocarbon dating and Bayesian modeling confirm that the hominin specimens date to the Ch&#xe2;telperronian at the Grotte du Renne.

### Keywords
Mammalia, Lc-ms/ms, De novo collagen sequencing, Q-exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap ms

### Affiliations
Postdoc
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Frido Welker

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Collins
BioArCh, University of York, United Kingdom


