### Accession
PXD020563

### Title
Molecular classification of the placebo effect in nausea by mass spectrometry

### Description
In this proof-of-concept study, we tested whether placebo effects can be monitored and predicted by plasma proteins. In a randomized controlled design, 90 participants were exposed to a nauseating stimulus on two separate days and were randomly allocated to placebo treatment or no treatment on the second day. Significant placebo effects on nausea, motion sickness, and gastric activity could be verified. Using state-of-the-art proteomics, 74 differentially regulated proteins were identified as correlates of the placebo effect. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analyses identified acute-phase proteins and microinflammatory proteins to be involved, and the identified GO signatures predicted day-adjusted scores of nausea indices in the placebo group. We also performed GO enrichment analyses of specific plasma proteins predictable by the experimental factors or their interactions and identified ‘grooming behavior’ as a prominent hit. Finally, Receiver Operator Characteristics allowed to identify plasma proteins differentiating placebo responders from non-responders, comprising immunoglobulins and proteins involved in oxidation reduction processes and complement activation. Plasma proteomics are a promising tool to identify molecular correlates and predictors of the placebo effect in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis Blood samples for proteomics assessments were collected in 2.7 ml EDTA tubes (S-Monovette, Sarstedt, Germany) from the antecubital veins and spinned in a centrifuge at 4°C for 10 min at 3000g. Plasma samples à 100 μl were stored in 0.5 ml Protein LoBind Tubes (Eppendorf, Germany) at -70°C until proteomic analysis.  Plasma samples were proteolysed using PreOmics’ iST Kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) according to manufacturers’ specifications. In short, a dilution of plasma with water containing approximately 70µg protein was used as starting material. The protocol was performed in a 96-well format. All reactions, including lysis, reduction and alkylation, enzymatic digestion and washing took place in the same container. No depletion of high abundant proteins took place. Digestion was performed by a combination of Lys-C and trypsin for 3 hours. Eluted peptides were speed-vaced to complete dryness and stored at -80°C until mass spectrometric measurement.   After drying, the peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid. The High Resolution Melt (HRM) Calibration Kit (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to all of the samples according to manufacturer's instructions.   Mass spectrometry data were acquired in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode on a Q Exactive high field mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Per measurement 0.5°μg of peptides were automatically loaded to the online coupled Rapid Separation, High Pressure Liquid Chromatography system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). A nano trap column was used (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed-phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75µm ID x 250mm, 1.8µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40°C. Peptides were eluted from the column at 250 nl/min using increasing acetonitrile concentration (in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 40 % over a 45-min gradient. The HRM DIA method consisted of a survey scan from 300 to 1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution and an automatic gain control target of 3e6 or 120 msec maximum injection time. Fragmentation was performed via high-energy collisional dissociation with a target value of 3e6 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Precursor peptides were isolated with 17°variable windows spanning from 300 to 1500 m/z at 30,000 resolution with an automatic gain control target of 3e6 and automatic injection time. The normalized collision energy was 28 and the spectra were recorded in profile type.  Spectral library Data analysis of DIA files requires comparison of mass spectra against a tailored spectral library built of preceding data dependent mass spectrometry measurements. We searched our DIA files against an in-house library generated from selected mass spectrometry data encompassing 57 files of plasma and serum preparations, spiked with the HRM Calibration Kit. Data dependent files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1, ThermoFisher Scientific). Embedded search engine nodes included Mascot (Version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK), Byonic (Version 2.0, Proteinmetrics, San Carlos, CA),  SequestHT, and MSAmanda. Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) for all search engines were calculated using percolator node, and the resulting identifications were filtered to satisfy the 1% peptide level FDR (with the exception of Byonic) and combined in a multi-consensus result file maintaining the 1% FDR threshold. The peptide spectral library was generated in Spectronaut (Version 9, Biognosys) with default settings using the Proteome Discoverer combined result file. Spectronaut was equipped with the Swissprot human database (Release 2016.02, 20165 sequences, www.uniprot.org) with a few spiked proteins (e.g., Biognosys  HRM peptide sequences). The final spectral library generated in Spectronaut contained 1811 protein groups and 26,805 peptide precursors.

### Data Protocol
Peptide dataset The DIA mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the Spectronaut 9 software applying default settings with the following exceptions: quantification was limited to proteotypic peptides, data filtering was set to Qvalue sparse for the peptide-based analysis. The Qvalue sparse setting includes all observations that pass the Qvalue at least once and it generates a matrix with a minimum of missing values. A peptide dataset used for analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) was generated by removing peptide with more than 10% missing values. Then data were normalized by setting the median to one, and intensities were log transformed (logN) for further analyses.  Protein dataset For the protein-based analysis, unique peptides were merged to proteins. To ensure best data quality in a most complete protein matrix, data were filled up in two steps. First, data filtering was set to Qvalue. The Qvalue setting considers only individual observations that pass the Qvalue threshold and generates a matrix containing missing values. Instead of imputing the remaining missing data, we used the values generated from the Qvalue sparse setting, representing real mass traces at the respective retention times. Proteins with >5% missing values were deleted. Data were finally normalized setting the median to one, intensities were log transformed (logN) for further analyses. Fold changes were calculated for both days as log2 fold between measurement 2 and 1.

### Publication Abstract
In this proof-of-concept study, we tested whether placebo effects can be monitored and predicted by plasma proteins. In a randomized controlled design, 90 participants were exposed to a nauseating stimulus on two separate days and were randomly allocated to placebo treatment or no treatment on the second day. Significant placebo effects on nausea, motion sickness, and (in females) gastric activity could be verified. Using label-free tandem mass spectrometry, 74 differentially regulated proteins were identified as correlates of the placebo effect. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analyses identified acute-phase proteins and microinflammatory proteins to be involved, and the identified GO signatures predicted day-adjusted scores of nausea indices in the placebo group. We also performed GO enrichment analyses of specific plasma proteins predictable by the experimental factors or their interactions and identified 'grooming behavior' as a prominent hit. Finally, Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) allowed to identify plasma proteins differentiating placebo responders from non-responders, comprising immunoglobulins and proteins involved in oxidation reduction processes and complement activation. Plasma proteomics is a promising tool to identify molecular correlates and predictors of the placebo effect in humans.

### Keywords
Plasma, Placebo, Dia-ms, Nausea

### Affiliations
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany


