### Accession
PXD025027

### Title
CMK LC-MS/MS after CoIP of ARID3A

### Description
In order to determine proteins interacting with ARID3A in the ML-DS cell line CMK, we performed CoIP of endogenous ARID3A followed by LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
CoIP of endogenous ARID3A was performed on CMK cells using Anti-ARID3A antibody (SantaCruz) coupled to Novex™ DYNAL™ Dynabeads™ Protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All steps e.g cell lysis, nuclear extraction and washing, followed standard protocols.  After cell lysis and affinity pulldown, proteins were eluted and subjected to proteolysis with trypsin (Promega) according to the FASP (filter-aided sample preparation) protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using a U3000 nano-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After desalting the samples on the trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptides were separated on the separation column (µPAC 50 cm, C18, Pharmafluidics) using a linear gradient from 3% to 40% B (solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.08% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min over 180 min.  Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode with higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD), and normalized collision energy set to 28%. Each high-resolution full scan (m/z 375 to 1799, R = 140,000 at m/z 200) in the orbitrap was followed by high-resolution product ion scans (R = 17,500) of the 10 most intense signals in the full-scan mass spectrum (isolation window 2 Th). The target value of the automated gain control was set to 3,000,000 (MS) and 200,000 (MS/MS); maximum accumulation times were set to 100 ms (MS) and 150 ms (MS/MS). Precursor ions with charge states <2+ or >6+ were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (duration 60 seconds, window 3 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot database (version Nov. 2019, tax. Homo sapiens, 73801 entries) (Consortium, 2020) using Sequest-HT (Eng et al., 1994). Label-free quantification of proteins was based on extracted peak areas of corresponding peptide precursor ions.

### Publication Abstract
Given the plasticity of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, multiple routes of differentiation must be blocked in the the pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia, the molecular basis of which is incompletely understood. We report that posttranscriptional repression of the transcription factor ARID3A by miR-125b is a key event in the pathogenesis of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). AMKL is frequently associated with trisomy 21 and GATA1 mutations (GATA1s), and children with Down syndrome are at a high risk of developing the disease. The results of our study showed that chromosome 21-encoded miR-125b synergizes with Gata1s to drive leukemogenesis in this context. Leveraging forward and reverse genetics, we uncovered Arid3a as the main miR-125b target behind this synergy. We demonstrated that, during normal hematopoiesis, this transcription factor promotes megakaryocytic differentiation in concert with GATA1 and mediates TGF&#x3b2;-induced apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in complex with SMAD2/3. Although Gata1s mutations perturb erythroid differentiation and induce hyperproliferation of megakaryocytic progenitors, intact ARID3A expression assures their megakaryocytic differentiation and growth restriction. Upon knockdown, these tumor suppressive functions are revoked, causing a blockade of dual megakaryocytic/erythroid differentiation and subsequently of AMKL. Inversely, restoring ARID3A expression relieves the arrest of megakaryocytic differentiation in AMKL patient-derived xenografts. This work illustrates how mutations in lineage-determining transcription factors and perturbation of posttranscriptional gene regulation can interact to block multiple routes of hematopoietic differentiation and cause leukemia. In AMKL, surmounting this differentiation blockade through restoration of the tumor suppressor ARID3A represents a promising strategy for treating this lethal pediatric disease.

### Keywords
Cmk, Ml-ds, Arid3a

### Affiliations
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle, Germany
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Jan-Henning Klusmann

### Lab Head
Dr Jan-Henning Klusmann
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle, Germany


