### Accession
PXD010580

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 pgm1 spsa1 highlight and chilling temperatures proteins LC-MS/MS

### Description
Abiotic stress exposure of plants induces metabolic reprogramming which is tightly regulated by signalling cascades connecting transcriptional with translational and metabolic regulation. Complexity of such interconnected metabolic networks impedes the functional understanding of molecular plant stress response compromising the design of breeding strategies and biotechnological processes. Thus, defining a molecular network to enable the prediction of a plant’s stress mode promises to promote the understanding of stress responsive biochemical regulation and its technological application. Arabidopsis wild type plants and two mutant lines with deficiency in sucrose or starch metabolism were grown under ambient and cold/high light stress conditions. Stress-induced dynamics of the primary metabolome and the proteome were quantified in a mass spectrometry-based high-throughput experiment. Wild type data were used to train a machine learning algorithm to classify mutant lines under control and stress conditions. Multivariate analysis and classification identified a module consisting of 23 proteins enabling the reliable prediction of coupled temperature and light stress conditions. 18 of these 23 proteins displayed putative protein-protein interactions connecting transcriptional regulation with regulation of primary and secondary metabolism under stress. The identified stress-responsive core module provides evidence for predictability of complex biochemical regulation during environmental fluctuation.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material was solubilized in 8M urea, 50mM Hepes KOH (pH=7.8) on ice. Samples were precipitated in acetone with 0.5% beta-mercaptoethanol. Pellets were washed 2 times with methanol and acetone, and afterwards again solubilized in 8 M urea, 50 mM Hepes KOH (pH=7.8). Protein concentration was determined via Bio-Rad Bradford-assay using BSA as standard (Bio-Rad, USA). Equal amounts of protein (15 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at a concentration of 5 mM for 45 minutes at 37°C, and alkylated at a concentration of 10mM with iodacetamid (IAA) and dark incubated for 60 minutes at 23°C. Alkylation was stopped by increasing DTT concentration to 10 mM and dark incubated for 15 minutes. Samples were diluted 2-fold by 20% acetonitrile (ACN) and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), proteins were predigested with Lys-C (1:1000 w:w; Sigma-Aldrich, USA) at 30 °C for 2.5 hours dark. Samples were diluted 2-fold to 2 M urea by 10% ACN, 25 mM AmBic, 10 mM CaCl2 and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsine (Poroszyme, immobilized trypsin; 1:100 v:w) for 12 hours. Digested proteins were acidified with formic acid (pH ~ 3.0) and desalted with C18 materials (Agilent, Bond Elut SPEC) and dried in a vacuum concentrator (ScanVac, LaboGene). Peptides were solved in 2 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid and the same amount of total protein was loaded and separated on a PepMap RSLC 75 μm, 50 cm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA). The flowrate was set to 300 nl/min with 2 % to 40 % in 120 minutes of mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.1 % formic acid (FA) in water [v/v]; mobile phase B: 0.1 % FA in 90 % ACN [v/v]). The run ended with 60 minutes of equilibrium. Subsequently, mobile phase B was increased from 40 % to 90 % within 1 minute and held stable for 10 minutes, followed by decreased mobile phase B from 90% to 2%. MS analysis was performed with an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA) in positive mode and full scan in FT with a resolution of 60.000 in profile mode. Precursor masses ranged between 360-1800 m/z. MS/MS analysis was done in the linear ion trap with CID fragmentation and rapid scan mode for the 20 most intense ions with a minimal signal threshold of 500 counts. Prediction of ion injection time was enabled (5*10² ions for up to 10 ms). Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count 1 and repeat duration of 30 seconds. Exclusion list size was set to 500 and exclusion duration to 30 seconds. Excluded mass was set to +/- 10ppm relative to reference mass, early expiration enabled with 1 count and the s/n threshold was 2.0.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and protein quantification was performed with MaxQuant (http://www.maxquant.org) and implemented algorithms of version 1.5.5.1 32 against the TAIR10 (www.arabidopsis.org) protein database 33. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was applied. Maximally 5 variable modifications per peptide were allowed for N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification (due to previous methylation). For identification a minimum of 2 peptides and 2 minimum razor + unique peptides were requested.

### Publication Abstract
Abiotic stress exposure of plants induces metabolic reprogramming which is tightly regulated by signalling cascades connecting transcriptional with translational and metabolic regulation. Complexity of such interconnected metabolic networks impedes the functional understanding of molecular plant stress response compromising the design of breeding strategies and biotechnological processes. Thus, defining a molecular network to enable the prediction of a plant's stress mode will improve the understanding of stress responsive biochemical regulation and will yield novel molecular targets for technological application. Arabidopsis wild type plants and two mutant lines with deficiency in sucrose or starch metabolism were grown under ambient and combined cold/high light stress conditions. Stress-induced dynamics of the primary metabolome and the proteome were quantified by mass spectrometry. Wild type data were used to train a machine learning algorithm to classify mutant lines under control and stress conditions. Multivariate analysis and classification identified a module consisting of 23 proteins enabling the reliable prediction of combined temperature/high light stress conditions. 18 of these 23 proteins displayed putative protein-protein interactions connecting transcriptional regulation with regulation of primary and secondary metabolism. The identified stress-responsive core module supports prediction of complex biochemical regulation under changing environmental conditions.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Spsa1, Abiotic stress, Metabolic reprogramming; mass spectrometry; machine learning, Pgm1, Combined stress

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich / Germany Department Biology I Plant Evolutionary Cell Biology
LMU Munich

### Submitter
Lisa Fürtauer

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Nägele
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich / Germany Department Biology I Plant Evolutionary Cell Biology


