### Accession
PXD025226

### Title
An XPC-PARP axis links ALC1-mediated chromatin remodeling to global genome DNA damage repair

### Description
Cells employ global genome DNA damage repair (GGR) to eliminate a broad spectrum of DNA lesions, including those induced by UV light. The lesion-recognition factor XPC initiates repair of helix-distorting DNA lesions, but binds inefficiently to lesions that cause poor helix distortion. How such difficult-to-repair lesions are detected in chromatin is unknown. Here, we identify the poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerases PARP1 and PARP2 as constitutive interactors of XPC. The close interaction between these proteins results in the PARylation of XPC at UV lesions, and an XPC-dependent stimulation of the poly-(ADP-ribose) response, which facilitates the recruitment of the poly-(ADP-ribose)-dependent chromatin remodeler ALC1. Both ALC1 and in particular PARP2 are required for the efficient clearing of difficult-to-repair DNA lesions. Our study offers key insights into the molecular mechanisms of GGR by revealing a molecular bookmarking system, which primes chromatin containing difficult-to-repair DNA lesions for efficient repair.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were mock treated or UV-C irradiated (20 J/m2) and harvested after 1 h. Cell pellets were lysed for 20 min on ice in EBC-150 buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) supplemented with 500 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen). Cell lysates were incubated for 1.5 h at 4°C with GFP-Trap®_A beads (Chromotek). The beads were then washed six times with EBC-150 buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 5 time ammonium bicarbonate 50mM. and Trypsinized overnight. Peptides were later analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed essentially as previously described . Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Digested peptides were separated using a 20 cm fused silica capillary (ID: 75 µm, OD: 375 µm, Polymicro Technologies, California, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2 % to 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. For the ALC1 samples and related GFP controls the gradient length was 40 min. For the XPC,PARP1 and PARP2 samples grandient length was 100 min. Every gradient was followed by an increase to 95% acetonitrile and back to 2% acetonitrile in 0.1%  formic acid  for chromatography column re-conditioning. Flow rate of was set 200 nl/min for 2 h. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion mode at 2.8 kV with the capillary heated to 250°C. Data-dependent acquisition mode was used to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS scans, employing a top 7 method. Full scan MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 70.000, a target value of 3x106 and a scan range of 400-2.000 m/z (XPC samples) or 300-1600 m/z (ALC1, PARP1 and PARP2 samples). Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded with a resolution of 35,000, a target value of 1x105 and a normalized collision energy of 25%. The precursor ion masses selected for MS/MS analysis were subsequently dynamically excluded from MS/MS analysis for 60s and  Precursor ions with a charge state of 1 and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS/MS events. Maximum injection times for MS and MS/MS were 20 and 120 ms (XPC) or 250 and 120 ms (ALC1, PARP1 and PARP2), respectively.  Mass spectrometry data analysis. All raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) as described previously. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens including canonical and isoform sequences (27th May 2019). Database searches were performed according to standard settings with the following modifications. Digestion with Trypsin/P was used, allowing 4 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, not allowing Fast LFQ. iBAQ was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Cells employ global genome nucleotide excision repair (GGR) to eliminate a broad spectrum of DNA lesions, including those induced by UV light. The lesion-recognition factor XPC initiates repair of helix-destabilizing DNA lesions, but binds poorly to lesions such as CPDs that do not destabilize DNA. How difficult-to-repair lesions are detected in chromatin is unknown. Here, we identify the poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerases PARP1 and PARP2 as constitutive interactors of XPC. Their interaction results in the XPC-stimulated synthesis of poly-(ADP-ribose) (PAR) by PARP1 at UV lesions, which in turn enables the recruitment and activation of the PAR-regulated chromatin remodeler ALC1. PARP2, on the other hand, modulates the retention of ALC1 at DNA damage sites. Notably, ALC1 mediates chromatin expansion at UV-induced DNA lesions, leading to the timely clearing of CPD lesions. Thus, we reveal how chromatin containing difficult-to-repair DNA lesions is primed for repair, providing insight into mechanisms of chromatin plasticity during GGR.

### Keywords
Parp2, Alc1, Parp1, Gg-ner, Xpc

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Román González-Prieto
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands


