### Accession
PXD026644

### Title
Quantitative glycoproteomics of human milk and their association with atopic disease

### Description
Children who grow up on farms have a lower risk of developing childhood atopic disease. Although human milk proteins are heavily glycosylated, there is a lack of studies investigating the milk glycoproteome. In this study, we have used label-free quantitative proteomics to analyze milk samples from Rochester and Older Order Mennonite mothers, two populations with different lifestyles, exposures, and risk of allergic disease. We identified multiple N-glycopeptides with significantly different abundances between the two communities and four N-glycopeptides that may have a protective effect against the development of atopic disease. The findings of this study indicate that the differential glycosylation of milk proteins may affect the development of atopic disease, something previously uninvestigated.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested, N-glycopeptides isolated, quantified and interesting N-glycopeptideswere fragmented and  identified.

### Data Protocol
MSE data was quantified with Progenesis and fragmentation data was identified with GlycopeptideID.

### Publication Abstract
The prevalence of allergic diseases and asthma is increasing rapidly worldwide, with environmental and lifestyle behaviors implicated as a reason. Epidemiological studies have shown that children who grow up on farms are at lower risk of developing childhood atopic disease, indicating the presence of a protective "farm effect". The Old Order Mennonite (OOM) community in Upstate New York have traditional, agrarian lifestyles, a low rate of atopic disease, and long periods of exclusive breastfeeding. Human milk proteins are heavily glycosylated, although there is a paucity of studies investigating the milk glycoproteome. In this study, we have used quantitative glycoproteomics to compare the N-glycoprotein profiles of 54 milk samples from Rochester urban/suburban and OOM mothers, two populations with different lifestyles, exposures, and risk of atopic disease. We also compared N-glycoprotein profiles according to the presence or absence of atopic disease in the mothers and, separately, the children. We identified 79 N-glycopeptides from 15 different proteins and found that proteins including immunoglobulin A1, polymeric immunoglobulin receptor, and lactotransferrin displayed significant glycan heterogeneity. We found that the abundances of 38 glycopeptides differed significantly between Rochester and OOM mothers and also identified four glycopeptides with significantly different abundances between all comparisons. These four glycopeptides may be associated with the development of atopic disease. The findings of this study suggest that the differential glycosylation of milk proteins could be linked to atopic disease.

### Keywords
Human, N-glycoproteins, Mass spectrometry, Milk

### Affiliations
Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finlan
Helsinki University

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finlan


