### Accession
PXD042382

### Title
A transient protein folding response targets aggregation in the early phase of TDP-43-mediated disease

### Description
Understanding the mechanisms that drive TDP-43 pathology is integral to combating amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Here we generated a longitudinal quantitative proteomic map of the cortex from the cytoplasmic TDP-43 rNLS8 mouse model of ALS and FTLD and developed a complementary open-access webtool, TDP-map (https://shiny.rcc.uq.edu.au/TDP-map/). We  identified distinct protein subsets enriched for diverse biological pathways with temporal alterations in protein abundance, including increases in protein folding factors prior to disease onset. This included increased levels of DnaJ homolog subfamily B member 5, DNAJB5, which also co-localized with TDP-43 pathology in diseased human motor cortex. DNAJB5 over-expression decreased TDP-43 aggregation in cell and cortical neuron cultures, and knockout of Dnajb5 exacerbated motor impairments caused by AAV-mediated cytoplasmic TDP-43 expression in mice. Together, these findings reveal molecular mechanisms at distinct stages of ALS and FTLD progression and suggest that protein folding factors could be protective in disease.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue collection For proteomics and immunoblotting, the brains from 3-5 mice per group were harvested. The left hemisphere of brains were flash frozen on dry ice and stored at -80° for immunoblotting. The right hemisphere cortex tissue was suspended in 5 x volume of bicarbonate buffer (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate, pH 7.6) on ice. Tissues were homogenized with 5 x 1.4 mm zirconium oxide beads (Bertin Instruments) and 3 x 15 s pulses with 30 s pauses at 6000 rpm using a Precellys Evolution (Bertin Instruments) and placed back on ice. Samples were ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 30 min at 4oC to pellet insoluble protein. The soluble protein fraction supernatant was collected and stored in a new tube. The insoluble protein pellet was washed in bicarbonate buffer and taken through the homogenization and ultracentrifugation steps and the wash supernatant discarded.   Tandem mass tag labeling Solubilized proteins were reduced by the addition of 0.1 volume of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature (RT), followed by alkylation with 0.05 volume of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h in the dark at RT. To quench the alkylation reaction, 5 mM DTT was added to the sample for 15 min in the dark. Proteins were then digested with trypsin (Promega) - 1:100 enzyme‐to‐protein ratio at 37°C overnight. The resultant peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted using styrene divinylbenzene‐reverse-phase sulfonate (Empore) stage tips and dried down using a vacuum centrifuge. The dried cortex peptides were solubilized in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8), and the concentration of the final sample was quantified using the BCA Protein Quantification Kit.   For peptide labeling, the TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used with 100 mg of peptides from each cortex sample. All steps were conducted at RT. Briefly, 0.8 mg of labeling reagent was added to each sample and the samples were incubated for 1 h with occasional vortexing. Samples were then treated with 8 mL of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min to quench unbound labeling reagent. To accommodate 45 samples (20 total control samples with 5 mice in 4 groups and 25 total rNLS8 samples with 5 mice in 5 groups), we conducted 5 TMT10plex experiments. For each individual TMT10plex experiment 10 uniquely labeled samples were combined and lyophilized in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were reconstituted in 1% formic acid and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Peptides were then consolidated into 16 fractions with high pH reverse-phase peptide fractionation. Dried fractions were resuspended in 1% formic acid and desalted using styrene divinylbenzene - reversed phase sulfonate stage-tips.   LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 40 mL of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 nanoflow high performance liquid chromatography system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Reverse-phase chromatographic separation was performed to separate labeled peptides using a Halo 2.7 mm 160 A ES-C18 column (Advanced Material Technology) and a gradient of 1% - 30% solvent B (99% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and Solvent A (97% water, 2% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid). The Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer was run in data-dependent acquisition mode. The full MS scan spectra (from m/z 350 – 1,850) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z, an automatic gain control, and a target value of 1 x 106 ions. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected with a precursor isolation width of 0.7 m/z for higher energy collisional association (HCD). HCD normalized collisional energy was set to 35% and fragmentation ions were detected in the Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer at a resolution of 70,000. Target ions that had been selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.1. Search results were filtered to retain protein with false discovery rate of < 1% and only master proteins assigned via protein grouping algorithm were retained.  Relative quantitative ratios to the common reference (label 131, pooled control sample) were extracted, and further analyzed using the TMTPrepPro analysis pipeline. TMTPrepPro scripts are implemented in the R statistical environment and are available as an R package accessed through a graphical user interface provided via a local GenePattern server. The experimental conditions were compared overall, using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) carried out separately for each protein using log-transformed ratios. Pairwise comparison tests were also undertaken for all comparisons of interest using the relevant ratios for each of the conditions of interest (e.g., All controls grouped – TDP Week 1, etc.), and differentially expressed proteins were identified based on Student t tests of log-transformed ratios. The overall fold changes were calculated as geometric means of the respective ratios. Differential expression required the proteins to meet both a ratio fold change (> 1.20 up-regulated or < 0.83 down-regulated) and a P-value cut-off (t test P-value < 0.05).  A combination of fold change and P-value cut-off was preferred to limit the false discovery rate over multiple testing corrections due to the known impacts of ratio compression in the context of TMT.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteinopathy, Mnd, Longitudinal, Ftld, Cortex, Motor neuron disease, Tdp-43, Als, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Mouse, Tandem mass tagging, Ftd, Lc-ms/ms, Frontotemporal dementia

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
Neurodegeneration Pathobiology Laboratory, Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia

### Submitter
Rebecca San Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Adam K.
Neurodegeneration Pathobiology Laboratory, Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia


