### Accession
PXD026202

### Title
Chronic fluoxetine treatment of socially isolated rats modulates prefrontal cortex proteome

### Description
Chronic social isolation (CSIS) is a risk factor for human major depressive disorder (MDD). Fluoxetine (Flx) is an antidepressant commonly used for first-line MDD therapy. However, its downstream mechanisms of action, beyond serotonergic signaling, remain elusive. We aimed to analyze the effects of CSIS followed by chronic Flx treatment on proteome changes in the adult male rat prefrontal cortex (PFC) cytosolic and non-synaptic mitochondria (NSM)-enriched fractions. Treatment with Flx ameliorated depression-like behaviors in CSIS-induced rat model of depression as assessed by sucrose preference test and forced swim test. Proteomic data showed that Flx increased the expression of proteins involved in cytoskeleton and regulation of intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis in the cytosol and of enzymes linking the glycolytic pathway to the citric acid cycle (Dlat) and ATPase-coupled ion transmembrane transport in NSM. CSIS resulted in down-regulation of cytosolic proteins involved in proteasome/ubiquitination processes and glutathione antioxidative system and up-regulated expression of key enzymes participating in oxidative phosphorylation. Presence of cytochrome c in the cytosol indicated compromised mitochondrial membrane integrity. Flx treatment in CSIS rats showed predominately an upregulation of vesicle-mediated transport proteins and reduced Uqcrfs1 along with transport in NSM, favoring reduced energy metabolism. Our data suggest that proteins from both cytosol and NSM-enriched fractions are affected by Flx in a key brain region associated with stress response, cognitive process and regulation of emotion.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were digested following the filter-aided sample preparation method with minor modifications (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). In addition, due to the small concentration of NSM, LC-MS/MS analysis had to be performed with pooled samples (Control+Flx n=4, and Control+Veh or CSIS+Flx n=5), while for cytosol analysis the number of rats per group was 8. Briefly, 20 µg of the cytosolic samples or 3ug of NSM-enriched fractions were diluted with urea buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) to a total volume up to 100µl containing 5µl 0.1M DTT (final concentration 5mM), transferred to a Microcon YM-30filter device (Merck Millipore), incubated 1h at 37oC in a thermo-mixer (300 rpm) and centrifuged at 14000 × g for 15min at room temperature (RT). 100µl of urea solution was added to the samples and spun down for 15min, and this step was repeated three times. Then, 100µl of urea buffer containing 5.25µl of iodoacetamide (IAA) (final concentration 10mM) were added onto the filter. The samples were incubated for 45min at 24oC in the dark with mixing (300 rpm) and centrifuged for 15min at 14000 × g at RT. Next, the samples were washed three times with 150 µl 100 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5 (dissolution buffer). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in 150µl 100mM TEAB with 0.5µg trypsin (Trypsin Premium Grade) (trypsin-to-protein ratio = 1:50). Peptides were centrifuged for 15 min at 14000 × g and washed with 150µl dissolution buffer. Reaction was terminated by adding 1µl of formic acid (FA) to 100µl solution and the samples were desalted on a Pierce C-18 spin column (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a speed-vac.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data were analyzed with the MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4)(Cox and Mann, 2008). For identification, rat reference proteome from UniProt (downloaded 22.12.2020) was used as a reference database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, N-acetylation of proteins’ N-termini and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used for peptide and protein identification. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 7 ppm. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm on the m/z scale. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides were considered for relative quantification. MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) was used to assess differences in the abundance of proteins between all the studied groups. Label-free quantification intensities for the proteins were log2-transformed and normalized to ensure equal median protein abundance across the samples. A two-tailed unpaired t-test with an FDR value of 0.05 and fold change of protein abundance > 2 was applied to identify proteins for which the abundance was significantly changed between all the studied groups.

### Publication Abstract
Fluoxetine (Flx) is the most commonly used antidepressant to treat major depressive disorder. However, its molecular mechanisms of action are not defined as yet. A comparative proteomic approach was used to identify proteome changes in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) cytosolic and non-synaptic mitochondria (NSM)-enriched fractions of adult male Wistar rats following chronic social isolation (CSIS), a rat model of depression, and Flx treatment in CSIS and control rats, using liquid chromatography online tandem mass spectrometry. Flx reversed CSIS-induced depressive - like behavior according to preference for sucrose and immobility in the forced swim test, indicating its antidepressant effect. Flx treatment in controls led to an increase of the expression of cytosolic proteins involved in the microtubule cytoskeleton and intracellular calcium homeostasis and of enzymes involved in bioenergetic and transmembrane transport in NSM. CSIS downregulated the cytosolic proteins involved in proteasome pathway, and glutathione antioxidative system, and upregulated the expression of enzymes participating in mitochondrial-energy metabolism and transport. The presence of cytochrome c in the cytosol may suggest compromised mitochondrial membrane integrity. Flx treatment in CSIS rats downregulated protein involved in oxidative phosphorylation, such as complex III and manganese superoxide dismutase, and upregulated vesicle-mediated transport and synaptic signaling proteins in the cytosol, and neuronal calcium-binding protein 1 in NSM. Our study identified PFC modulated proteins and affected biochemical pathways that may represent potential markers/targets underlying CSIS-induced depression and effective Flx treatment, and highlights the role of protein systems involved in NSM and various metabolic pathways potentially involved in neuronal plasticity.

### Keywords
Energy metabolism, Fluoxetine, Non-synaptic mitochondria, Depression, Prefrontal cortex

### Affiliations
Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of thе Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
Department of Molecular Biology and Endocrinology, “VINČA”, Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of thе Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia

### Submitter
Dragana Filipovic

### Lab Head
Dr Dragana Filipovića
Department of Molecular Biology and Endocrinology, “VINČA”, Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National Institute of thе Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia


