### Accession
PXD001160

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis extracellular vesicle proteome

### Description
Tuberculosis is a common infectious disease mostly caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. M. tuberculosis have been shown to release extracellular vesicles (EVs) containing immunologically active molecules. However, only limited number of proteins has been identified in M. tuberculosis EVs. We present a comprehensive proteome of M. tuberculosis EVs to elucidate the pathogenesis of M. tuberculosis EVs and suggest several potential biomarker candidates.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were purified from culture supernatants of M. tuberculosis H37Rv, as described previously with some modifications (Lee et al., 2009; Choi et al., 2011; Prados-Rosales et al, 2011). M. tuberculosis was grown in a chemically defined medium in an orbital shaking incubator to A600 = 1.0 at 37oC. Mycobacteria were removed by centrifugation and filtration. Then, the filtrate was concentrated using a QuixStand Benchtop system with a 100 kDa hollow-fiber filter membrane. The concentrate was subjected to sucrose cushion ultracentrifugation and then isolated EVs further purified using iodixanol buoyant density gradient ultracentrifugation. Proteins of EV-enriched fraction, determined by LprG (M. tuberculosis-derived EV marker protein), were precipitated using methanol/chloroform precipitation. Precipitated EV proteins were denatured with 6 M urea, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide. EV proteins were digested using trypsin (the ratio of trypsin to protein should be 1:20) for 16 hours at 37ºC. The sample were lyophilized and desalted with PepClean C18 spin columns for MS analysis. The desalted tryptic peptides were analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer combined with EASY-nLC II. The tryptic peptides were separated using a lab-made microcapillary column (75 μm x 12 cm) packed with C18 resin. The sample was separated using a linear 60 min gradient of a mixture of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acentonitrile) to 40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acentonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separated peptides were electrosparyed with the electrospray voltage of 2.6 kV. All MS/MS spectra were obtained in data-dependent scans for fragmentation of the ten most abundant spectra from full scans. We used the following dynamic exclusion conditions to increase the size of proteome to be detected: repeat count for dynamic exclusion = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, dynamic exclusion duration = 180 s, exclusion mass width = 1.5 Da, and the list size of dynamic exclusion = 50. [1] Lee, E. Y., Choi, D. Y., Kim, D. K., Kim, J. W., et al., Gram-positive bacteria produce membrane vesicles: proteomics-based characterization of Staphylococcus aureus-derived membrane vesicles. Proteomics 2009, 9, 5425-5436. [2] Choi, D. S., Kim, D. K., Choi, S. J., Lee, J., et al., Proteomic analysis of outer membrane vesicles derived from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proteomics 2011, 11, 3424-3429. [3] Prados-Rosales, R., Baena, A., Martinez, L. R., Luque-Garcia, J., et al., Mycobacteria release active membrane vesicles that modulate immune responses in a TLR2-dependent manner in mice. J Clin Invest 2011, 121, 1471-1483.

### Data Protocol
Four technical replicates of LC-MS/MS data were analysed using the X!Tandem packaged with Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.6). Each RAW data file was converted to mzXML files using MSConverter and the mzXML files were searched against M. tuberculosis H37Rv database from UniProt database (release 2014_05, 3,981 entries) using X!Tandem. The tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions, and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used and the number of missed cleavage sites was set to two. Four variable modification options were used: oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da), deamination of N-terminal glutamine (-17.027 Da), and dehydration of N-terminal glutamic acid (-18.011 Da). Trans-Proteomic Pipeline was performed to statistically identify peptides by PeptideProphet (PeptideProphet ≥ 0.90) and proteins by ProteinProphet (ProteinProphet ≥ 0.90).

### Publication Abstract
The release of extracellular vesicles, also known as outer membrane vesicles, membrane vesicles, exosomes, and microvesicles, is an evolutionarily conserved phenomenon from bacteria to eukaryotes. It has been reported that Mycobacterium tuberculosis releases extracellular vesicles harboring immunologically active molecules, and these extracellular vesicles have been suggested to be applicable in vaccine development and biomarker discovery. However, the comprehensive proteomic analysis has not been performed for M. tuberculosis extracellular vesicles. In this study, we identified a total of 287 vesicular proteins by four LC-MS/MS analyses with high confidence. In addition, we identified several vesicular proteins associated with the virulence of M. tuberculosis. This comprehensive proteome profile will help elucidate the pathogenic mechanism of M. tuberculosis. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001160 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001160).

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Extracellular vesicles, Outer membrane vesicles, Bacteria, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea (South Korea)

### Submitter
Jaewook Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Song Gho
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea (South Korea)


