### Accession
PXD019268

### Title
Rubisco acetylation stoichiometry in Arabidopsis Thaliana

### Description
Multiple studies have shown Rubisco to be subject to Lys-acetylation at various residues; however, conflicting reports exist about the biological significance of these post-translational modifications. One aspect of the Lys-acetylation that has not been addressed in plants generally, or with Rubisco specifically, is the stoichiometry at which these Lys-acetylation events occur. As a method to ascertain which Lys-acetylation sites on Arabidopsis Rubisco might be of regulatory importance, we purified Rubisco from leaves in both the day and night-time and performed independent mass-spectrometry based methods to determine the stoichiometry of Rubisco Lys-acetylation events.

### Sample Protocol
Rubisco was purified from 30 g of Arabidopsis leaves according to the method of Carmo-Silva et al. (2011; Methods Molecular Biology). The addition of the de-acetylase inhibitors 1 mM butyrate and 2 mM nicotinamide was made to all buffers to prevent Rubisco de-acetylation. Following chromatrography, pooled Rubisco fractions were precipitated with 60% (NH4)2SO4 , then stored as a saturated (NH4)2SO4 suspension at -80°C. For initial detection of Rubisco acetylation sites, purified Rubisco was separated on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel and the bands for RBL and RBD were excised. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM (NH4)HCO3 for 10 min then washed 3 times with 100% acetonitrile for 15 min and allowed to dry. Gel pieces were then incubated in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM (NH4)HCO3 for 45 min at 56°C, followed by incubation in 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Gel pieces were then washed once with 50 mM (NH4)HCO3, twice with 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM (NH4)HCO3 and once with 100% acetonitrile and allowed to dry. Gel pieces were then digested with 80 ng of trypsin overnight. Liquid was then collected and the tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 2% (v/v) formic acid for 20 min. The pooled liquid was then dried down in a vacuum concentrator. Samples were then resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and subject to solid phase extraction using C18 MacroSpin Columns (The Nest Group, Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Orbitrap MS/MS was performed according to (Van Moerkercke et al., 2019, PNAS). Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo orbitrap fusion mass spectrometer using data dependent acquisition. Analysis consisted of direct injection onto a self-packed 150 mm x 75 µm Dr Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm column. Water/acetonitrile gradients with 0.1% formic acid were formed by an Ultimate U3000 nano pump running at 250 nL min-1 from 2-27% acetonitrile over 30 minutes. Chemical acetylation of Rubisco was performed according to the method of (Wei et al., 2018, Journal of Visualized Experiments). Rubisco samples (100 µg) were resuspended in 100 µl of 8M urea, 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate followed by the addition of 2 µl of 1 M dithiothreitol and incubation at 37°C for 30 min. 22 µl of 200 mM IAA was then added, followed by incubation at room temperature for 1 h. Three rounds of chemical acetylation were then performed by adding 6 µl of acetic anhydride-d6 (10.57 M; Sigma) and incubating at 4°C for 20 min, followed by neutralization to approximately pH 7.5 with 7.5 M NaOH. 10 µl of 50% hydroxylamine solution was then added to revert O-acetylation side reactions. Samples were then digested with 1 µg of trypsin overnight at 37°C. Samples were then subject to solid phase extraction using C18 MacroSpin Column (The Nest Group, Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, eluted in 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and dried down in a vacuum desiccator. Orbitrap MS/MS analysis of Rubisco samples was then performed as above.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis was performed using both MaxQuant (v1.6.7.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008, Nature Biotechnology) and Mascot (Matrix Science) software. For MaxQuant analysis, default parameters were used for the Andromeda database search except for the addition of Lys-acetylation as a variable modification, a peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 0.05, up to 3 missed cleavages and the use of peptide matching between runs with a time window of 1 min. For Mascot analysis, raw data files were converted to .mgf files and MS/MS spectra were matched against the TAIR10 peptide database with the following parameters: Lys-acetylation and Met-oxidation were variable modifications; Cys-carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification; digestion was by trypsin with up to 3 missed cleavages; MS peptide tolerance was 5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Significance threshold for peptide identification was set at p<0.05. For MaxQuant analysis of MS/MS data following chemcial acetylation Lys-acetylation-D3 (C2D3O) was added as a variable modification and missed cleavages were set at 5.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple studies have shown ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (E.C. 4.1.1.39; Rubisco) to be subject to Lys-acetylation at various residues; however, opposing reports exist about the biological significance of these post-translational modifications. One aspect of the Lys-acetylation that has not been addressed in plants generally, or with Rubisco specifically, is the stoichiometry at which these Lys-acetylation events occur. As a method to ascertain which Lys-acetylation sites on Arabidopsis Rubisco might be of regulatory importance to its catalytic function in the Calvin-Benson cycle, we purified Rubisco from leaves in both the day and night-time and performed independent mass spectrometry based methods to determine the stoichiometry of Rubisco Lys-acetylation events. The results indicate that Rubisco is acetylated at most Lys residues, but each acetylation event occurs at very low stoichiometry. Furthermore, in vitro treatments that increased the extent of Lys-acetylation on purified Rubisco had no effect on Rubisco maximal activity. Therefore, we are unable to confirm that Lys-acetylation at low stoichiometries can be a regulatory mechanism controlling Rubisco maximal activity. The results highlight the need for further use of stoichiometry measurements when determining the biological significance of reversible PTMs like acetylation.

### Keywords
Lys-acetylation, Arabidopsis, Rubisco

### Affiliations
University of Western Australia
Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, Department of Molecular Sciences, University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Brendan O'Leary

### Lab Head
Dr Harvey Millar
Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, Department of Molecular Sciences, University of Western Australia


