### Accession
PXD010504

### Title
M.abscessus Proteome and Secretome

### Description
Members of the Mycobacterium (M.) abscessus complex (MABC) are rapidly growing mycobacteria showing smooth and/or rough colony morphotype. While not as virulent as M. tuberculosis, they can cause soft tissue infection and fatal pulmonary disease, especially in patients with cystic fibrosis. Diagnosing MABC pulmonary disease is challenging since the isolation of M. abscessus from respiratory samples is in itself not diagnostic and the clinical features are often non-specific. Immunologic assays, which could aid in the understanding and diagnosis of the disease, are not available. In this study eight rough and six smooth colony morphotype isolates were collected from seven clinical MABC strains and the M. abscessus reference strain ATCC19977, as six strains showed both morphotypes simultaneously and two strains only showed a rough morphotype. Clinical isolates were submitted to whole genome sequencing. Quantitative proteomic analysis was performed on bacterial lysates and the culture supernatant of all 14 isolates. Supernatant proteins present in all isolates were compared in a BLAST search against other clinically significant mycobacterial species to determine species-specific proteins of MABC. In silico B- and T-cell epitope prediction was performed for species-specific proteins. All clinical strains were found to be M. abscessus ssp. abscessus. Six of seven rough colony clinical isolates contained genetic changes in the MAB_4099c gene, which is a likely genetic basis for the rough morphotype. Proteomic analysis detected 3 137 different proteins in total of which 79 proteins were found in the culture supernatants of all isolates. BLAST analyses of these 79 proteins identified 12 of those exclusively encoded by all members of MABC plus M. immunogenum. In silico prediction of epitopes predicted B- and T-cell epitopes in all these 12 species-specific proteins, rendering them promising candidates for future studies on immune pathogenesis and immune diagnostic tools for MABC disease.

### Sample Protocol
For Secretomes approximately 10 mL of conditioned medium was centrifuged at 4 °C, 5 min at 1000 g to remove cell debris and death cells. The proteins in the conditioned medium were precipitated for 1 h at 4 °C by addition of 50% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid and 0.1% sodium [dodecanoyl(methyl)amino]acetate in water, sedimented by centrifugation and washed with ice-cold acetone. After repeated centrifugation, the protein pellet was shortly air-dried at room temperature and resolved in 50 μL of lysis buffer (30 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, 2 M thiourea, 7 M urea, and 4% (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate, pH 8.5).   Bacterial pellets were washed twice with chilled PBS/0.05% (v/v) Tween 80 (PBS-TW), the resulting bacterial sediments pooled in 1 ml chilled PBS-TW and then again collected by centrifugation (4 000 x g, 15 min at 4°C) and finally the bacterial pellet was re-suspended in 9 ml PBS and 1 ml proteinase inhibitor cocktail (10x, Sigma MS safe Protease-/Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany). 10 screw cap tubes each pre-filled with 0.3 g 0.1 mm glass beads (Sigma Aldrich) and 10-12 3 mm beads (Merck Millipore) were each filled with 1ml of the bacterial suspension, followed by disruption in a bead-beater (50 Hz 4 x 1 min). Disrupted and homogenized samples were centrifuged (10 000 x g, 3 min) and the resulting bacterial lysates were collected by pipette. The samples (bacterial lysates) were separated from remaining beads by centrifugation (10 000 x g, 5 min) in Spin Basket-Tubes (Investigator Lyse&Spin Basket Kit, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and stored at -80°C until further analysis.  The protein concentrations of secretome and bacterial lysates samples were determined by the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) and prepared for LC-MS analysis by short separation via a 4–12% polyacrylamide gel. Therefore up to 10 µg per sample were loaded onto the gel (Novex NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) and run for about 10 min. After silver staining, protein bands were cut out, destained and washed. Proteins were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Subsequently, proteins were digested for 16 h at 37 °C with 0.1 μg of trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate in water. Tryptic peptides were extracted twice with a 1:1 (v/v) solution of acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and, after acetonitrile removal, resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. After peptide extraction 1.25 µg were subjected to liquid chromatography for each LC-MS run.  For peptide separation over a 120 minute LC-gradient with 300 nL/min an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 2 mm particle size from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used. MS analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive mode and equipped with a nano electrospray ionization source. Capillary temperature was set to 250°C and source voltage to 1.4 kV. Survey scans were carried out over a mass range from 200-2 000 m/z at a resolution of 70 000 (at 200 m/z). The target value for the automatic gain control was 3 000 000 and the maximum fill time 50 ms. The 20 most intense peptide ions (excluding singly charged ions) were selected for fragmentation. Peptide fragments were analyzed using a maximal fill time of 50 ms and automatic gain control target value of 100 000 and a resolution of 17 500 (at 200 m/z). Peptides already fragmented were excluded for fragmentation for 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were searched using Mascot 2.4 within Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 against a M. abscessus UniProt database (release 2015_03, 4918 sequences). Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation was considered as variable modification. In addition, tryptic cleavage specificity was set to a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Predefined values were used for other parameters including a false discovery rate of 1% on peptide level, a main search precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and mass tolerance of 0.4 Da for fragment spectra.

### Publication Abstract
The Mycobacterium abscessus complex can cause fatal pulmonary disease, especially in cystic fibrosis patients. Diagnosing M.&#xa0;abscessus complex pulmonary disease is challenging. Immunologic assays specific for M.&#xa0;abscessus are not available. In this study seven clinical M.&#xa0;abscessus complex strains and the M.&#xa0;abscessus reference strain ATCC19977 were used to find species-specific proteins for their use in immune assays. Six strains showed rough and smooth colony morphotypes simultaneously, two strains only showed rough mophotypes, resulting in 14 separate isolates. Clinical isolates were submitted to whole genome sequencing. Proteomic analysis was performed on bacterial lysates and culture supernatant of all 14 isolates. Species-specificity for M.&#xa0;abscessus complex was determined by a BLAST search for proteins present in all supernatants. Species-specific proteins underwent in silico B- and T-cell epitope prediction. All clinical strains were found to be M.&#xa0;abscessus ssp. abscessus. Mutations in MAB_4099c as a likely genetic basis of the rough morphotype were found in six out of seven clinical isolates. 79 proteins were present in every supernatant, of which 12 are exclusively encoded by all members of M.&#xa0;abscessus complex plus Mycobacterium immunogenum. In silico analyses predicted B- and T-cell epitopes in all of these 12 species-specific proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteomics, Cystic fibrosis, Secretome, Mycobacterium abscessus, M.abscessus, Non tuberculous mycobacteria

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Institute for Molecular Medicine Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Anja Stefanski

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Institute for Molecular Medicine Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


