### Accession
PXD004445

### Title
Large scale ubiquitination in doxorubicin treated cells

### Description
Protein post-translational modification (PTM) plays a central role in the DNA damage response. In particular protein phosphorylation and ubiquitination have been shown to play a major role in the signalling cascade that coordinates break repair with cell cycle progression. Here we performed large-scale quantitative proteomics to identify changes in protein ubiquitination that are induced by DNA double-strand breaks. In total we quantified >9400 ubiquitin sites, and found that the relative abundance of ~10% of these sites was altered in response to DNA double-strand breaks. Interestingly, we found a large proportion of the ribosomal proteins to be ubiquitinated after damage. These included ribosomal proteins from the 40S as well as the 60S subunit. We subsequently show that DNA damage damage leads to a transient inhibition in ribosome function in protein synthesis. Taken together, these data uncover ribosome ubiquitination as a consequence of activation of the DDR .

### Sample Protocol
Cel culture, transfection and drugs U2OS cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 6% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin. Thymidine, doxorubicin, and caffeine were purchased from Sigma and used at 2.5 mM, 1 μM, and 5mM, respectively. MG132 was purchased from Millipore and used at 5mM. Cell synchronization, DNA damage application, and recovery assays were performed as previously described (1) Protein extraction, proteolytic digestion and peptide purification Cells were lysed using ultrasonicator for 3 times 1 minutes at 0.6 cycle and 90% amplitude and proteins were extracted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 8M urea, protease inhibitor, and DUB inhibitor PR619. For each sample, 20 mg protein is reduced and alkylated using 5 mM DTT and 10mM cloroacetamide respectively. Subsequently, the sample was digested with lys-C (1:50 w/w enzyme: protein ratio). After buffer dilution (to 2M urea), sample was digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w enzyme: protein ratio). The peptide product was then purified using Seppak C8 column and speedvac concentrated. Finally, the purified peptide was reconstituted in the immunoprecipitation buffer for further enrichment. The immunoprecipitation buffer is supplied by Cell Signaling Technology as part of enrichment kit. Details on extraction, digestion, and peptide purification were performed as previously described (2,3). Peptide enrichment and MS analysis Diglycil-remnant peptide enrichment was done using antibody from Cell Signaling Technology, according to the standard protocol from the company. The peptide was eluted twice with total 105 µl of 0.15%.TFA. The sample was analyzed with LC-MS/MS (orbitrap) in triplicates using 25 µl injection volume and 2 hour gradient run. In addition, single and double charge ions were excluded in the analysis.

### Data Protocol
Ubiquitin- peptide/ site identification and quantification; data analysis and evaluation Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.0.3) (4) and the MS/MS data were searched against the human UniProt database (23630 entries, released 2013_06). Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing 2 missed cleaveges. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fix modification, while oxidation (M) and GlyGly (K) were used as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on search with a mass deviation of the precursor ion up to 4.5 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm for FTMS and 0.5 Da for ITMS. Data filtering was carried out using the following parameters: peptide and protein FDR were set to 1%, minimum peptide length was set to 6, and Andromeda minimum score was set to 40 (5). MaxQuant label free quantification was used to quantify the ubiquitin- peptide/ site. Quantified sites were evaluated with Perseus (version 1.4.0.8) (6). Only ubiquitin sites that passed the significant B- test were consider as changed sites. Ingenuity pathway analysis was used to further identify common changed in the system in response to the treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Protein posttranslational modifications (PTMs) play a central role in the DNA damage response. In particular, protein phosphorylation and ubiquitination have been shown to be essential in the signaling cascade that coordinates break repair with cell cycle progression. Here, we performed whole-cell quantitative proteomics to identify global changes in protein ubiquitination that are induced by DNA double-strand breaks. In total, we quantified more than 9,400 ubiquitin sites and found that the relative abundance of &#x223c;10% of these sites was altered in response to DNA double-strand breaks. Interestingly, a large proportion of ribosomal proteins, including those from the 40S as well as the 60S subunit, were ubiquitinated in response to DNA damage. In parallel, we discovered that DNA damage leads to the inhibition of ribosome function. Taken together, these data uncover the ribosome as a major target of the DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Faculty of Science, Utrecht University
Associate Professor of Proteomics Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry | University of Oxford

### Submitter
Vincentius Andrianto Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Shabaz Mohammed
Associate Professor of Proteomics Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry | University of Oxford


