### Accession
PXD021660

### Title
Genomics- and Peptidomics-Based Discovery of Conserved and Novel Neuropeptides in the American Cockroach

### Description
As a model hemimetabolous insect species and an invasive urban pest that is globally distributed, the American cockroach, Periplaneta americana, is of great interest in both basic and applied research. Previous studies on P. americana neuropeptide identification have been based on biochemical isolation and molecular cloning. In the present study, an integrated approach of genomics- and peptidomics-based discovery was performed for neuropeptide identification in this insect species. Using large-scale peptidomic analysis of peptide extracts from 4 different tissues (the central nervous system, corpora cardiac and corpora allata complex, midgut, and male accessory gland), 35 conserved (predicted) and a potential (novel) neuropeptides were then identified. Subsequent experiments revealed the tissue distribution, sex difference, and developmental patterns of 2 conserved neuropeptides (allatostatin B and short neuropeptide F) and a novel neuropeptide PaOGS36577. Our study shows a comprehensive neuropeptidome and detailed spatiotemporal distribution patterns, providing a solid basis for future functional studies of neuropeptides in the American cockroach.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to dissection of the different tissues, animals were anesthetized on ice. Tissues of the central nervous system (CNS), corpora cardiaca and corpora allata complex (CC&CA), midgut (MG), and male accessory glands (MAG) were dissected and cleaned, then transferred into a microtube with peptide extraction solution (methanol: water: acetic acid =90:9:1). The samples were homogenized and ground in liquid nitrogen using mortar and pestle, then centrifuged at 4°C and 12,000× g for 30 min in a 10-kDa MWCO ultrafiltration tube (MF-Millipore, Burlington, USA) to collect the filtrate as the peptide extracts. The filtrate was dried in a vacuum concentrator and frozen for further steps. The frozen peptide extract was redissolved in buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10.0) and then fractionated with an Acquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) with a BEH C18 reverse-phase column (Waters Corporation). The column was equilibrated with buffer A, and then eluted using gradient concentrations of buffer B (10 mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN, pH 10.0). After eluting the peptides, the samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step and stored at –80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. The neuropeptides were identified and quantified using the Nano Acquity UPLC system coupled with a hybrid triple quadrupole time-of-flight (Triple TOF) mass spectrometer (5600 SCIEX, Concord, ON) (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) equipped with an online nanoelectrospray ion source. To chromatographically resolve the peptide mixtures, the samples were reconstituted in 9 μL of solvent A (98% water/2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a Symmetry C18 (5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) column at a flow rate of 2 μL/min for 15 min, and then separated on a BEH130 C18 (1.7 μm, 100 μm ×100 mm) column. After equilibrating the column with solvent A at a flow rate of 2 μL/min for 15 min, the mixture was eluted with a linear gradient of solvent B (98% acetonitrile/2% water/0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 35% in 40 min, 35% to 80% in 5 min, and 80% for 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. At the end, the initial chromatographic conditions were restored for an additional 2 min. Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and interface heater temperature of 150°C. The MS was operated with a resolution power (RP) of greater than or equal to 30,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) for TOF MS scans. For information-dependent acquisition (IDA), survey scans were acquired in 250 ms. As many as 30 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. The total cycle time was fixed at 3.3 s. The Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulse frequency value of 11 kHz by monitoring the 40 GHz multichannel time-to-digital converter (TDC) detector with four-anode channel detection. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of the peak width (18 s).

### Data Protocol
data analysis was carried out with PEAKS Studio software (version 6.0, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). The linear discriminative function (LDF) algorithm was used to determine the peptide-spectrum match (PSM). PEAKS automatically converts the LDF score to a P-value, and the final peptide matching result is displayed using -10 times the logarithm of the P-value (-10logP). The greater the -10logP value of each protein is, the more reliable the results are. Variable posttranslational modifications (PTMs) were selected, including N‐pyroglutamyl formation, C-terminal amidation, phosphorylation, methionine oxidation, methylation, and acetylation. The digestion and enzyme modes were set to “none”. The peptides were searched against an internal database comprising the P. americana neuropeptide precursor sequences with a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da and precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set below 1% to filter out the identified peptide sequences.

### Publication Abstract
As a model hemimetabolous insect species and an invasive urban pest that is globally distributed, the American cockroach, <i>Periplaneta americana</i>, is of great interest in both basic and applied research. Previous studies on <i>P. americana</i> neuropeptide identification have been based on biochemical isolation and molecular cloning. In the present study, an integrated approach of genomics- and peptidomics-based discovery was performed for neuropeptide identification in this insect species. First, 67 conserved neuropeptide or neurohormone precursor genes were predicted via an <i>in silico</i> analysis of the <i>P. americana</i> genome and transcriptome. Using a large-scale peptidomic analysis of peptide extracts from four different tissues (the central nervous system, corpora cardiac and corpora allata complex, midgut, and male accessory gland), 35 conserved (predicted) neuropeptides and a potential (novel) neuropeptide were then identified. Subsequent experiments revealed the tissue distribution, sex difference, and developmental patterns of two conserved neuropeptides (allatostatin B and short neuropeptide F) and a novel neuropeptide (PaOGS36577). Our study shows a comprehensive neuropeptidome and detailed spatiotemporal distribution patterns, providing a solid basis for future functional studies of neuropeptides in the American cockroach (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021660).

### Keywords
Periplaneta americana, Genomics, Neuropeptides, Lcms, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
South China Normal University
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Insect Development Regulation and Application Research, Institute of Insect Science and Technology & School of Life Sciences, South China Normal University GuangZhou China

### Submitter
HuanChao Zeng

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Li
Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Insect Development Regulation and Application Research, Institute of Insect Science and Technology & School of Life Sciences, South China Normal University GuangZhou China


