### Accession
PXD008462

### Title
Human Retina Proteomics -  Dissection of Human Retina and RPE-Choroid for Proteomic Analysis

### Description
Differences in regional protein expression within the human retina may explain molecular predisposition of specific regions to ophthalmic diseases like age-related macular degeneration, cystoid macular edema, retinitis pigmentosa, and diabetic retinopathy. To quantify protein levels in the human retina and identify patterns of differentially-expressed proteins, we collected foveal, macular, and peripheral retina punch biopsies from healthy donor eyes and analyzed protein content by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
The received tissue samples (100 µg of total protein) were diluted in 2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 100 mM DTT to approximately 0.5 mL volume and heated at 95 C for 10 min. Each sample was then briefly vortexed and sonicated for 10 s using a probe-tip sonicator (Omni International). The samples were then returned to incubate at 95 C for an additional 10 min. Samples were then transferred to a 30 k Amicon MWCO device (Millipore) and centrifuged at 16.1 k RCF for 30 min. Then 400 uL of 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 was added to each device and centrifuged as before and the filtrate discarded. This step was repeated. Then 400 uL of 8M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 15 mM iodoacetamide was added to each device and incubated in the dark for 30 min. The samples were then centrifuged as before and the filtrate discarded. Then 400 uL of 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 was added to each device and centrifuged as before and the filtrate discarded. This step was repeated. Then 400 ul of 2 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6 was added to each device along with 2.5 mcg trypsin. The devices incubated overnight on a heat block at 37 C. The devices were then centrifuged and the filtrate collected. Then 400 uL 0.5 M NaCl was added to each device and centrifuged as before. The filtrate was added to the previously collected filtrate.  Peptide desalting and fractionation Digested peptides were desalted using C18 stop-and-go extraction (STAGE) tips. Briefly, for each sample a C18 STAGE tip was activated with methanol, then conditioned with 75% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid followed by 0.5% acetic acid. Samples were loaded onto the tips and desalted with 0.5% acetic acid. Peptides were eluted with 75% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid and lyophilized in a SpeedVac (Thermo Savant) to dryness, approximately 2 h. Peptides were fractionated using SAX STAGE tips. Briefly, for each sample a SAX STAGE tip was activated with methanol, then conditioned with Britton-Robinson buffer (BRB), pH 3.0 followed by BRB, pH 11.5. Peptides were loaded onto the tips and the flow-through collected followed by and five additional fractions by subsequent application of BRB at pH 8.0, 6.0, 5.0, 4.0 and 3.0. Each fraction was desalted using a C18 STAGE tip and lyophilzed as described above.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry Each SAX fraction was analyzed by LC-MS/MS. LC was performed on an Agilent 1100 Nano-flow system. Mobile phase A was 94.5% MilliQ water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. Mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 19.5% MilliQ water, 0.5% acetic acid. The 150 min LC gradient ran from 5% A to 35% B over 105 min, with the remaining time used for sample loading and column regeneration. Samples were loaded to a 2 cm x 100 um I.D. trap column positioned on an actuated valve (Rheodyne). The column was 13 cm x 100 um I.D. fused silica with a pulled tip emitter. Both trap and analytical columns were packed with 3.5 um C18 (Zorbax SB, Agilent). The LC was interfaced to a dual pressure linear ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ Velos, Thermo Fisher) via nano- electrospray ionization. An electrospray voltage of 1.5 kV was applied to a pre-column tee. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire, by data-dependent acquisition, tandem mass spectra from the top 15 ions in the full scan from 400 - 1400 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and library searching Mass spectrometer .RAW data files were converted to .MGF format and then to .CMN format using msconvert and common. Detailed search parameters are printed in the output data files. Peak list data were searched using three algorithms: NCBI's OMSSA[13] and The GPM's X!Tandem,[14] and X!Hunter.[15] Version 37 of the Ensembl human protein sequence library was used in a target-decoy format. For X!Hunter the latest library build available from TheGPM.org at the time of searching was used. CMN files were searched using X!Tandem using both the native and k-score scoring algorithms. MGF files were searched using OMSSA with precursor mass tolerance settings of +/- 20 ppm, product ions mass tolerance of +/- 1.5 Da, and fragment settings of +/- 0.5 Da [16]. XML output files were parsed using MassSieve (NIH). Proteins were required to have 2 or more unique peptides with E-value scores of 0.01 or less. Relative quantitation was performed by spectral counting. Data were normalized based on total spectral counts (hits) per sample. Proteins with a probability of less than 63% were excluded, giving a 5% false discovery rate at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The human retina is composed of the sensory neuroretina and the underlying retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE), which is firmly complexed to the vascular choroid layer. Different regions of the retina are anatomically and molecularly distinct, facilitating unique functions and demonstrating differential susceptibility to disease. Proteomic analysis of each of these regions and layers can provide vital insights into the molecular process of many diseases, including Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD), diabetes mellitus, and glaucoma. However, separation of retinal regions and layers is essential before quantitative proteomic analysis can be accomplished. Here, we describe a method for dissection and collection of the foveal, macular, and peripheral retinal regions and underlying RPE-choroid complex, involving regional punch biopsies and manual removal of tissue layers from a human eye.One-dimensional SDS-PAGE as well as downstream proteomic analysis, such as liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), can be used to identify proteins in each dissected retinal layer, revealing molecular biomarkers for retinal disease.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Biomarker, Precision medicine, Proteomics, Retinal degeneration, Retina, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Vinit B. Mahajan M.D., Ph.D., Byers Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 94304 USA (vinit.mahajan@stanford.edu). Phone: 650.723.6995. Fax: 650.498.1528.

### Submitter
Vinit Mahajan

### Lab Head
Dr Vinit Mahajan
Vinit B. Mahajan M.D., Ph.D., Byers Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 94304 USA (vinit.mahajan@stanford.edu). Phone: 650.723.6995. Fax: 650.498.1528.


