### Accession
PXD029183

### Title
Interactome analysis of human phospholipase D and phosphatidic acid-associated protein network

### Description
Using a systematic proteomic approach, we define the protein-protein interaction network for PLD superfamily and phosphatidic acid in human cells and reveal diverse cellular signaling events involved for this key protein family and lipid.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands described were cut into approximately 1mm3 pieces. The gel pieces were then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. All cysteins(C) are modified by iodoacetamide (MOD:01214). Some Cysteins are dynamically modified to S-carboxamidoethyl-L-cysteine (MOD: 00417). The serach was set up to be able to find alkylated cysteine if the cysteines were treated with iodocetamide or if they were not to find the presence of mono-acrylamide adducts on cysteine. Samples were reconstitued in 5 uL of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The facility packed a nanoscale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column by packing 5-um C18 spherical silica beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into a fused silica capillary (100 um inner diameter x ~20 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After the column was equilibrated, each sample was loaded onto the column via a Famos autsampler (LC Packings). A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide squences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, SEQUEST (ver.28). (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Enzyme specificity was set to partially tryptic with 2 missed cleavages. Modifications included carboxyamidomethyl (Cysteines,fixed) and oxidation (methioine,variable). Mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for precursor ioins and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The database searched was the Swiss-Prot reviewed database (release 2016.4). Spectral matches were filtered to contain less than 1% FDR at the peptide level basedc on the target-decoy method Finally, only tryptic matches were reported and spectral matches were manually examined. When peptides matched to multiple proteins, the peptides was assigned so that only the most logical protein was included (Occam's razor). This same principle was used for isofroms whe prsent in the database. The Sequest output files were further processed by Scaffold 4.6.1 to ensure the protein FDR is less than 1%

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian phospholipase D (PLD) enzyme family consists of six members. Among them, PLD1/2/6 catalyzes phosphatidic acid (PA) production, while PLD3/4/5 has no catalytic activities. Deregulation of the PLD-PA lipid signaling has been associated with various human diseases including cancer. However, a comprehensive analysis of the regulators and effectors for this crucial lipid metabolic pathway has not been fully achieved. Using a proteomic approach, we defined the protein interaction network for the human PLD family of enzymes and PA and revealed diverse cellular signaling events involving them. Through it, we identified PJA2 as a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase for PLD1 involved in control of the PLD1-mediated mammalian target of rapamycin signaling. Additionally, we showed that PA interacted with and positively regulated sphingosine kinase 1. Taken together, our study not only generates a rich interactome resource for further characterizing the human PLD-PA lipid signaling but also connects this important metabolic pathway with numerous biological processes.

### Keywords
S1p, Sphk1, Pja2, Phospholipase d, Mtor, Phosphatidic acid

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine 
University of California Irvine, Irvine CA 92697, Department of Developmental and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Rebecca Vargas

### Lab Head
Dr Wenqi Wang
University of California Irvine, Irvine CA 92697, Department of Developmental and Cell Biology


