### Accession
PXD039850

### Title
The Orf9b protein of SARS-CoV-2 modulates mitochondrial protein biogenesis - Yeast Data Set

### Description
Viruses often induce a complex rewiring of cellular physiology to maximize their propagation. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) expresses high amounts of the viral antagonistic protein Orf9b. Increased amounts and mutated versions of Orf9b were found to correlate with improved transmission of more evolved virus forms such as the Alpha and Omicron variants. Orf9b binds to the mitochondrial surface receptor Tom70 which stiffens its highly flexible structure. Tom70 plays a critical role in the antiviral response since it serves as recruiting factor for the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein. However, the predominant and MAVS-independent role of Tom70 is that of a receptor component of the mitochondrial import system. Whether Orf9b also interferes with this predominant function of Tom70 is unknown. In this study, we expressed Orf9b in human HEK293 cells and observed the Orf9b-mediated depletion of mitochondrial proteins, particularly in respiring cells. The spectrum of depleted mitochondrial proteins was comparable to that of cells in which Tom70 was depleted, consistent with an Orf9b-mediated impairment of Tom70-dependent protein import. To exclude that the observed depletion was caused by the antiviral response triggered by Orf9b expression, we generated a yeast system in which the yeast Tom70 was replaced by a humanized version of Tom70. Upon expression of Orf9b in these cells, we again observed a general but moderate reduction of mitochondrial proteins. Similar to the situation in human cells, a number of mitochondrial proteins were particular sensitive to Orf9b expression, suggesting a rather specific modulation of the mitochondrial import system. In vitro import experiments with semi-intact cells confirmed this Orf9b-mediated impairment of the mitochondrial protein import. Thus, the SARS-CoV-2 virus seems to modulate the mitochondrial proteome by a direct effect of Orf9b on mitochondrial Tom70-dependent protein import.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and mass spectrometric identification of proteins For mass spectrometry (MS), W303+pYX142-HsTom70+pYX123-Orf9b or pYX123 empty vector cells were cultured in SLac medium. Cells were diluted continuously to keep them in the exponential growth phase. Orf9b expression was induced with galactose (final concentration 0.5%). After 16 h of induction, 10 OD600 of each culture were harvested (5,000 g, 5 min, RT), washed with sterile water and shock frozen with liquid nitrogen. Samples were stored at -80°C for further analysis. MS samples were prepared according to a published protocol with minor adaptations {Kulak, 2014 #8408}. To analyze the proteome changes upon Orf9b expression, cell lysates were prepared in 100 µl lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM TCEP-HCl, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) using a FastPrep-24 5 G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) with 3 cycles of 20 s, speed 8.0 m/s, 120 s breaks, glass beads (Ø 0.5 mm) at 4°C. Samples were heated for 10 min at 96°C and afterwards centrifuged twice for 5 min at 16,000 g. In between the supernatant was transferred to fresh Eppendorf tubes to remove all remaining glass beads. Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, #23225). For protein digestion, 25 µg of protein was diluted 1:10 with LT-digestion buffer (10% acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.8). Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich #T6567) and Lys-C (Wako #125-05061) were added to the samples (1:50 w/w). Samples were incubated over night at 37°C and 700 rpm. After 16 h, fresh Trypsin (1:100 w/w) was added for 30 min (37°C, 700 rpm). pH of samples was adjusted to pH <2 with trifluoroacetic acid (10%) and samples were centrifuged for 3 min at 16,000 g and RT. Desalting/mixed-Phase cleanup was performed with 3 layers SDB-RPS stage tips (cat 2241). Samples were dried down in speed-vac and resolubilized in 12 µl buffer A++ (buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer A* (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoracetic acid) in a ratio of 9:1)). 4 µl of the resolubilize peptides were separated on a 50 cm long reverse phase column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed in house with C18 material (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Chromatography was performed with an Easy-nLC 1200 System directly coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a Nanoflex source (Sonation). A non-linear 180 minute gradient of 2-95% buffer b [80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid]  was applied using a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. All MS data was recorded with a data dependent acquisition strategy

### Data Protocol
MS data processing MS data obtained from yeast samples were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.1.0) {Cox, 2008 #6855;Cox, 2011 #6895;Tyanova, 2016 #7545}. Peak lists were searched against the yeast Uniprot FASTA database and the amino acid sequence of human Tom70 and Orf9b. Statistical analysis of MS data Protein groups identified in human and yeast samples were processed and analyzed in parallel using the R programming language (version 4.2.1, ref). First, protein groups were filtered to remove contaminants, reverse hits, proteins identified by site only as well as proteins that were identified in less than three replicates (N = 4) of every condition. This resulted in 4316 (human galactose), 3697 (human glucose) and 3910 (yeast) robustly identified protein groups in human samples grown in galactose or glucose and yeast sample respectively. Next, the protein group’s label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were log2-transformed and normalized between samples using fast linear loess normalization [ref] as implemented in the limma R-package [ref]. Finally, missing values were imputed by the minimum values observed as implemented in the imputeLCMD package [ref] function impute.MinDet using the 1% percentile of each replicate respectively to estimate the minima. Only those missing values with no corresponding valid values in a quadruplicate of a condition were imputed. Since in this imputation scheme it is assumed that missing values are left-censored, this distinction was made to avoid placing minima where values are potentially more likely to be missing at random. In total, 251 to 362 values were imputed this way in human samples grown in galactose, 141 to 207 in those grown in glucose and 110 to 147 in the yeast data set. Protein groups were statistically analyzed using pairwise, two-sided Welch’s t-tests on the processed LFQ intensities between the replicates of respective control and treatment conditions. Only comparisons with non-imputed values in either the control or treatment condition were tested. The resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure [ref] and are listed together with all test results in Table S1.  Principal component analysis was carried out for each data set using the package pcaMethods [ref] on the processed and standardized LFQ intensities of those protein groups with an ANOVA F-statistic p-value < 0.05 between all replicate groups to filter for proteins with a discernable degree of variance between conditions.

### Publication Abstract
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) expresses high amounts of the protein Orf9b to target the mitochondrial outer membrane protein Tom70. Tom70 serves as an import receptor for mitochondrial precursors and, independently of this function, is critical for the cellular antiviral response. Previous studies suggested that Orf9b interferes with Tom70-mediated antiviral signaling, but its implication for mitochondrial biogenesis is unknown. In this study, we expressed Orf9b in human HEK293 cells and observed an Orf9b-mediated depletion of mitochondrial proteins, particularly in respiring cells. To exclude that the observed depletion was caused by the antiviral response, we generated a yeast system in which the function of human Tom70 could be recapitulated. Upon expression of Orf9b in these cells, we again observed a specific decline of a subset of mitochondrial proteins and a general reduction of mitochondrial volume. Thus, the SARS-CoV-2 virus is able to modulate the mitochondrial proteome by a direct effect of Orf9b on mitochondrial Tom70-dependent protein import.

### Keywords
Orf9b, Mitochondrial import

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics, RPTU Kaiserslautern, Germany
Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, RPTU Kaiserslautern, Germany


