### Accession
PXD007741

### Title
Identifying host factors associated with DNA replicated during virus infection

### Description
Viral DNA genomes replicating in cells encounter a myriad of host factors that facilitate or hinder viral replication. Viral proteins expressed early during infection modulate host factors interacting with viral genomes, recruiting proteins to promote viral replication, and limiting access to antiviral repressors. Although some host factors manipulated by viruses have been identified, we know little about pathways exploited during infection and how these differ between viruses. To identify cellular processes manipulated during viral replication, we defined proteomes associated with viral genomes during infection with adenovirus, herpes simplex virus and vaccinia virus. We compared enrichment of host factors between virus proteomes and confirmed association with viral genomes and replication compartments. Using adenovirus as an illustrative example, we uncovered host factors deactivated by early viral proteins, and identified a subgroup of nucleolar proteins that aid virus replication. Our datasets provide valuable resources of virus-host interactions that affect proteins on viral genomes.

### Sample Protocol
iPOND-MS We adapted the iPOND protocol previously described (22) to include infection conditions. Per condition, eight 15 cm cell culture dishes containing U2OS at ~90 confluence (~1.8x107) were mock-infected or infected with Ad5 (multiplicity of infection [MOI] 40), HSV-1 (MOI 3), or VACV (MOI 3-7). Cells were incubated with infection media (serum free DMEM plus antibiotics) for 1 h (HSV-1) or 2 h (Ad5 and VACV) at 37˚C. Following adsorption, cells were topped-off with fresh complete culture media (DMEM plus 10% FBS and antibiotics) incubated at 37˚C for 24 h (Ad5), 8 h (HSV-1) or 6 h (VACV) before pulsing with 10 µM EdU (Invitrogen) for 15 min at 37˚C. Cells were fixed with 1% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min at room temperature, crosslinking was quenched with 125 mM glycine and cells were scraped and harvested. To facilitate subsequent iPOND steps, cells from four plates of the same condition were combined and pelleted together generating two cell pellets per condition. Samples were then processed for iPOND as described previously (22, 25), with the following adaptations: After click chemistry reaction, cell pellets were resuspended in 0.5 ml of Lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 400 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with 1 mM DTT and protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets [Roche] and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) and sonicated with a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 20 min in 30 s on/off cycles at a high intensity. Capture of DNA-protein complexes was carried out by incubating lysates with streptavidin magnetic beads (Dynabeads M-280, Invitrogen) for 16-18 hr at 4˚C. Beads were washed once in Lysis buffer, once in 1 M NaCl, four times in Wash buffer (20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 110 mM KOAc, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Tween-20, 0.1% Triton-X-100,150 mM NaCl) and once in PBS. To combine samples from the same condition, proteins from one of the samples were eluted in 60 µl of 1X LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) containing 10% DTT by incubating at 95˚C for 10 min. Then, the same 60 µl of sample buffer used to eluted proteins from the first sample were used for the elution of sample two of the same condition. Finally, eluted proteins were boiled at 95˚C for 45min to reverse crosslinks.  iPOND isolates were separated on ~0.8 cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MOPS buffer system. The gel was stained with Coomassie and excised into four equal 2x7 mm segments. Gel segments were destained with 50% methanol/1.25% acetic acid, reduced with 5 mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Gel pieces were then washed with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and dehydrated with acetonitrile (Fisher).  Trypsin (Promega) (5 ng/µl in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the gel pieces and proteolysis was allowed to proceed overnight at 37˚C.  Peptides were extracted with 0.3% triflouroacetic acid (J.T.Baker), followed by 50% acetonitrile. Extracts were combined and the volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation. Tryptic digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled with a nanoLC Ultra (Eksigent).  Peptides were separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm id x 15 cm Reprosil-pur 3uM, 120A (Dr. Maisch) in a Nanoflex chip system (Eksigent). Mobile phase A consisted of 1% methanol (Fisher) /0.1% formic acid (Thermo) and mobile phase B of 1% methanol/0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nl/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90 minute gradient from 10 to 25 % B in 65 min, 25-40%B in 25 min. The mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1800 (R = 240,000 for LTQ-Orbitrap Elite) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, with a minimum signal of 1500, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30s, exclusion size of 500 and duration of 60s, isolation width of 2.0, normalized collision energy of 33, and waveform injection and dynamic exclusion enabled. FTMS full scan AGC target value was 1x106, while MSn AGC was 1x104, respectively. FTMS full scan maximum fill time was 500 ms, while ion trap MSn fill time was 50 ms; microscans were set at one.  FT preview mode; charge state screening, and monoisotopic precursor selection were all enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states. 22. Sirbu, B. M., Couch, F. B., and Cortez, D. (2012) Monitoring the spatiotemporal dynamics of proteins at replication forks and in assembled chromatin using isolation of proteins on nascent DNA. Nat. Protoc. 7, 594–605 25. Dungrawala, H., Rose, K. L., Bhat, K. P., Mohni, K. N., Glick, G. G., Couch, F. B., and Cortez, D. (2015) The replication checkpoint prevents two types of fork collapse without regulating replisome stability. Mol. Cell 59, 998–1010

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and database searching MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (30) version 1.5.2.8. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (31) against the Human UniProt FASTA database [9606] (version July 2014). Viral proteins were identified using Adenovirus C serotype 5 [28285], Human Herpesvirus strain 17 [10299], and Vaccinia virus [10245] UniProt FASTA database (version January 2015). Additionally, the database included 247 common contaminants, discarded during data analysis. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identifications. Protein grouping was enabled. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation up to 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Label-free quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm (32). For matching between runs, the retention time alignment window was set to 20 min and the match time window was 1 min. Protein table were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, only identified by site and common contaminants.   30. Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 31. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V., and Mann, M. (2011) Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J. Proteome Res. 10, 1794–1805 32. Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N., Dittmar, G., Schuchhardt, J., Wolf, J., Chen, W., and Selbach, M. (2011) Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 473, 337–342

### Publication Abstract
Viral DNA genomes replicating in cells encounter a myriad of host factors that facilitate or hinder viral replication. Viral proteins expressed early during infection modulate host factors interacting with viral genomes, recruiting proteins to promote viral replication, and limiting access to antiviral repressors. Although some host factors manipulated by viruses have been identified, we have limited knowledge of pathways exploited during infection and how these differ between viruses. To identify cellular processes manipulated during viral replication, we defined proteomes associated with viral genomes during infection with adenovirus, herpes simplex virus and vaccinia virus. We compared enrichment of host factors between virus proteomes and confirmed association with viral genomes and replication compartments. Using adenovirus as an illustrative example, we uncovered host factors deactivated by early viral proteins, and identified a subgroup of nucleolar proteins that aid virus replication. Our data sets provide valuable resources of virus-host interactions that affect proteins on viral genomes.

### Keywords
Virus infection / dna replication / dna repair / intrinsic defense

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA  Division of Cancer Pathobiology,Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA USA
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Katarzyna Kulej

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew D. Weitzman
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA USA  Division of Cancer Pathobiology,Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA USA


