### Accession
PXD001085

### Title
PHD3 and FIH substrates cluster in distinct signalling pathways

### Description
Amino acid hydroxylation is a common post-translational modification which regulates intra and inter-molecular protein-protein interactions. The modifications are regulated by a family of 2-oxoglutarate (2OG) dependent enzymes and although the biochemistry is well understood, until now only a few substrates have been described for these enzymes. We present here a sensitive method which specifically enriches and identifies hydroxylase substrates. We screened for substrates of PHD3 and FIH, a proline and asparagine hydroxylase respectively which regulate the HIF-mediated hypoxic response and were able to confirm known substrates as well as identifying hundreds of potential novel ones. Enrichment analysis revealed that the substrates of both hydroxylases cluster in the same pathways but frequently modify different nodes of these networks. We confirm that two proteins identified in this screen, MAPK6 and RIPK4, are indeed hydroxylated in a FIH or PHD3 dependent mechanism and explore the biological consequences of the hydroxylation.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with either empty vector, a V5-tagged hydroxylase or Flag-tagged RIPK4 or MAPK6 and treated the cells 48 hours post-transfection with either 2 mM DMOG, 100 µM JNJ-42041935 or DMSO for 4 hours. The cells were lysed and we immunoprecipitated the protein with anti-V5 or anti FLAG agarose for 1 hour. The samples were processed as previously described (Turriziani et al., 2014).  The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system incorporating an autosampler. Five microliters of the resuspended tryptic peptides was loaded onto a homemade column (100-mm length, 75-mm inside diameter [i.d.]) packed with 1.9 μm RepreosilAQ C18 (Dr Maisch, Germany) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 40-min reverse-phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220°C, with a potential of 2,000 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to tandem MS (MS/MS) analysis. Mass spectra were analyzed by using the MaxQuant software program. Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw data was analysed by the MaxQuant 1.3 or 1.4 software package. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the human uniprot database with a mass accuracy of 6ppm and 20ppm (for MS and MS/MS). Carbamylation (C) was selected as fixed modification. Variable modifications were N-terminal acetylation (protein) and oxidation (M) for the interaction screen or oxidation (MWYFKPHDN) for the hydroxylation screen. FDR was set to 0.01. LFQ and peak matching was selected and was limited to within a 30 s elution window. The LFQ intensities were extracted; missing values were replaced by a constant (1). Replicates were compared to each other by a two-tailed Student’s ttest and by the ratio of the averages with the cut-off as indicated. Normalisation was performed on the specific interactors by dividing the LFQ values by the average bait LFQ-intensity of the sample for each set of control and sample.  .

### Publication Abstract
Amino acid hydroxylation is a post-translational modification that regulates intra- and inter-molecular protein-protein interactions. The modifications are regulated by a family of 2-oxoglutarate- (2OG) dependent enzymes and, although the biochemistry is well understood, until now only a few substrates have been described for these enzymes. Using quantitative interaction proteomics, we screened for substrates of the proline hydroxylase PHD3 and the asparagine hydroxylase FIH, which regulate the HIF-mediated hypoxic response. We were able to identify hundreds of potential substrates. Enrichment analysis revealed that the potential substrates of both hydroxylases cluster in the same pathways but frequently modify different nodes of signaling networks. We confirm that two proteins identified in our screen, MAPK6 (Erk3) and RIPK4, are indeed hydroxylated in a FIH- or PHD3-dependent mechanism. We further determined that FIH-dependent hydroxylation regulates RIPK4-dependent Wnt signaling, and that PHD3-dependent hydroxylation of MAPK6 protects the protein from proteasomal degradation.

### Keywords
Dmog, Erk3, Ripk4, Hypoxia, Hydroxylases, Mapk6

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
systems biology Ireland, UCD

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
systems biology Ireland, UCD


