### Accession
PXD013362

### Title
PACAP and other neuropeptide targets link chronic migraine and opioid-induced hyperalgesia in mouse models

### Description
Understanding the precise molecular mechanisms behind chronic pain disorders such as migraine and opioid induced hyperalgesia (OIH) has been a long-standing goal met with limited success. Neuropeptides, which play a vital role in several physiological processes are also hypothesized to be involved in mediating these pain mechanisms. Here we show that change in levels of several neuropeptides and neuropeptide-precursor proteins (prohormones) correlate with migraine and OIH in mice. We also identified common prohormones that are significantly changed in both migraine and OIH. These results suggest that neuropeptides have an important role in these chronic pain disorders and might be key towards unlocking their mechanisms. This knowledge could eventually be utilized in developing an effective cure for these disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide extraction was performed on all the 7 regions studies (Hypothalamus, Trigeminal Ganglia, Trigeminal Nucleus, Periaqueductal Gray, Rostroventral Medulla, Dorsal Horn and Nucleus Accumbens). Post extraction, part of the sample was used to construct a peptide library by LC-MS/MS. Remaining sample was used for quantitation via LC-MS based experiments.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS experiment files were searched against the Mouse proteome database downloaded from Uniprot using the search engine PEAKS. The library file thus generated was used for identifying the peptide peaks from the LC-MS experiments via SKYLINE. Peptides were quantified based on the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) of the peptides using SKYLINE. Further downstream statistical analyses were performed on the data from SKLYLINE to identify the peptides and group of peptides that were significantly different between the treated and control groups of migraine and OIH

### Publication Abstract
Chronic use of opioids can produce opioid-induced hyperalgesia (OIH), and when used to treat migraine, these drugs can result in increased pain and headache chronicity. We hypothesized that overlapping mechanisms between OIH and chronic migraine occur through neuropeptide dysregulation. Using label-free, non-biased liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to identify and measure changes in more than 1500 neuropeptides under these two conditions, we observed only 16 neuropeptides that were altered between the two conditions. The known pro-migraine molecule, calcitonin-gene related peptide, was among seven peptides associated with chronic migraine, with several pain-processing neuropeptides among the nine other peptides affected in OIH. Further, composite peptide complements Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and Secretogranin (SCG) showed significant changes in both chronic migraine and OIH. In a follow-up pharmacological study, we confirmed the role of PACAP in models of these two disorders, validating the effectiveness of our peptidomic approach, and identifying PACAP as a mechanistic link between chronic migraine and OIH. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013362.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Peptidomics, Label-free

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, 61801
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign

### Submitter
Krishna Anapindi

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan V. Sweedler
Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, IL, 61801


