### Accession
PXD031991

### Title
A phylogenetic and proteomic reconstruction of eukaryotic chromatin evolution

### Description
Histones and associated chromatin proteins have essential functions in eukaryotic genome organization and regulation. Despite this fundamental role in eukaryotic cell biology, we lack a phylogenetically-comprehensive understanding of chromatin evolution. Here, we combine comparative proteomics and genomics analysis of chromatin in eukaryotes and archaea. Proteomics uncovers the existence of histone post-translational modifications in Archaea. However, archaeal histone modifications are scarce, in contrast with the highly conserved and abundant marks we identify across eukaryotes. Phylogenetic analysis reveals that chromatin-associated catalytic functions (e.g., methyltransferases) have pre-eukaryotic origins, whereas histone mark readers and chaperones are eukaryotic innovations. We show that further chromatin evolution is characterized by expansion of readers, including capture by transposable elements and viruses. Overall, our study infers detailed evolutionary history of eukaryotic chromatin: from its archaeal roots, through the emergence of nucleosome-based regulation in the eukaryotic ancestor, to the diversification of chromatin regulators and their hijacking by genomic parasites

### Sample Protocol
Histone acid extraction Starting material was a pellet of 50-100M cells (washed once with cold PBS) or a flash-frozen tissue homogenate in liquid nitrogen using a ceramic mortar grinder. Cells were washed first in 10ml of buffer I (10 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.4M Sucrose). After 5min incubation, samples were centrifuged at 8.000g for 20min at 4o C and supernatant was removed. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 1.5ml of Buffer II (10 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.25M Sucrose, 1% Triton X100, 1% Igepal Ca-630) and incubated 15min on ice. In specific cases, cells at this stage were broken using a 2ml Dounce homogenizer (with Pestle B) or with a 20G syringe. Then samples were centrifuged at 15.000g for 10min at 4o C and supernatant was removed. The resulting pellet was then slowly resuspended in 300µL of Buffer III (10 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 2 mM MgCl2, 1.7M Sucrose, 1% Triton X-100) and then resulting resuspended nuclei were layered on top of another 300µL of Buffer III. Sample was centrifuged at 20.000g for 1h at 4o C and supernatant was removed, resulting in a nuclear pellet ready for acid histone extraction. All buffers were supplemented with spermidine (1:1000), beta-mercaptoethanol (1:1000), protease inhibitors (1x cOmplete cocktail Roche #11697498001, 1mM PMSF, 1:2000 Pepstatin), phosphatase inhibitors (1x phoSTOP cocktail Roche #4906845001) and deacetylase inhibitors (10mM Sodium butyrate). For samples processed using a high-salt + HCl extraction protocol95,96, the pellet was resuspended in 500µL of High Salt Extraction Buffer (20 mM TrisHCl pH 7.4, CaCl2 1M and protease, phosphatase and deacetylase inhibitors, same as above). Sample was incubated on ice for 30min and then pure HCl has added to a final 0.3N concentration (12.82µL to the initial 500µL). Samples were incubated for at least 2h on a rotor at 4o C and then centrifuged at 16.000g for 10min at 4o C to remove cellular/nuclear debris. The resulting supernatant containing solubilized histones was transferred to a clean 1.5ml tube and Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) was added drop-wise to 25% final concentration (171µL TCA to an approximate initial 513µL sample) and left overnight at 4o C to precipitate histones. Samples were then centrifuged at 20.000g for 30min at 4o C and the supernatant removed. The pellet was then washed twice with 500µL of cold acetone and then dried for 20min at room temperature. Finally, clean histone pellets were resuspended in 30-50µL of ultrapure water. Protein concentration in the sample was measured using BCA and extraction was examined using an SDS-PAGE protein gel with Coomassie staining. For samples processed using H2SO4 96, the protocol was exactly the same except that 400µL 0.4N H2SO4 (freshly diluted) was used instead, with a similar incubation time of at least 2h at 4o C. Histone chemical derivatization Histones samples were quantified by the BCA method and 10 µg of each sample were derivatized with propionic anhydride, digested with trypsin and derivatized again with phenylisocyanate as previously described. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 9 µL of H2O and 1 µL of triethyl ammonium bicarbonate was added to bring the pH to 8.5. The propionic anhydride was prepared by adding 1 µL of propionic anhydride to 99 µL of H2O and 1 µL of propionic anhydride solution was added immediately to the samples with vortexing and incubation for 2 minutes. The reaction was quenched with 1 µL of 80mM hydroxylamine and samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes. Tryptic digestion was performed for 3 h with 0.1 µg trypsin (Promega Sequencing Grade; Madison, WI) per sample. A 1% v/v solution of phenyl isocyanate (PIC) in acetonitrile was freshly prepared and 3 µl added to each sample (17 mM final concentration) and incubated for 60 min at 37 °C. Samples were acidified by adding 50 µL of 5% formic acid, vacuum dried and desalted with C18 ultramicrospin columns (The Nest Group, Inc, Southborough, MA). Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry  A 2-µg aliquot of the peptide mixture was analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA ) with both collision induced dissociation (CID) and high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 µm, packed with 2 µm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with a 90 min chromatographic gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode using a data dependent acquisition method. The “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm determined the number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry Data Analysis Acquired data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science) was used for peptide identification using a double-search strategy. First, data were searched against each organism protein database plus the most common contaminants considering Propionylation on N-terminal, Propionylation on Lysines and Phenylisocyanate on N-terminal as variable modifications. Then a new database was generated with the proteins identified in the first search,, and a second search was done considering Propionylation on N-terminal, Propionylation on Lysines, Phenylisocyanate on N-terminal, Dimethyl lysine, trimethyl lysine, propionyl + methyl lysine, acetyl lysine, crotonyl lysine as variable modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to 5 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. The identified peptides were filtered by mascot ion score higher than 20 and only PTMs with a localization score ptmRS higher than 50 were considered

### Publication Abstract
Histones and associated chromatin proteins have essential functions in eukaryotic genome organization and regulation. Despite this fundamental role in eukaryotic cell biology, we lack a phylogenetically comprehensive understanding of chromatin evolution. Here, we combine comparative proteomics and genomics analysis of chromatin in eukaryotes and archaea. Proteomics uncovers the existence of histone post-translational modifications in archaea. However, archaeal histone modifications are scarce, in contrast with the highly conserved and abundant marks we identify across eukaryotes. Phylogenetic analysis reveals that chromatin-associated catalytic functions (for example, methyltransferases) have pre-eukaryotic origins, whereas histone mark readers and chaperones are eukaryotic innovations. We show that further chromatin evolution is characterized by expansion of readers, including capture by transposable elements and viruses. Overall, our study infers detailed evolutionary history of eukaryotic chromatin: from its archaeal roots, through the emergence of nucleosome-based regulation in the eukaryotic ancestor, to the diversification of chromatin regulators and their hijacking by genomic parasites.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Proteogenomics, Histones, Evolution

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona 08003, Catalonia, Spain
University Pompeu Fabra

### Submitter
Cristina Chiva

### Lab Head
Dr Arnau Sebé-Pedrós
Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona 08003, Catalonia, Spain


