### Accession
PXD036482

### Title
HPLC-TIMS-TOF-MS of purified mitochondrial I+III2 supercomplex from Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Mitochondrial I+III2 supercomplex was purified from Arabidopsis thaliana cells using differential centrifugation including Percoll step gradients and continuous sucrose gradients. Supercomplex fractions were digested with trypsin using the SP3 approach. Peptides were further purified with SepPak cartridges and measured by HPLC-ESI-TIMS-TOF-MS. Database search was performed with MaxQuant (Version 2.0.3.0.) Over 1,300 proteins were identified using this highly sensitive approach, including all known subunits of the I+III2 supercomplex. This MS analysis is part of a publication on the structure of the I+III2 supercomplex from Arabidopsis by Klusch et al., 2022.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material cultivation and mitochondria isolation was performed as described in Klusch et al., 2021 (PMID: 33768254). For sucrose gradient separation of mitochondrial membrane protein complexes, mitochondrial fractions were solubilized in digitonin solubilization buffer (30 mM HEPES, pH7.4, 150 mM potassium acetate, 5% [w/v] digitonin) and loaded onto continuous sucrose gradients (0.3 M to 1.5 M sucrose in gradient buffer (30 mM HEPES, pH7.8, 150 mM potassium acetate, 0.1% [w/v] digitonin)). After centrifugation for 20h at 146.000 g and 4°C the gradient was fractionated and fractions were tested by gel electrophoresis. I+III2 supercomplex containing fractions of optimal purity were used for tryptic digestion using the adapted SP3 protocol described by Mikulášek et al. 2021 (PMID: 33777071).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 2.0.3.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016) was used to query acquired MS/MS spectra against a modified TAIR10 database including models of mitochondrial and plastid genes after RNA editing to improve sequence coverage of affected proteins (introduced in https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.14534). Default parameters were used with the following exception: Caclulation of iBAQ values (Schwannhäuser et al. doi: 10.1038/nature11848) was activated, the options “Log fit” and “charge normalization” were enabled. Identification transfer between individual runs via the “Match between runs” feature was applied with the default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Arabidopsis, Supercomplex

### Affiliations
Institut für Pflanzengenetik
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Herrenhäuser Str. 2
30419 Hannover
Germany
Prof. Dr. Hans-Peter Braun Abteilung Pflanzenproteomik Institut für Pflanzengenetik Naturwissenschaftliche Fakultät Leibniz Universität Hannover Herrenhäuser Str. 2 30419 Hannover Germany

### Submitter
Nils Rugen

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Peter Braun
Prof. Dr. Hans-Peter Braun Abteilung Pflanzenproteomik Institut für Pflanzengenetik Naturwissenschaftliche Fakultät Leibniz Universität Hannover Herrenhäuser Str. 2 30419 Hannover Germany


