### Accession
PXD018096

### Title
African Penguin (Spheniscus demersus)  Plasma Samples

### Description
Fractionation of normal and abnormal African penguin samples via capillary electrophoresis demonstrated a change from a left skewed composition to a right skewed composition. Further analysis of this fraction via mass spectrometry revealed key proteins associated with this skewed.

### Sample Protocol
After capillary electrophoresis samples were denatured in 6M urea, reduced in 10 mM DTT, alkylated in 15 mM IAA and quenched with 20 mM DTT. Samples were digested using Trypsin, followed by desalting and protein enrichment.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 for protein identification. Statistical analysis was done using MetaboAnalyst 4.0.

### Publication Abstract
A decrease of avian biodiversity in the African continent has been the result of anthropogenic pressure in the region. This has resulted in the African penguin (<i>Spheniscus demersus</i>) being placed on the endangered species list and requires conservation efforts to maintain its free-ranging population and placement under managed care. In the latter environment, infection by <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> can be common. The diagnosis and treatment of this fungal disease in birds has presented with many difficulties, largely due to the diversity and limited knowledge that exists about this species. In this study, we implement a high-resolution capillary electrophoresis system for the fractionation of African penguin plasma, followed by mass spectrometry analysis for the identification of proteins associated with aspergillosis. Several protein differences were revealed, including changes in acute phase proteins and lipid metabolism. In addition, our results demonstrated that fibrinogen &#x3b2; chain is a protein largely present during the inflammatory process in an African penguin infected with <i>A. fumigatus</i>. These findings present a new avenue for the measurement of plasma proteins as a potential method for identifying important biomarkers to aid in monitoring African penguin health.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plasma, Ce, African penguin

### Affiliations
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA
Sanjoy K. Bhattacharya, M. Tech., Ph. D. Professor of Ophthalmology Bascom Palmer Eye Institute (McKnight Bldg.) 1638 NW 10th Avenue, Suite 707A University of Miami Miami, FL, 33136 Tel: 305-482-4103 (Office)

### Submitter
Sanjoy Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjoy Bhattacharya
Sanjoy K. Bhattacharya, M. Tech., Ph. D. Professor of Ophthalmology Bascom Palmer Eye Institute (McKnight Bldg.) 1638 NW 10th Avenue, Suite 707A University of Miami Miami, FL, 33136 Tel: 305-482-4103 (Office)


