### Accession
PXD017215

### Title
A novel polyubiquitin chain linkage formed by viral Ubiquitin resists cleavage by deubiquitinating enzymes

### Description
The project reports the structural difference between viral Ubiquitin (vUB) and human ubiquitin, hence causing local and global destabilization in vUB. Viral Ubiquitin conjugates are degraded by proteasome machinery. The in-vitro biochemical assays suggest comparable activity of mono UB and mono-vUB against different set of E2 and E3 enzymes. The project also reports the novel isopeptide linkage in viral ubiquitin at K54 position through MS/MS, which is made by E2D2 and not by other E2s used in this study. Most importantly K54-conjugates were found to be resistant towards deubiquitinase enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
The gel pieces of di-vUb and di-vUb-K54 were washed with LC-MS grade water for 20minutes, followed by vortexing in 400µl of 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate/Acetonitrile [1:1 v/v], till the gel pieces became transparent. 400µl of Acetonitrile was then added and incubated at room temperature with occasional vortexing until the gel pieces became white and shrunken. For trypsin digestion, 100µl of trypsin buffer (13ng/µl of trypsin in 10mM Ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile) was added to dried gel pieces and kept for 2hrs at -20ºC. 100µl of Ammonium bicarbonate buffer was added to wet the gel pieces, and the tubes were incubated overnight at 37ºC for trypsin cleavage. 5% formic acid/Acetonitrile was added to the solution and incubated for 15mins at 37ºC to inactivate trypsin. The gel pieces were carefully removed, and the supernatant was centrifuged for 20minutes before lyophilization and then finally re-solubilized in 40µl of 0.1%formic acids, 2% [v/v] acetonitrile for LCMS analysis. EASY SPRAY PEPMAP RSLC C18 analytical column was used to separate the peptides by the gradient developed from 0.1% [v/v] formic acid to 80% [v/v] Acetonitrile, 0.1% [v/v] formic acid in HPLC grade water over 53mins at a flow rate of 300nL/min in EASY-nLC 1200 system which is in-line coupled to nano-electrospray source of a LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, SanJose, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Full MS in the mass range between m/z 375 and m/z 1700 was performed on an Orbitrap Mass analyzer, followed by CID-based MS/MS, performed in the scan range of m/z 100 and m/z 2000. Mascot Distiller software was used to identify the peptides with GG modification, in which the peptide mass tolerance threshold was set to 10ppm, and the maximum fragment mass tolerance was set between 0.2 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The Baculoviridae family of viruses encode a viral Ubiquitin (vUb) gene. Though the vUb is homologous to the host eukaryotic Ubiquitin (Ub), its preservation in the viral genome indicates unique functions that are not compensated by the host Ub. We report the structural, biophysical, and biochemical properties of the vUb from Autographa californica multiple nucleo-polyhedrosis virus (AcMNPV). The packing of central helix &#x3b1;1 to the beta-sheet &#x3b2;1-&#x3b2;5 is different between vUb and Ub. Consequently, its stability is lower compared with Ub. However, the surface properties, ubiquitination activity, and the interaction with Ubiquitin-binding domains are similar between vUb and Ub. Interestingly, vUb forms atypical polyubiquitin chain linked by lysine at the 54th position (K54), and the deubiquitinating enzymes are ineffective against the K54-linked polyubiquitin chains. We propose that the modification of host/viral proteins with the K54-linked chains is an effective way selected by the virus to protect the vUb signal from host DeUbiquitinases.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteasomal degradation, Ubiquitination, Dubs, Nmr, Isopeptide bond

### Affiliations
National Centre for Biological Sciences
National Centre for Biological Sciences, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Hitendra Negi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ranabir Das
National Centre for Biological Sciences, Bangalore, India


