### Accession
PXD036414

### Title
RNA-controlled nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of mRNA decay factors regulates mRNA synthesis and a novel mRNA decay pathway

### Description
mRNA level is controlled by factors that mediate both mRNA synthesis and decay, including the 5’ to 3’ exonuclease Xrn1 - a major mRNA synthesis and decay factor. Here we show that nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of several mRNA decay factors plays a key role in determining both mRNA synthesis and decay. Shuttling is regulated by RNA-controlled binding of the karyopherin Kap120 to two nuclear localization sequences (NLSs) in Xrn1, location of one of which is conserved from yeast to human. The decaying RNA binds and masks NLS1, establishing a link between mRNA decay and Xrn1 shuttling. Preventing Xrn1 import, either by deleting KAP120 or mutating the two Xrn1 NLSs, compromise transcription and, unexpectedly, also the cytoplasmic decay, uncovering a cytoplasmic decay pathway that initiates in the nucleus. Most mRNAs are degraded by both the “classical” and the novel pathways, the ratio between them represents a full spectrum. Importantly, Xrn1 shuttling is required for proper adaptation to environmental changes, in particular to ever changing environmental fluctuations.

### Sample Protocol
Interactome of XRN1-flag was separated on SDS-PAGE. The proteins were trypsinized in gel and the peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyze by Proteome Discoverer 1.4. with two search algorithms: Sequest (Thermo) and Mascot (Matrix science) against the  Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome from the Uniprot database, and a decoy database

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xrn1, Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, Mrna decay

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Medicine Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Bat Galim, Haifa, Israel 31076

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Mordechai (Motti) Choder
Faculty of Medicine Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Bat Galim, Haifa, Israel 31076


