### Accession
PXD017381

### Title
Cardiopoietic stem cell therapy restores infarction-altered cardiac proteome

### Description
Cardiopoietic stem cells are in advanced clinical testing for ischemic heart failure. To profile their uncharted molecular influence on recipient hearts, systems proteomics was applied in a chronic murine model of infarction randomized with and without human cardiopoietic stem cell treatment. Four biological replicates are included from each of three separate groups, Control (Ctrl, n=4), myocardial infarction without treatment (MI, n=4), and MI with cardiopoietic stem cell treatment (CP, n=4). Athymic nude male mice (2-3 months of age) underwent left anterior descending coronary artery ligation (70-min occlusion followed by reperfusion). ST elevation on the electrocardiogram confirmed MI. Four weeks post-MI, animals were randomized into cohorts without (MI, n=4) or with (CP, n=4) cell therapy. Human CP cells were generated from bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells using an established cardiopoiesis protocol. Media (15 µL), with or without CP cells (600,000 cells/heart), were epicardially delivered in infarcted left ventricles.

### Sample Protocol
Four weeks post-therapy (i.e., 8 weeks post-MI), age-matched control (Ctrl, n=4), infarcted (MI, n=4), and infarcted plus CP cell therapy (CP, n=4) hearts were excised and rinsed in phosphate buffered saline. Ventricles were snap frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80°C. Proteins were isolated by sequential extraction, modified to maximize yield. Tissue was subjected to 3 rounds of mechanical homogenization by 25-30 pestle strokes at 4°C in 150 µL of cytosolic (Cyto) extraction buffer, containing 25 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, pH 7.4, Mini-Complete™ protease inhibitor (-)EDTA cocktail (Roche), and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma). Homogenates were centrifuged 5 min at 16,000 g, with supernatant pooled as the ‘Cyto’ extract. Remaining pellet was subjected to 3 rounds of homogenization at 4°C in 150 µL of membrane, myofilament, and organelle (MMO) extraction buffer, consisting of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 2% 3-((3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio)-1-propanesulfonic acid, and centrifuged 5 min at 16,000 g with supernatant pooled as the ‘MMO’ extract. Extracts were quantified in triplicate by Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad) using the microassay procedure with bovine γ-globulin standard. Samples (30 µg) were resolved by 10.5-14% gradient Criterion Tris-HCL precast (Bio-Rad) sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, using separate gels for ‘Cyto’ and ‘MMO’ extracts, and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250. Gels were processed for mass spectrometry by segmenting mass ranges of each extract lane to reduce complexity of each individual mass spectrometry run. Each of the 12 lanes of the Cyto extract gel represented an individual heart, and was processed into 9 individual samples per lane for MS/MS analysis (108 samples), while each of the 12 lanes of the MMO extract gel representing the second extract of the same 12 hearts, was processed into 10 individual samples per lane for MS/MS analysis (120 samples). In total, the proteins from each heart were separated into 19 distinct fractions prior to mass spectrometry, for 228 total MS/MS runs (12 hearts x 19 fractions per heart). Gel sections were de-stained and prepared for MS by reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion, followed by peptide extraction. Dried tryptic peptides were re-suspended in 0.2% formic acid, 0.1% TFA, and 0.002% zwittergent 3-16 (Calbiochem). Samples were analyzed by nano-flow liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS) using a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system. Sample run order, randomized to negate chromatographic bias, alternated with 30 min blank runs to avoid carry-over. Peptides were loaded onto a 250 nL OPTI-PAK trap (Optimize Technologies) packed with Michrom Magic C8, 5 µm solid phase (Michrom Bioresources). Chromatography was performed using 0.2% formic acid in solvents A (98% water, 2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile, 10% isopropanol, 10% water), over a 2-45% B gradient for 60 min at 400 nL/min through a 100 μm x 35 cm PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) hand-packed with Agilent Poroshell 120 EC-C18 (Agilent Scientific). MS1 survey scans were acquired from 350-2000 m/z at resolution 70,000 (at 200 m/z) with an automatic gain control target of 3×10E6 ions and 60-ms maximum ion inject time, followed by high energy collisional dissociation MS/MS on the top 15 ions at resolution 17,500 targeting 2×10E5 ions with 60-ms maximum ion inject time. Dynamic exclusion placed selected ions on an exclusion list for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in MaxQuant v1.5.1.2, using the Andromeda search engine for multidimensional label-free quantification (LFQ) based on extracted ion chromatogram with applied fastLFQ settings, to enable relative quantification across cohorts. Spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse database, combining forward and reverse peptides as decoys to estimate false discovery rate (FDR), calculated as proportion of reverse relative to forward plus reverse sequence matches. Calculated FDR was 0.28%. MS/MS search parameters included trypsin/P digestion, with fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of amino-terminal protein acetylation, glutamate to pyro-glutamate modification and methionine oxidation. Maximum charge was +7, with up to 3 dynamic modifications, 3 missed cleavages, and a minimum of 7 amino acids per peptide. Mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for first search and 10.5 ppm for main search, with isotope mass tolerance of 2 ppm. LFQ included spectral features matching a theoretical MS/MS peptide spectrum, with peptide identification maximized by MaxQuant’s ‘Match Across Groups’ feature assigning spectral features from one MS/MS run to corresponding aligned masses and retention times detected in other runs. Identified peptides were rolled into protein assignments, with matches requiring a minimum of 2 peptides. Protein differential expression was calculated using R. Protein spectral intensities were normalized using total ion current, followed by log2 transformation to generate normal distributions. This was iterated for each protein, with data fit to a generalized linear model of counts versus groups assuming Gaussian distribution. Protein levels were compared by two-sided ANOVA, with Gaussian linked function, using a minimum 2-fold change, p<0.01 considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiopoietic stem cells have reached advanced clinical testing for ischemic heart failure. To profile their molecular influence on recipient hearts, systems proteomics was here applied in a chronic model of infarction randomized with and without human cardiopoietic stem cell treatment. Multidimensional label-free tandem mass spectrometry resolved and quantified 3987 proteins constituting the cardiac proteome. Infarction altered 450 proteins, reduced to 283 by stem cell treatment. Notably, cell therapy non-stochastically reversed a majority of infarction-provoked changes, remediating 85% of disease-affected protein clusters. Pathway and network analysis decoded functional reorganization, distinguished by prioritization of vasculogenesis, cardiac development, organ regeneration, and differentiation. Subproteome restoration nullified adverse ischemic effects, validated by echo-/electro-cardiographic documentation of improved cardiac chamber size, reduced QT prolongation and augmented ejection fraction post-cell therapy. Collectively, cardiopoietic stem cell intervention transitioned infarcted hearts from a cardiomyopathic trajectory towards pre-disease. Systems proteomics thus offers utility to delineate and interpret complex molecular regenerative outcomes.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Systems biology, Regenerative medicine, Proteomics, Cardiopoiesis

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic Center for Regenerative Medicine Department of Cardiovascular Medicine Rochester, MN, USA

### Submitter
D Kent Arrell

### Lab Head
Dr Andre Terzic, MD, PhD
Mayo Clinic Center for Regenerative Medicine Department of Cardiovascular Medicine Rochester, MN, USA


