### Accession
PXD033115

### Title
Quantitative analysis of redox proteome reveals protein thiol switches regulating fundamental processes in developmental hematopoiesis

### Description
Fetal and adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are characterized by distinct redox homeostasis that may influence their differential cellular behaviour in normal and malignant haematopoiesis. In this work, we have applied a quantitative mass spectrometry-based redox proteomic approach to comprehensively describe reversible cysteine modifications in primary mouse fetal and adult HSPCs. We defined the redox state of 4455 cysteines in fetal and adult HSPCs and demonstrated a higher susceptibility to oxidation of protein thiols in fetal HSPCs. Our data identified ontogenically active redox switches in proteins with a pronounced role in metabolism and protein homeostasis. Additional redox proteomic analysis identified redox switches acting in mitochondrial respiration as well as protein homeostasis to be triggered during onset of MLL-ENL leukemogenesis in fetal HSPCs. Our data has demonstrated that redox signalling contributes to the regulation of fundamental processes of developmental hematopoiesis and has pinpointed potential targetable redox-sensitive proteins in in utero-initiated MLL-rearranged leukaemia. An H9 human embryonic stem cells cell line was applied to validate data from the primary cells.

### Sample Protocol
H9 human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) with a normal 46, XX karyotype were incubated with vehicle, 100 or 500 µM H2O2 for 2 h at 37°C. Cells in 10% TCA corresponding to 400’000 cells/replicate were sonicated 5x 15s and centrifuged. Firstly, naturally occurring free protein thiols were blocked by suspending pellet in lysis buffer (LB, 3% sodium deoxycholate [SDC]/200mM triethylammonium bicarbonate [TEAB]/1mM EDTA) with 4 mM of a first label of iodoTMT (“iodoTMT1”) and incubation for 2h at 37 °C. Unreacted iodoTMT1 was removed by precipitation with acetone (1:4). Next, reversibly oxidized protein thiols were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethel)phosphine (TCEP)/LB for 1 h at 50 °C followed by blocking of new free thiols with 4mM of a second label of iodoTMT (“iodoTMT2”) for 2h at 37 °C. Unreacted iodoTMT2 was removed by acetone precipitation. Labelled Ctrl, 100 or 500 µM H2O2 treated samples were combined for each replicate and digested with LysC (Wako) (enzyme: protein = 1: 50 w/w) in 1% RapiGest/50mM ammonium bicarbonate for 4 h followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (Promega; enzyme: protein = 1: 50 w/w). RapiGest was precipitated by addition of 0.5% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) and removed by centrifugation. An aliquot corresponding to 4 µg of sample was stored for full sample analysis (“Full fraction”). Remaining sample was enriched with immobilized anti-TMT antibody resin (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer protocol. All fractions (Full, Flow through, Enriched) were dried by vacuum centrifugation and cleaned-up using in-house made C18 micro-spin columns. Samples were dissolved in 4% ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to analysis by LC/MS.MS analyses for redox proteomics experiments were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS instrument (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) using a 120 min linear gradient separation followed by a synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 method. Injected peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (3 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 20 mm length, nanoViper fitting), followed by gradient elution of peptides on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 100 Å column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 250 mm length, nanoViper fitting) using 0.1% (v/v) FA in LC-MS grade water (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN (solvent B) as the mobile phases. Peptides were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 9 µl/min onto the trapping column and eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 300 nl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B was increased in a linear fashion from 5% to 10% in 2 minutes, followed by an increase to 25% in 85 minutes and finally to 60% in an additional 20 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Stainless-Steel Nano-bore emitter (150 µm OD x 30 µm ID; 40 mm length; Thermo Scientific) using a spray voltage of 2.0 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275 °C. Data acquisition was carried out using a data-dependent SPS-MS3 method. The full MS scan was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 380 to 1580 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 at full-width-half-max (FWHM) using an automatic gain control (AGC) of 4.0e5 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms. The top ten most intense ions selected in the first MS scan were isolated for ion trap collision-induced dissociation MS2 (CID-MS2) at a precursor isolation window width of 0.7 m/z, an AGC of 1.5e4, a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The precursor selection range for MS3 was set to an m/z range of 400–1200 in MS2. Orbitrap higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD)-MS3 scans were acquired in parallel mode with SPS (ten precursors), a normalized collision energy of 55% and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM in a range of 100–500 m/z. The fragment ion isolation width was set to 2 m/z, the AGC was 1.0e5 and the maximum injection time 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data from all redox proteomic experiments were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.6.5 80. For data including MS3-based acquisition, ‘Reporter ion MS3’mode with quantification of cysteine-specific iodoTMT labels reporter ions was used. Data were searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine against the Swissprot human data base (downloaded 2017.07.05; 20,160 protein entries) respectively, together with commonly observed contaminants and reversed sequences for all entries. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was set as the enzyme in specific digestion mode, allowing two missed cleavage sites. No fixed modifications were considered. The ‘match between runs’ algorithm was applied. Precursor and MS/MS fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. An FDR of 1% was required for identification at protein, site and PSM level. The minimum ratio count for protein quantification was set to two and razor and unique peptides were considered for protein quantification. Full, enriched and flow-through fractions of each replicate were jointly processed. Data was filtered for contaminants, peptides identified only by site and non-cysteine peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Fetal and adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) are characterized by distinct redox homeostasis that may influence their differential cellular behavior in normal and malignant hematopoiesis. In this work, we have applied a quantitative mass spectrometry-based redox proteomic approach to comprehensively describe reversible cysteine modifications in primary mouse fetal and adult HSPCs. We defined the redox state of 4,438 cysteines in fetal and adult HSPCs and demonstrated a higher susceptibility to oxidation of protein thiols in fetal HSPCs. Our data identified ontogenic changes to oxidation state of thiols in proteins with a pronounced role in metabolism and protein homeostasis. Additional redox proteomic analysis identified oxidation changes to thiols acting in mitochondrial respiration as well as protein homeostasis to be triggered during onset of MLL-ENL leukemogenesis in fetal HSPCs. Our data has demonstrated that redox signaling contributes to the regulation of fundamental processes of developmental hematopoiesis and has pinpointed potential targetable redox-sensitive proteins in in utero-initiated MLL-rearranged leukemia.

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cells, Oxidative stress, Redox proteomics, Hydrogen peroxide, Oxidative modifications

### Affiliations
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
BIOCEV, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Kristyna Pimkova

### Lab Head
Dr Kristyna Pimkova
Lund Stem Cell Center, Division of Molecular Hematology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


