### Accession
PXD007684

### Title
Cell Surface Capture of mouse PSC-derived Cardiac Progenitor Cells

### Description
The identification of cell surface proteins on stem cells or stem cell derivatives is a key strategy for the functional characterization, isolation, and understanding of stem cell population dynamics. Here, using an integrated mass spectrometry and microarray based approach, we analyzed the surface proteome and transcriptome of cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) generated from the stage-specific differentiation of mouse and human pluripotent stem cells. Through bioinformatic analysis, we have identified and characterized FZD4 as a new marker for lateral plate mesoderm. Additionally, we utilized FZD4, in conjunction with FLK1 and PDGFRA, to further purify CPCs and increase cardiomyocyte (CM) enrichment in both mouse and human systems. Moreover, we have shown that NORRIN presented to FZD4 further increases CM output via proliferation through the canonical WNT pathway. Taken together, these findings demonstrate a role for FZD4 in mammalian cardiac development.

### Sample Protocol
CSC was performed as described previously (Wollscheid et al., 2009). In brief, cells or EBs were dissociated using 1 mM EDTA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10% FBS (Hyclone). Exposed extracellular aldehydes were then oxidized with 1.6 mM sodium meta-periodate (NaIO4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and reacted for 1 hour with 5 mM biocytin hydrazide (Biotium). The cells were then washed and lysed by sonication in a hypotonic lysis buffer, and the nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation. The supernatant containing the membranes and the cytoplasm were subjected to ultra-centrifugation. The microsomal pellet was collected and solubilized by addition of 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) and sonication. After overnight trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) digestion, the biontinylated peptides were coupled to streptavidin beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific), thoroughly washed, and enzymatically released by PNGaseF (NEB), which cleaves N-glycosylated peptides at their backbone. Peptides were then cleaned-up over C18-tips (The NestGroup) and subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1000 nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, which was equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out on an RP-HPLC column (75 µm × 10 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (Magic C18 AQ 3 µm, Michrom BioResources) using a linear gradient from 90% solvent A (water, 0.2% formic acid, 1% acetonitrile) and 10% solvent B (water, 0.2% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 65% solvent A and 35% solvent B for 60 minutes at a flow rate of 0.2 µL/minute. The data acquisition mode was set to acquire one high-resolution first stage scan (ms1) in the ion cyclotron resonance cell followed by 10 collision induced dissociation mass scans in the linear ion trap. For a high-resolution mass scan, 106 ions were accumulated over a maximum time of 500 ms, and the full width at half maximum resolution was set to 60,000 (at m/z 300). Only mass signals exceeding 500 ion counts triggered a second stage (ms2) attempt, and 104 ions were acquired for an ms2 scan over a maximum time of 250 ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 35% and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. Singly charged ions were excluded from triggering ms2 scans.  All acquired mass spectra were searched against the International Protein Index database (Version 3.26) using the SEQUEST algorithm (Eng et al., 1994). The SEQUEST database search criteria included: 0.2 Da mass tolerance for the precursor ion, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for the fragment ions, variable modifications of 0.984016 Da for asparagines (representing formerly N-glycosylated asparagines after deamidation through the PNGaseF treatment) and 15.994915 Da for methionines (covering rapidly oxidizing methionines), carbamidomethylation as static modification for cysteines, at least one tryptic terminus, and two missed cleavage sites. Statistical analysis of the data, including peptide and protein identification was performed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline v4.3 (TPP; Seattle Proteome Center) including PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet (Keller et al., 2005). Peptides and proteins were detected and quantified at a confidence score of >1.3 using the TPP in combination with Progenesis software. The ProteinProphet probability score was set such that the false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 1% as determined by ProteinProphet. Protein quantification was performed using Progenesis (Nonlinear Dynamics). After manually improving the alignment, peptides were quantified based on ms1 intensity, and filtered for sequences that have a UniProt accession number. Overall protein abundance was estimated using a 10% trimmed mean of all identified peptide abundances. Significance of differential expression in protein abundance was assessed by ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
The identification of cell surface proteins on stem cells or stem cell derivatives is a key strategy for the functional characterization, isolation, and understanding of stem cell population dynamics. Here, using an integrated mass spectrometry- and microarray-based approach, we analyzed the surface proteome and transcriptome of cardiac progenitor cells (CPCs) generated from the stage-specific differentiation of mouse and human pluripotent stem cells. Through bioinformatics analysis, we have identified and characterized FZD4 as a marker for lateral plate mesoderm. Additionally, we utilized FZD4, in conjunction with FLK1 and PDGFRA, to further purify CPCs and increase cardiomyocyte (CM) enrichment in both mouse and human systems. Moreover, we have shown that NORRIN presented to FZD4 further increases CM output via proliferation through the canonical WNT pathway. Taken together, these findings demonstrate a role for FZD4 in mammalian cardiac development.

### Keywords
Cardiac progenitor cell, Mouse, Pluripotent stem cell, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Toronto
IBBME, Stem Cell Bioengineering, University of Toronto, Canada

### Submitter
Peter Zandstra

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Zandstra
IBBME, Stem Cell Bioengineering, University of Toronto, Canada


