### Accession
PXD001039

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of the Milk Fat Globule Membrane: new  insights into lipid droplet secretion from the mammary  epithelial cell

### Description
Lipid droplets  are  secreted into  milk  by a complex  process which begins  by burgeoning  oflipids  at  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  of  the  mammary  epithelial  cell  (MEC).  Lipid  dropletsenveloped by organelle-derived phospholipids reach the apical pole of the cell where they arewrapped by the plasma membrane to be secreted as fat globules into milk.  Analyzing the fineprotein  composition  of  the  Milk  Fat  Globule  Membrane  (MFGM),  the  triple-layeredmembrane surrounding milk lipid droplets can therefore provide mechanistic clues to betterunderstand lipid droplet biosynthesis and secretion pathways. We combined a high sensitiveQ  Exactive  LC-MS/MS  analysis  of  MFGM-derived  peptides  with  the  use  of  an  in-house database intended to improve protein identification in the goat species.  Using this approach, we performed the identification of 442 functional groups of proteins in the MFGM from goatmilk.  To  get  a  more  comprehensive  view  of  intracellular  mechanisms  driving  lipid  dropletdynamics in the MEC, we decided to investigate for the first time whether MFGM proteinswere  phosphorylated.  A  phosphopeptide  enrichment  approach  let  us  pinpoint  271  sites  ofphosphorylation  on  124  unique  goat  MFGM  proteins.  Enriched  gene  ontology  termsassociated with phosphorylated MFGM proteins were protein transport and actin cytoskeletonorganization.  Gained  data  are  discussed  with  regard  to  lipid  secretory  mechanisms  in  the MEC.

### Sample Protocol
Individual   milk   samples   (morning   milking)   were   collected   from   six   A/A   genotype  86  primiparous  goats  at  peak  lactation  (91  ±  7  days  post  partum) . For protein extraction, 45 ml-milk samples were used. MFGM were prepared as previously described (Reinhardt et al, 2006). For proteins identification, twenty-five micrograms of MFGM proteins were solubilized in the Laemmli buffer and resolved by 10 % SDS-PAGE. 3 slice of gel were cut in 23 peaces and proteins were reduced  alkylated and digest with trypsin. Sample were injected on the nanoLC-MS/MS (Qexactive). Proteins sample were named : P3/P5/P6. For the phosphoproteome, 5 mg of the crude protein were cleaned with phenol, digested with lysin-C and trypsin and prefractionnated on th SCX column. Titanium beads were add on each fraction of the SCX  and phosphopeptides eluted for analyseis in nanLC-MS/MS (Qexactive).  Phospho sample were named : Besma_X. Q  Exactive  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific)  coupled  with  Eksigent  nano  LC  (AB-sciex)  were   used  for  the  nano-LC-MS/MS  analysis.    4  µl  were  injected  on  the  nanoLc-Ultra  system  153  (Eksigent) chain.

### Data Protocol
The Goat database  was downloaded from Goat Gene Database site  (http://goat.kiz.ac.cn/GGD/help.htm,  january  2013,  22,175  protein  entries).  In  addition,  the  capra  and  bovin  database  from  UniprotKB  were  used  (http://www.uniprot.org/,  may  2013   5,352  entries  for  capra  and  38,794 entries  for  bovin).  These  databases  were  merged  and in conjonction with reverse and contaminants databases, were searched by X!Tandem (version 2012.10.01.1,   http://www.thegpm.org/tandem/)   using   X!TandemPipeline   (version   3.3.0) developed  by  PAPPSO  platform  (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/).  Enzymatic  cleavage  was  declared as a trypsin digestion with one possible misscleavage. Cys carboxyamidomethylation  and Met oxidation were set to static and possible modifications, respectively. Precursor mass  was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Th. A refinement search was added with  similar  parameters  except  that  semi-trypsic  peptide,  possible  N-ter  proteins  acetylation  and  phosphorylation of serine threonine or tyrosine were searched for the phosphoproteins. For data of proteomic, only peptides with a E value smaller than 0.1 were reported. Identified  proteins were filtered and grouped using X!TandemPipeline   (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/) according to : (1) A minimum of two different   peptides was required with a E value smaller than 0.05, (2) a protein E value (calculated as the   product  of  unique  peptide  E  values)  smaller  than  10-4.  To take  redundancy  into  account, proteins with at least one peptide in common were grouped. This allowed to group proteins of  similar function. Within each group, proteins with at least one specific peptide relatively to  190  other members of the group were reported as sub-groups.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanisms of milk lipid secretion are highly controversial. Analyzing the fine protein composition of the "milk fat globule membrane" (MFGM), the triple-layered membrane surrounding milk lipid droplets (LDs) can provide mechanistic clues to better understand LD biosynthesis and secretion pathways in mammary epithelial cells (MECs). We therefore combined a high-sensitive Q-Exactive LC-MS/MS analysis of MFGM-derived peptides to the use of an in-house database intended to improve protein identification in the goat species. Using this approach, we performed the identification of 442 functional groups of proteins in the MFGM from goat milk. To get a more dynamic view of intracellular mechanisms driving LD dynamics in the MECs, we decided to investigate for the first time whether MFGM proteins were phosphorylated. MFGM proteins were sequentially digested by lysine-C and trypsin proteases and the resulting peptides were fractionated by a strong cation exchange chromatography. Titanium beads were used to enrich phosphopeptides from strong cation exchange chromatography eluted fractions. This approach lets us pinpoint 271 sites of phosphorylation on 124 unique goat MFGM proteins. Enriched GO terms associated with phosphorylated MFGM proteins were protein transport and actin cytoskeleton organization. Gained data are discussed with regard to lipid secretory mechanisms in the MECs. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001039 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001039).

### Keywords
Lipid droplet, Secretion, Phosphoproteome, Mammary epithelial cell, Milk

### Affiliations
INRA
INRA, UMR 1313 Unité Génétique Animale animale et Biologie Intégrative

### Submitter
HENRY CELINE

### Lab Head
Dr Christelle CEBO
INRA, UMR 1313 Unité Génétique Animale animale et Biologie Intégrative


