### Accession
PXD009823

### Title
Chromatin phosphoproteomics unravels a function for AT-hook motif nuclear localized protein AHL13 in PAMP-triggered immunity

### Description
Mitogen-activated protein kinases constitute essential signaling mechanisms linking external signal perception to gene expression in all eukaryotes. In Arabidopsis, MAPKs are found in the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments, but no nuclear phosphoproteomic studies of mapk mutants were performed so far. In this work, we report a panel of nuclear and chromatin-associated targets by performing phosphoproteome analyses of wild-type and mpk3, mpk4, and mpk6 mutant plants. Since the three MAPKs play a role in cell division, development and innate immunity, we also analyzed the phosphoproteomes following microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP) treatment. A total of 165 proteins were identified to be differentially phosphorylated when compared between genotypes and in response to MAMP treatment. Using different criteria, including different biochemical and interaction assays, a number of the putative MAPK substrates were validated as true substrates for different MAPKs. Signaling networks for the three MAPKs revealed their common role in RNA transcription, RNA processing and chromatin organization, but also specific roles in development and organelle organization. Overall, this study unravels a set of chromatin-associated targets for these three MAPKs and promises novel insights into yet undiscovered domains linking MAPK signaling to a number of chromatin-related events.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear proteins (nucleoplasmic and chromatin-linked) were obtained from Arabidopsis plants (WT plants as well as mpk3, mpk4 and mpk6 deletion mutants) grown in liquid medium and treated for 15 min with the peptide flg22 or left otherwise. After trypsin digestion, phosphorylated peptides were enriched on an IMAC resin. The resulting samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument, while acquiring pairs of CID MSA spectra on every precursor ion.

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data files were interpreted by the program Mascot. The database TAIR10 was explored, while specifying trypsin as the enzyme, allowing 2 missed cleavages, considering phospho(ST) and phospho(Y) as variable modifications and 5 ppm and 0.6 Da as mass errors in MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The fragment types considered for MS/MS spectra interpretation were those specified in the ESI-trap definition of Mascot. Relative quantification of phosphopeptide abundance was obtained using MassChroQ. We searched for phosphopeptides being differentially abundant between the genotypes and depending on the treatment by looking for sequences specifically absent in some conditions and, using a two-way ANOVA, for species whose abundance was more subtly modulated.

### Publication Abstract
In many eukaryotic systems during immune responses, mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) link cytoplasmic signaling to chromatin events by targeting transcription factors, chromatin remodeling complexes, and the RNA polymerase machinery. So far, knowledge on these events is scarce in plants and no attempts have been made to focus on phosphorylation events of chromatin-associated proteins. Here we carried out chromatin phosphoproteomics upon elicitor-induced activation of <i>Arabidopsis</i> The events in WT were compared with those in <i>mpk3</i>, <i>mpk4</i>, and <i>mpk6</i> mutant plants to decipher specific MAPK targets. Our study highlights distinct signaling networks involving MPK3, MPK4, and MPK6 in chromatin organization and modification, as well as in RNA transcription and processing. Among the chromatin targets, we characterized the AT-hook motif containing nuclear localized (AHL) DNA-binding protein AHL13 as a substrate of immune MAPKs. <i>AHL13</i> knockout mutant plants are compromised in pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-induced reactive oxygen species production, expression of defense genes, and PAMP-triggered immunity. Transcriptome analysis revealed that <i>AHL13</i> regulates key factors of jasmonic acid biosynthesis and signaling and affects immunity toward <i>Pseudomonas syringae</i> and <i>Botrytis cinerea</i> pathogens. Mutational analysis of the phosphorylation sites of AHL13 demonstrated that phosphorylation regulates AHL13 protein stability and thereby its immune functions.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Immune mapks, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
CNRS
KAUST

### Submitter
Delphine PFLIEGER

### Lab Head
Dr Heribert Hirt
KAUST


