### Accession
PXD041736

### Title
Label-free Quantification of Host-Cell Protein Impurity in a Recombinant Hemoglobin Reference Material

### Description
Quantitative analysis depends on pure-substance primary calibrators with known mass fractions of impurity. The datasets included were generated using mass spectrometry  for the evaluation of label-free quantification (LFQ) as a method for determining the mass fraction of host-cell proteins (HCPs) in bioengineered proteins. For this purpose, hemoglobin-A2 (HbA2) was used, as obtained by overexpression in E.coli. Two different materials had been produced: natural, and U-15N-labeled HbA2. To quantify impurity, precursor ion (MS1-) intensities were integrated over all E.coli-proteins identified and divided by the intensities obtained for HbA2. This ratio was calibrated against the corresponding results for an E.coli-cell lysate, that had been spiked at known mass-ratios to pure HbA2. To demonstrate the universal  applicability of LFQ, further proteomes (yeast and human K562) were then alternatively used for calibration and were found to produce comparable results.  Valid results were also obtained when the complexity of the calibrator was reduced to a mix of nine proteins.

### Sample Protocol
To a 30 μL aliquot of sample (recombinant HbA2) or calibrator, 70 μL of Tris-solution  (35 mg Tris-base, 46 mg Tris HCl, dissolved in 1 mL water) were added. Proteolysis (37 °C) was started by the addition of 10 μL of trypsin solution (1 mg/mL in 50mM acetic acid). After 10, 70, 130, 190 and 250 min, further 10 μL aliquots of trypsin solution were added. In parallel, 40 μL aliquots of acetonitrile were added after 10, 30, 60, 90, 120 and 150 min. The sample or calibrator was further incubated at 37 °C overnight.  Dithiothreitol (DTT) and 2-iodoacetamide were used for reduction and alkylation, respectively. The sample or calibrator was desalted using solid-phase extraction (SPE)  and subjected to nLC-MS/MS analysis.  An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik) was used for the analysis of the proteolysed sample and calibrator.  Peptides were trapped on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 μm, 0.3x5 mm) and then separated  on a Bruker Fifteen nanoFlow column (15 cm x 75 μm, C18, 1.9 μm, 120 Å) using a linear  water-acetonitrile gradient (210 min) from 1 to 60% B and from 60% to 80% B within 20 min (with solvent A: water, 0.1 vol.-% formic acid and B: acetonitrile, 0.1 vol.-% formic acid) at 40 °C. The flow rate was 300 nl/min. The timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was equipped with a CaptiveSpray ion source. The mass spectrometer was run using the DDA-PASEF-standard- 1.1 sec-cycletime method, as provided by Bruker.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio Xpro (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) was used for feature detection/database search and precursor ion (MS1) quantification. Databases for E.coli-, Saccharomyces cerevisiae-,  human proteome and the mixture of 9 proteins were obtained as FASTA files.  FASTA files of human hemoglobin subunit alpha and delta (Uniprot: P69905 and P02042) were added to the databases of non-human proteomes. Settings applied for data analysis were: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as  fixed modification, methionine oxidation and glutamine or asparagine deamidation as variable modifications.  A maximum of two modifications per peptide was allowed. With the human proteome, glycosylation was set as an additional variable modification using the built-in glycosylation list. Trypsin/P was set as the enzyme and no more than two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. The tolerance for monoisotopic mass of precursor ions and fragment ions was 15 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. For the retention time and ion-mobility of an identified peptide the shift tolerance between different runs was 3 min and 5%, respectively. Mass correction was enabled for precursor ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was 1% at the peptide- and protein-level. Results of quantification were obtained as peak areas at the protein-level.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative analysis relies on pure-substance primary calibrators with known mass fractions of impurity. Here, label-free quantification (LFQ) is being evaluated as a readily available, reliable method for determining the mass fraction of host cell proteins (HCPs) in bioengineered proteins which are intended for use as protein calibration standards. In this study a purified hemoglobin-A2 (HbA<sub>2</sub>) protein, obtained through its overexpression in E. coli, was used. Two different materials were produced: natural and U<sup>15</sup>N-labeled HbA<sub>2</sub>. For the quantification of impurities, precursor ion (MS1-) intensities were integrated over all E. coli proteins identified and divided by the intensities obtained for HbA<sub>2</sub>. This ratio was calibrated against the corresponding results for an E. coli cell lysate, which had been spiked at known mass ratios to pure HbA<sub>2</sub>. To demonstrate the universal applicability of LFQ, further proteomes (yeast and human K562) were then alternatively used for calibration and found to produce comparable results. Valid results were also obtained when the complexity of the calibrator was reduced to a mix of just nine proteins, and a minimum of five proteins was estimated to be sufficient to keep the sampling error below 15%. For the studied materials, HbA<sub>2</sub> mass fractions (or purities) of 923 and 928 mg(HbA<sub>2</sub>)/g(total protein) were found with expanded uncertainties (U) of 2.8 and 1.3%, resp. Value assignment by LFQ thus contributes up to about 3% of the overall uncertainty of HbA<sub>2</sub> quantification when these materials are used as calibrators. Further purification of the natural HbA<sub>2</sub> yielded a mass fraction of 999.1&#xa0;mg/g, with a negligible&#xa0;uncertainty (U&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02%), though at a significant loss of material. If an overall uncertainty of 5% is acceptable for protein quantification, working with the original materials would therefore definitely be viable, circumventing the need of further purification.

### Keywords
Host-cell proteins, Dda-pasef, Protein reference materials, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB)
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB),  Braunschweig und Berlin, D-38116 Braunschweig, Germany

### Submitter
Cristian Arsene

### Lab Head
Dr Cristian Arsene
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB),  Braunschweig und Berlin, D-38116 Braunschweig, Germany


