### Accession
PXD015668

### Title
Yeast AGC-kinases phospho-proteomics

### Description
Protein phosphorylation cascades play a central role in the regulation of cell growth and protein kinases PKA, Sch9 and Ypk1 take centre stage in regulating this process in S. cerevisiae. To understand how these kinases co-ordinately regulate cellular functions we compared the phospho-proteome of exponentially growing cells without and with acute chemical inhibition of PKA, Sch9 and Ypk1.

### Sample Protocol
Three replicates each of DMSO- and 1NM-PP1- (Merck) treated sch9as, pkaas, pkaas+sch9as and ypk1as cultures were prepared for label-free phospho-proteomics as previously described (31). In brief, all cultures were diluted to OD 0.2 and grown to exponential phase (OD 0.7-0.8). Each strain was treated with 500 nM 1NM-PP1 or DMSO for 15 minutes after which ice cold 100% TCA was added to a final concentration of 6%. The samples were incubated on ice for 30 minutes. After centrifugation the cells were washed twice with acetone and kept at -70oC. Cell pellets were suspended in a buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 5 mM EDTA, then lysed by beat beating. For each biological replicate, 3 mg protein were reduced using 5 mM TCEP, alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin (1:125 w/w). Reverse phase chromatography was used to purify samples before phospho-peptide enrichment, which was performed with titanium dioxide resin (1.25 mg resin for each sample) (22). Isolated phospho-peptides were analyzed on an LTQ-Obritrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A 90 minute gradient, starting with 3% and ending with 23% acetonitrile, was used for liquid chromatography elution. The 4 most intense ions detected in each MS1 measurement were selected for MS2 fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed with the MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.0.16), which uses the Andomeda MS/MS spectrum search engine (32,33). The following search settings were used: enzyme was Trypsin/P with 2 allowed missed cleavages. For precursor ions the first search tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the main search tolerance to 4.5 ppm and for fragment ions the tolerance was set to 0.5 Th. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were used as variable modifications (maximal 5 modifications per peptide). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. The SGD yeast protein database (https://downloads.yeastgenome.org/sequence/S288C_reference/orf_protein/ orf_trans_all.fasta.gz; 6713 entries) from 2015-01-13 was used to match the spectra. Finally, a peptide and modification site FDR of 0.01 was applied to filter peptide spectrum matches (PSMs).

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation cascades play a central role in the regulation of cell growth and protein kinases PKA, Sch9 and Ypk1 take center stage in regulating this process in <i>S. cerevisiae</i> To understand how these kinases co-ordinately regulate cellular functions we compared the phospho-proteome of exponentially growing cells without and with acute chemical inhibition of PKA, Sch9 and Ypk1. Sites hypo-phosphorylated upon PKA and Sch9 inhibition were preferentially located in RRxS/T-motifs suggesting that many are directly phosphorylated by these enzymes. Interestingly, when inhibiting Ypk1 we not only detected several hypo-phosphorylated sites in the previously reported RxRxxS/T-, but also in an RRxS/T-motif. Validation experiments revealed that neutral trehalase Nth1, a known PKA target, is additionally phosphorylated and activated downstream of Ypk1. Signaling through Ypk1 is therefore more closely related to PKA- and Sch9-signaling than previously appreciated and may perform functions previously only attributed to the latter kinases.

### Keywords
Sch9, Ypk1, Pka, Chemical genetics, Agc-kinases, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Dpt. of Molecular Biology, Sc III, University of Geneva
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Michael Plank

### Lab Head
Dr Robbie Loewith
Dpt. of Molecular Biology, Sc III, University of Geneva


