### Accession
PXD021759

### Title
Catechol-modified protein extracts from human heart mitochondria after APBA chromatography

### Description
Catecholamine metabolism via monoamine oxidase (MAO) contributes to cardiac injury in models of ischemia and diabetes, but the pathogenic mechanisms involved are unclear. MAO deaminates norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA) to produce H2O2 and highly reactive ‘catecholaldehydes,’ which may be toxic to mitochondria due to the localization of MAO to the outer mitochondrial membrane. We performed a comprehensive analysis of catecholamine metabolism and its impact on mitochondrial energetics in atrial myocardium obtained from patients with and without type 2 diabetes.  This data set contains a list of human cardiac mitochondrial proteins that were isolated following aminophenylboronic acid (APBA) column chromatography, which allows for selective purification of catechol-modified proteins. Samples of human heart mitochondria were prepared from discarded atrial appendage biopsies taken during elective cardiac surgery. Following extraction via APBA, bands were excised from a gel and subjected to proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Patients recruited underwent elective coronary artery bypass graft or valve surgery and samples of human heart mitochondria were prepared from discarded atrial appendage biopsies.  We analyzed catecholamine metabolism in patients with and without type II diabetes by mitochondrial isolation and enrichment of potential catecholaldehyde adducts using an aminophenylboronic acid (APBA) column.  protein extracts eluted from the APBA column were then washed 5 times with cold PBS. 1× SDS sample-loading buffer was added to the beads, and the mixture boiled for 5 min. The gel was stained with Silver Stain kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and the bands corresponding to those indicated with arrows in Figure 5 were manually excised, minced digested in-gel. Shotgun proteomics performed on an Orbitrap LUMOS equiped with an nanoEasy LC was used to identify catechol-modified proteins among the APBA eluates.

### Data Protocol
spectral searches were performed with both Mascot version 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA) and Byonic search engines ver. 2.8.2 (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA). Search databases were composed of the Uniprot KB for species 9606 (Human) downloaded 10/24/2017 containing 92645 sequences.  Both Mascot and Byonic search results were combined and validated using Scaffold ver. 4.8.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). Proteins assignments required a minimum of two peptides established at 80% probability (Local FDR algorithm) and an overall protein FDR < 1% (assigned by Protein Prophet).

### Publication Abstract
<b><i>Aims:</i></b> Catecholamine metabolism <i>via</i> monoamine oxidase (MAO) contributes to cardiac injury in models of ischemia and diabetes, but the pathogenic mechanisms involved are unclear. MAO deaminates norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine to produce H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and highly reactive "catecholaldehydes," which may be toxic to mitochondria due to the localization of MAO to the outer mitochondrial membrane. We performed a comprehensive analysis of catecholamine metabolism and its impact on mitochondrial energetics in atrial myocardium obtained from patients with and without type 2 diabetes. <b><i>Results:</i></b> Content and maximal activity of MAO-A and MAO-B were higher in the myocardium of patients with diabetes and they were associated with body mass index. Metabolomic analysis of atrial tissue from these patients showed decreased catecholamine levels in the myocardium, supporting an increased flux through MAOs. Catecholaldehyde-modified protein adducts were more abundant in myocardial tissue extracts from patients with diabetes and were confirmed to be MAO dependent. NE treatment suppressed mitochondrial ATP production in permeabilized myofibers from patients with diabetes in an MAO-dependent manner. Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity was substantially decreased in atrial myocardium from these patients, and metabolomics confirmed lower levels of ALDH-catalyzed catecholamine metabolites. Proteomic analysis of catechol-modified proteins in isolated cardiac mitochondria from these patients identified &gt;300 mitochondrial proteins to be potential targets of these unique carbonyls. <b><i>Innovation and Conclusion:</i></b> These findings illustrate a unique form of carbonyl toxicity driven by MAO-mediated metabolism of catecholamines, and they reveal pathogenic factors underlying cardiometabolic disease. Importantly, they suggest that pharmacotherapies targeting aldehyde stress and catecholamine metabolism in heart may be beneficial in patients with diabetes and cardiac disease. <i>Antioxid. Redox Signal.</i> 35, 235-251.

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Human, Catecholamine metabolism, Cardiomyopathy, Mitochondrial proteomics, Mao, Atrial mitocardium, Atrial tissue

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Pharmaceutical Sciences & Experimental Therapeutics College of Pharmacy FOE Diabetes Research Center University of Iowa
University of Iowa, COM, Iowa City, IA 52241

### Submitter
robert Pope

### Lab Head
Dr Ethan J. Anderson
Associate Professor Pharmaceutical Sciences & Experimental Therapeutics College of Pharmacy FOE Diabetes Research Center University of Iowa


