### Accession
PXD006193

### Title
Discovery of dedicated EPHA2 inhibitors - Medicinal chemistry meets chemical proteomics

### Description
The receptor tyrosine kinase EPHA2 has gained interest as therapeutical drug target in cancer and infectious diseases in the past years. However, EPHA2 research and EPHA2 based therapies have been hampered by the lack of selective small molecule EPHA2 inhibitors. We report on the synthesis and evaluation of dedicated EPHA2 inhibitors based on the clinical BCR-ABL/SRC inhibitor Dasatinib as lead structure. We designed hybrid structures of Dasatinib, CHEBI-513815, PD-173955 and a known EPHB4 inhibitor aiming at the exploitation of the ATP pocket entrance and the ribose pocket. Medicinal chemistry and inhibitor design was guided by a chemical proteomic approach allowing for early selectivity profiling of the newly synthesized inhibitor candidates. Additionally, protein crystallography delivered detailed insight into the molecular interactions that consitute structure-affinity-relationships. Finally, the anti-proliferative effect of the inhibitor candidates was confirmed in the glioblastoma cell line SF-268. In this work, we discovered a novel EPHA2 inhibitor candidate 4a comprising an improved selectivity profile while maintaining potency against EPHA2 and anti-cancer activity in SF-268 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Kinobead selectivity profiling was performed as described previously (Medard, G., Pachl, F., Ruprecht, B., Klaeger, S., Heinzlmeir, S., Helm, D., Qiao, H., Ku, X., Wilhelm, M., Kuehne, T., Wu, Z., Dittmann, A., Hopf, C., Kramer, K., and Kuster, B. (2015) Optimized chemical proteomics assay for kinase inhibitor profiling, J Proteome Res 14, 1574-1586.) Briefly, 5 mg of a protein mixture of the four cell lines or a single cell line were incubated with compound dilution series in DMSO (3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 µM, 3 µM, 30 µM and DMSO) or single compound dose (5 µM) for 45 min at 4°C. The preincubation step was followed by incubation with kinobeads (35 µl settled beads). Bound proteins were eluted with LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) containing 50 mM DTT. For the calculation of a correction factor, the flowthrough of the DMSO control was incubated with fresh beads for a second time. Eluates were alkylated wit CAA and ingel digestion was performed. Peptides were then measured via LC-MS/MS on a nanoLCUltra 1D+ (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite. Up to 15 precursorer where subjected to fragmentation by HCD in a data dependent setup. A kinase peptide inclusionl ist was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.0.5), searching against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (human proteins only, 20,193 entries, downloaded 22.03.2016, internally annotated with PFAM domains) with Andromeda. Label free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Search results were filtered for 1% peptide and protein FDR, contaminants and reverse identifications. . For consistent peptide identification and protein grouping, the MS data for each compound was supplemented with 15 standard DMSO controls. Each compound was analyzed separately.

### Publication Abstract
The receptor tyrosine kinase EPHA2 has gained attention as a therapeutic drug target for cancer and infectious diseases. However, EPHA2 research and EPHA2-based therapies have been hampered by the lack of selective small-molecule inhibitors. Herein we report the synthesis and evaluation of dedicated EPHA2 inhibitors based on the clinical BCR-ABL/SRC inhibitor dasatinib as a lead structure. We designed hybrid structures of dasatinib and the previously known EPHA2 binders CHEMBL249097, PD-173955, and a known EPHB4 inhibitor in order to exploit both the ATP pocket entrance as well as the ribose pocket as binding epitopes in the kinase EPHA2. Medicinal chemistry and inhibitor design were guided by a chemical proteomics approach, allowing early selectivity profiling of the newly synthesized inhibitor candidates. Concomitant protein crystallography of 17 inhibitor co-crystals delivered detailed insight into the atomic interactions that underlie the structure-affinity relationship. Finally, the anti-proliferative effect of the inhibitor candidates was confirmed in the glioblastoma cell line SF-268. In this work, we thus discovered a novel EPHA2 inhibitor candidate that features an improved selectivity profile while maintaining potency against EPHA2 and anticancer activity in SF-268 cells.

### Keywords
Selectivity profiling, Inhibitors, Drug discovery, Eph receptor, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


