### Accession
PXD009382

### Title
Peptidome profiling of ovarian cancer and non-cancer proximal fluids: ascites and blood sera

### Description
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological malignancy, because its early detection is difficult due to the absence of recognizable physical symptoms and a lack of sensitive screening methods. Despite a large number of proteomic studies of biological fluids from ovarian cancer patients, only a few biomarkers are used in clinical practice. Low molecular weight endogenous peptides more easily diffuse across endothelial barriers and can be more relevant biomarker candidates. In this current study, detailed peptidomic analysis of 26 ovarian cancer and 15 non-cancer samples of biological fluids (ascites and sera) were performed using TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
The ascitic fluids from both groups were taken in sterile standard tubes of 50-mL volume (Eppendorf). The ascitic fluids were centrifuged at 200 g for 15 min at room temperature in order to remove the cells. The samples were stored at −80°C and transported in liquid nitrogen. To obtain serum, samples were collected from cubital vein into blood collection tubes (REF 456092, 6 mL, Vacuette tube, Austria). Serum was obtained after coagulation of blood for 1 h at room temperature. The collection tubes were centrifuged for 15 min at 700 g at room temperature. The serum was separated from the clot, aliquoted and stored at –80°C until analysis. Prior to peptidomic analysis, the samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min to remove the cellular debris. 
Plasma and serum fractionation.
Ascites and serum samples were fractionated on QAE Sephadex A-25 (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Sweden) strong anion exchange particles. Preliminarily, 80 µL of sorbent was washed 2 times with 400 µL Wash buffer 1 (20mM Tris (pH=8.26)). To precipitate the sorbent, the samples were centrifuged at 500 g for 10 s. Then the solvent was accurately removed paying close attention not to take any sorbent beads. 200 µL of ascites/serum was diluted with 400 µL Wash buffer 1 and added to the sorbent. After 30 min of incubation with vortexing, the sorbent was precipitated and the ascites/serum-buffer solution was removed. Then the sorbent was washed 3 times with 700 µL Wash buffer 1 and incubated for 15 min with 800 µL Elution buffer (0.5% TFA).
Peptide desorption from abundant proteins.
To desorb peptides from the surface of abundant blood/ascites proteins, we used the technique described earlier [7]. The eluates after peptide extraction were incubated in water bath at 98°C for 15 min. After heating, the samples were desalted using C18 Discovery Supelco RP-SPE cartridge (50 mg; Sigma-Aldrich St. Louis, MO, USA). The RP-SPE cartridge was pre-conditioned with 500 µL of MeOH and equilibrated 3 times with 500 µL of Wash buffer 2 (3% AcN, 0.1% TFA). Eluates from the previous step were applied on the sorbent and went through at a flow rate of approximately 200 µL/min. The cartridge was washed 3 times with 300 µL Wash buffer 2. Eluates were collected with 1 mL 80% AcN, 0.1%TFA, concentrated under vacuum to 5 µL and diluted with 10 µL 3% AcN, 0.1% TFA. 
LC-MS/MS analysis.
Analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (Sciex, Canada) coupled with a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system (Eksigent, USA). The HPLC system was configured in the trap-elute mode. For sample loading buffer and buffer A, a mixture of 98.9% water, 1% MeOH, 0.1% FA (v/v) was used. Buffer B was 99.9% AcN and 0.1% FA (v/v). Samples were loaded on a Chrom XP C18 trap column (3 µm, 120 Å, 350 µm 0.5 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 3 µL/min for 10 min and eluted through a 3C18-CL-120 separation column (3 µm, 120 Å, 75 µm 150 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient was from 5 to 40% buffer B in 90 min followed by 10 min at 95% buffer B and 20 min of re-equilibration with 5% buffer B. Between different samples, two blank 45-min runs consisting of 5 to 8 min waves (5% B, 95%, 95%, 5%) were required to wash the system and to prevent carryover. The information-dependent mass-spectrometer experiment included one survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were as follows: the mass range for MS2 analysis was 300–1250 m/z, and the signal accumulation time was 250 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity with a threshold of 200 counts per second and a charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters were as follows: the resolution of the quadrupole was set to UNIT (0.7 Da), the measurement mass range was 200–1800 m/z, and the signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision-activated dissociation was performed with nitrogen gas with the collision energy ramped from 25 to 55 V within the signal accumulation time of 50 ms. Analyzed parent ions were sent to the dynamic exclusion list for 15 s in order to get an MS2 spectra at the chromatographic peak apex. β-Galactosidase tryptic solution (20 fmol) was run with a 15-min gradient (5% to 25% buffer B) every two samples and between sample sets to calibrate the mass spectrometer and to control the overall system performance, stability, and reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification Raw LC-MS/MS data were converted to .mgf peaklists with ProteinPilot (version 4.5, Sciex, Canada). For this procedure, we ran ProteinPilot in identification mode with the following parameters: no specific digestion, TripleTOF 5600 instrument, thorough ID search with detected protein threshold 95.0% against the UniProt human protein knowledgebase. For thorough protein identification, the generated peak lists were searched with the MASCOT (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd, UK) and X! Tandem (VENGEANCE, 2015.12.15, The Global Proteome Machine Organization) search engines against the UniProt human protein knowledgebase. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 50 ppm, respectively. Database-searching parameters included the following: no specific digestion. For X! Tandem we also selected parameters that allowed quick check for protein N-terminal residue acetylation, peptide N-terminal glutamine ammonia loss or peptide N-terminal glutamic acid water loss. Resulting files were submitted to the Scaffold 4 software (version 4.2.1, Proteome Software, Inc, USA) for validation and further analysis. We used the local false discovery rate scoring algorithm with standard experiment-wide protein grouping. For the evaluation of peptide hits, a false discovery rate less than 1% was selected for peptides only. False positive identifications were based on reverse database analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Despite a large number of proteomic studies of biological fluids from ovarian cancer patients, there is a lack of sensitive screening methods in clinical practice (Kim et al., 2016) (DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/cas.12987[1]). Low molecular weight endogenous peptides more easily diffuse across endothelial barriers than proteins and can be more relevant biomarker candidates (Meo et al., 2016) (DOI:https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.8931[2], (Bery et al., 2014) DOI:https://doi.org/10.1186/1559-0275-11-13[3], (Huang et al., 2018) DOI:https://doi.org/10.1097/IGC.0000000000001166[4]). Detailed peptidomic analysis of 26 ovarian cancer and 15 non-cancer samples of biological fluids (ascites and sera) were performed using TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were extracted from biological fluids using anion exchange sorbent with subsequent peptide desorption from the surface of highly abundant proteins. In total, we identified 4874 peptides; 3123 peptides were specific for the ovarian cancer samples. The mass-spectrometry peptidomics data presented in this&#xa0;data article have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (Deutsch et al., 2017) (DOI:https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw936[5]) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD009382 and https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD009382, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD009382.

### Keywords
Blood sera, Ascites, Ovarian cancer, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Arapidi
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences


