### Accession
PXD044086

### Title
Human lung cancer TMT-labeling LC-MS

### Description
Although the paradigm of cancer treatment has changed with the recent development of drugs targeting immune checkpoints (PD-1, PD-L1, etc.), there is still a need for new targets for anticancer drugs. To discover new potential targets for immunotherapy, we compared membrane protein expression in non-small cell lung cancer cells versus normal lung cancer cells and NSCLC cell lines with low and high PD-L1 expression using mass spectrometry. As a result, it was confirmed that membrane protein, which is one of the most highly expressed proteins in NSCLC cell lines, is highly expressed in normal cells and highly expressed in cells with low PD-L1 expression.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins were extracted from lung normal cells and two lung cancer cells using the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). 50 µg of each protein was reacted with 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 55°C for 1 hr and 18.75 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min, followed by precipitation with acetone at -20°C overnight. Acetone-precipitated protein pellets were dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and 2.5 µg of trypsin (1:40) per 100 µg of protein was added and digested overnight at 37°C. TMT labeling was performed using the TMTsixplex Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the protocol was followed according to the manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
Mass analysis was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Hybrid FT-ETD Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw data analysis was performed with IP2 software (Integrated Proteomics Pipeline). Protein IDs and quantifications were identified as peptides in the UniProt human database using the IP2 provided search engine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Immune checkpoint, Tmt-labeling lc-ms, Human lung cancer

### Affiliations
Wellmarker Bio
Wellmarker Bio, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Jae-Sik Shin

### Lab Head
Dr Jae-Sik Shin
Wellmarker Bio, Republic of Korea


