### Accession
PXD010095

### Title
C/EBPβ-LIP regulates the let-7/Lin28b circuit to induce cancer-type metabolic reprogramming

### Description
The RNA binding protein Lin28b is highly expressed during embryogenesis but its expression declines in adult tissues, and aberrant expression of Lin28b is associated with tumour development and maintenance. Lin28b regulates the translation of several glycolytic and mitochondrial enzymes in order to enhance cellular metabolism and energy production. Lin28b is repressed by let-7 family microRNAs in a reciprocal negative regulatory circuitry where Lin28b supresses maturation of let-7. This circuitry obtains input from master regulators such as MYC that transcriptionally upregulates Lin28b, which is required for let-7 suppression and proliferation. Not much is known of how this circuitry is regulated through transcription of the let-7 microRNAs. Here we show that the transcription factor C/EBPβ-LIP induces aerobic glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration reminiscent to cancer cell metabolism. By integrating transcriptome, proteome and metabolic flux analysis we reveal that this LIP-induced metabolic reprogramming is dependent on Lin28b and that LIP enhances Lin28b expression through transcriptional repression of the let-7 microRNA family. Transgenic mice overexpressing LIP have reduced levels of let-7 in bone marrow, skin and spleen, which is associated with induction of Lin28b and hyperplasia. This study establishes LIP as a regulator of the let-7/Lin28b regulatory circuitry and we hypothesize that the LIP-controlled let-7/Lin28b regulation is involved in the de-regulation of tissue homeostasis and tumourigenesis.

### Sample Protocol
100 micrograms of protein lysate were reduced in DTT 2mM for 30 minutes at 25°C and successively free cysteines were alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes at room temperature in the darkness. LysC digestion was performed by adding LysC (Wako) in a ratio 1:40 (w/w) to the sample and incubating it for 18 hours under gentle shaking at 30 °C. After LysC digestion, the samples were diluted 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, 7 µl of immobilized trypsin (Applied Biosystems) were added and samples were incubated 4 hours under rotation at 30°C.  Digestion was stopped by acidification with 5 ul of trifluoroacetic acid and trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation. 15 micrograms of digest were desalted on STAGE Tips, dried and reconstituted to 20 µl of 0.5% acetic acid in water (Rappsilber, Ishihama et al. 2003). 5 microliters of each sample were injected in duplicate on a LC-MS/MS system (NanoLC 400 [Eksigent] coupled to Q Exactive HF [Thermo]), using a 240 minutes gradient ranging from 5% to 40% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A= 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). For the chromatographic separation 100 cm long MonoCap C18 HighResolution 2000 (GL Sciences) was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant proteomics pipeline (v1.5.3.30) and the built in the Andromeda search engine (Cox, Neuhauser et al. 2011) with the mouse Uniprot database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminus were chosen as variable modifications. The search engine peptide assignments were filtered at 1% FDR and the feature match between runs was enabled; other parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factors LAP1, LAP2 and LIP are derived from the <i>Cebpb</i>-mRNA through the use of alternative start codons. High LIP expression has been associated with human cancer and increased cancer incidence in mice. However, how LIP contributes to cellular transformation is poorly understood. Here we present that LIP induces aerobic glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration reminiscent of cancer metabolism. We show that LIP-induced metabolic programming is dependent on the RNA-binding protein LIN28B, a translational regulator of glycolytic and mitochondrial enzymes with known oncogenic function. LIP activates LIN28B through repression of the <i>let-7</i> microRNA family that targets the <i>Lin28b</i>-mRNA. Transgenic mice overexpressing LIP have reduced levels of <i>let-7</i> and increased LIN28B expression, which is associated with metabolic reprogramming as shown in primary bone marrow cells, and with hyperplasia in the skin. This study establishes LIP as an inducer of cancer-type metabolic reprogramming and as a regulator of the <i>let-7</i>/LIN28B regulatory circuit.

### Keywords
Q exactive hf, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics and Metabolomics   Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max Delbrueck Centrum for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Guido Mastrobuoni

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kempa
Quantitative Proteomics and Metabolomics   Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association


