### Accession
PXD009097

### Title
A proteomic approach to study Brassica oleracea responses to black rot (Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris), part 1

### Description
Understanding plant’s response mechanisms against pathogenesis is fundamental for the development of resistant crop varieties and more productive agriculture. In this regard, ‘omic’ approaches are heralded as valuable technologies. In this work, combining iTRAQ technology with mass spectrometry, the proteomes from leaves of Brassica oleracea plants infected with Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (Xcc) and control plants at two different post-infection times were compared.

### Sample Protocol
The doubled haploid broccoli line “Early Big” (B. oleracea var. italica) was used in this study. Plants at six leaf stage were inoculated with Xcc race 1 strain HRI3811, provided by Warwick HRI (Wellesbourne, UK). Inoculated leaves were collected at 3 and 12 days post-infection. For protein extraction, fresh leaves were homogenized with a help of a mortar during 10 min using 18 ml of extraction buffer (TRIS-HCL 50 mM, EDTA 1 mM and KCl 1M, pH 7.5) and 50 mg/g of leaf of PVPP. The resulting solutions were centrifuged at 18000 g for 40 min and filtered to remove any vegetal debris. Protein extracts obtained from 16 different samples (2 treatments, 2 dpi and 4 biological replicates) were analyzed independently. Five hundred µl of each sample was concentrated to a final volume of 100 µl with Amicon ultrafiltration units (3 kDaMWCO, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and then cleaned up by acetone precipitation. Protein pellets were dried in air and then resuspended in 25 µl Dissolution Buffer. Equal amounts of proteins (25 µg) from each sample were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Then, Isobaric Tag for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling was performed according to the supplier’s instructions (ABSciex, Foster City, CA, USA). Due to 8 different iTRAQ tags were available, comparative analysis of a set 16 samples was feasible within only two MS run. TRAQ-labeled peptides from same day of analysis (3 and 12 days) were mixed and desalted using reversed phase columns (Pierce C18 Spin Columns, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) prior to liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. LC-MS analysis The peptide mixtures were firstly separated by off-line reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RP-LC) at basic pH (pH=9) to lower its complexity. The separation was performed on a HP 1200 system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) employing a C18 reversed-phase column (Zorbax extend C18, 100 3 2.1 mm id, 3.5 mm, 300Å; Agilent). The flow rate used was 0.2 mL/minute and the mobile phases used were 95:5 water:acetonitrile 10 mM NH4OH (mobile phase C) and 90:10 acetonitrile:water 10 mM NH4OH (mobile phase D). The LC gradient was the following: 0% D from 0 to 10 min; 0-60% D from 10 to 50 min; 60-100% D from 50 to 52 min; 100% D from 52 to 58 min; 100-0% D from 58-60 min; and 0% D from 60 to 80 min. The chromatogram was produced using a UV Detector at 214 nm. Several fractions were pooled post-collection (FC203B fraction collector, Gilson, Middleton, WI, USA) based on the peak intensity of the UV trace. Each fraction were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2% acetonitrile; 5 ml of this sample were injected onto a capillary trap column (0.5 × 2 mm, Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA, USA) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min. Peptides were desalted for 10 minutes and loaded onto a C18 column (Integrafit C18, ProteopepTM II, 75 mmid, 10.2 cm, 5 mm, 300Å; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) at a constant flow rate of 350 nl/min to perform the separation. Then peptides were separated using linearly increasing concentration of acetonitrile in buffer B and eluates were deposited onto an Opti-TOF LC MALDI target plate (1,534-spot format; ABSciex, Framingham, MA, USA) with a speed of one spot per 15 seconds using the Sun Collect MALDI Spotter/Micro Collector (SunChrom Wissenschaftliche Geräte GmbH, Germany). Before spotting, the LC microfractions were mixed with MALDI matrix (3 mg/ml a-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 70% Acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA containing 10fmol/μl angiotensin as internal standard). Peptide-containing LC spots were analyzed in a 4800 MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument (ABSciex) with a 200 Hz repetition rate (Nd:YAG laser). MS full-scan spectra were acquired from 800 to 4,000 m/z. A total of 1,500 laser shots were accumulated for each time-of-flight MS spectrum at a fixed laser intensity of 3000 kV. After the screening of all LC-MALDI sample positions in MS positive reflector mode, the fragmentation of automatically selected precursors was performed to generate fragment ions that provided sequence information for the peptide and reporter ions. Tandem MS mode was operated with 1 kV of collision energy with CID gas (air) over a range of 60 to -20 m/z of the precursor mass value. The precursor mass window was 200 ppm (full width at half-maximum) in relative mode. Automated precursor selection was done using a Job-Wide interpretation method (up to 12 precursors/fraction, signal-to-noise lower threshold 80) with a laser voltage of 4000 kV and 2000 shots/spectrum at medium CID collision energy range. A second Job-Wide precursor selection was done excluding those precursors previously fragmented and using a lower signal-to-noise threshold of 50, to identify peptides coming from low-abundance proteins. Data from both MS/MS acquisitions were used for data processing and subsequent protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were carried out using ProteinPilotTM software v.4.0 (ABSciex). Each MS/MS spectrum was searched in the Uniprot/Swissprot database for Arabidopsis thaliana and in the UniProtKB/TrEMBL databases for Viridiplantae and Brassica (downloaded in 2014). Search parameters within ProteinPilot were set with trypsin cleavage specificity; methyl methanethiosulfate (MMTS) modified cysteine as fixed modifications; biological modification ‘‘ID focus’’ settings, and a protein minimum confidence score of 95%. Thus, the identity of the protein from the analyzed peptide was confirmed, and the ratios of the peak areas of iTRAQ reporter ions were used to compare the relative abundance of the protein identified in each sample. Only proteins identified with at least 95% confidence, or a Prot Score (protein confidence measure) of at least 1.3 were reported (34). Data were normalized for loading error by bias and the background correction was calculated using the Pro GroupTM algorithm (ABSciex). The results obtained from ProteinPilotTM were exported to Microsoft Excel for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics; biotic stress; itraq; mass spectrometry; brassica oleracea; xanthomonas campestris

### Affiliations
INIBIC
Proteomics Group-ProteoRed PRB2/ISCIII Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (Spain)

### Submitter
valentina calamia

### Lab Head
Dr valentina calamia
Proteomics Group-ProteoRed PRB2/ISCIII Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (Spain)


