### Accession
PXD002274

### Title
Analysis of the ubiquitinated peptides using the yeast Rpt2-normal, G2A and G2delta strains

### Description
Ubiquitinated peptides (KGG peptides) purified from the yeast strains with or without mutation on the N-myristoylation site of the proteasome Rpt2 subunit were analyzed by an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. The MS data was analyzed by the Progenesis LC-MS software.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cell lysate was obtained by using the lysis buffer containing 9M Urea and 50um PR-619. Proteins were reduced by DTT, alkylated by 2-chloroacetamide, and digested with trypsin. After desaltation using SepPak and lyophilisation, KGG peptides were purified by the immunoprecipitation using the specific antibody for KGG peptides. Peptides were further desalted by C18-StageTips before the MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation and multivariate statistical ananlysis was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software. Peptides were identified by the database search using Mascot against the UniprotKB database.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is the posttranslational modification of a protein by covalent attachment of ubiquitin. Controlled proteolysis via the ubiquitin-proteasome system (\UPS) alleviates cellular stress by clearing misfolded proteins. In budding yeast, UPS within the nucleus degrades the nuclear proteins as well as proteins imported from the cytoplasm. While the predominantly nuclear localization of the yeast proteasome is maintained by the importin-mediated transport, N-myristoylation of the proteasome subunit Rpt2 was indicated to cause dynamic nucleo-cytoplasmic localization of proteasomes. Here, we quantitatively analyzed the ubiquitinated peptides using anti-K-&#x3b5;-GG antibody in yeast cell lines with or without a mutation in the N-myristoylation site of Rpt2 and detected upregulated ubiquitination of proteins with nucleo-cytoplasmic localizations in the mutant strains. Moreover, both the protein and ubiquitinated peptide levels of two Hsp70 family chaperones involved in the nuclear import of misfolded proteins, Ssa and Sse1, were elevated in the mutant strains, whereas levels of an Hsp70 family chaperone involved in the nuclear export, Ssb, were reduced. Taken together, our results indicate that N-myristoylation of Rpt2 is involved in controlled proteolysis via regulation of the nucleo-cytoplasmic localization of the yeast proteasome.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Advanced Medical Research Center, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan
Yokohama City University

### Submitter
Ayuko Kimura

### Lab Head
Dr Hisashi Hirano
Advanced Medical Research Center, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan


