### Accession
PXD044650

### Title
The COP9 signalosome reduces neuroinflammation and attenuates ischemic neuronal stress in organotypic brain slice culture model

### Description
In the context of studying the role of the COP9 signalosome (CSN) in neuroinflammation and ischemic neuronal damage, we studied the effect of the cullin NEDDylation state-modifying drugs MLN4924 and CSN5i-3 in BV2 microglial cells, an immortalized murine cell line featuring many of the characteristics of primary microglia. Owing to its potent inhibitory effect on the NEDDylation cascade, MLN4924 exhibits a CSN5-like anti-inflammatory activity. Csn5i-3 is a small molecule inhibitor that specifically binds to CSN5, while it resides in the CSN holocomplex and blocks its deNEDDylase activity, thus leading to an accumulation of NEDDylated cullins. We performed untargeted mass spectrometry-based proteomics of the cell lysates after treating BV2 cells with these drugs under basal culture stress conditions. The proteomic analysis revealed that MLN4924 and CSN5i-3 substantially altered the microglial proteome.

### Sample Protocol
BV2 cells were cultured in full medium in 10 cm cell culture dishes until they were confluent. MLN4924 (500 nM), CSN5i-3 (1 μM), or solvent control (0.01% DMSO) were added and the culturing continued for 6 h. After the incubation, cells were washed once with PBS, removed from the cell culture plate with a scraper, collected in tubes, and centrifuged in 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes for 3 min to remove remaining PBS buffer, snap-frozen, and stored at -80 °C until further processing. Thereafter cells were collected and lysed in urea buffer (9 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1x Roche protease inhibitor cocktail, product # 11836153001) followed by short sonification. Samples were cleared by centrifugation and protein amounts were adapted. Protein reduction was performed with dithiothreitol (DTT; 5 mM final) for 25 min at 56°C and protein alkylation by the addition of iodoacetamide (14 mM final) for 30 min at room temperature. Protein mixtures were quenched with DTT and diluted 1:5 with 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.2. For increased peptide recovery, proteins were digested at room temperature for 3 h with LysC (FUJIFILM, 2 µL/100 µg protein) before overnight tryptic digest at 37°C (0.5 µg/100µg protein). The following day, digestion was stopped with 10% trifluoroacetate (TFA). To increase analysis depth, samples were pre-fractioned by a C18-SCX custom-made stage tip. Fractions were eluted stepwise with increasing NH4AcO concentrations (20 mM to 500 mM) and desalted on a separate C18 stage tip. Desalted peptides were loaded on a custom-made 75 mm x 15 cm fused silica capillary filled with C18-AQ resin (Reprosil Pur 120 HPLC column, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) using an Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography. Samples were separated for 140 min with a 2.4-80% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (MS; ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) and loaded into Perseus (version 1.6.5.0), where matches to common contaminants, reverse identifications, identifications based only on site-specific modifications and with less than 2 peptides and MS/MS counts were removed. Only proteins with LFQ intensities in 3 out of 4 biological replicates in at least one experimental group were kept for the subsequent label-free quantification (LFQ). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced with random numbers drawn from a normal distribution. Student’s t-tests were used to determine the statistical significance of the abundance alterations of proteins detected between control and treated conditions. Proteins with P<0.05, FDR<0.05 and t-test difference >0.5 or <-0.5 were considered to be significantly increased or decreased, respectively. Functional annotations were performed using DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).

### Publication Abstract
The constitutive photomorphogenesis 9 (COP9) signalosome (CSN) is a deNEDDylase controlling ubiquitination activity of cullin-RING-E3 ligases (CRLs) and thus the levels of key cellular proteins. While the CSN and its catalytic subunit CSN5 have been extensively studied in cancer, its role in inflammatory and neurological diseases is less understood. Following verification that CSN5 is expressed in mouse and human brain, here we studied the role of the CSN in neuroinflammation and ischemic neuronal damage employing models of relevant brain-resident cell types, an ex vivo organotypic brain slice culture model, and the CRL NEDDylation state-modifying drugs MLN4924 and CSN5i-3, which mimic and inhibit, respectively, CSN5 deNEDDylase activity. Untargeted mass spectrometry-based proteomics revealed that MLN4924 and CSN5i-3 substantially alter the microglial proteome, including inflammation-related proteins. Applying these drugs and mimicking microglial and endothelial inflammation as well as ischemic neuronal stress by TNF and oxygen-glucose-deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/RO) treatment, respectively, we could link CSN5/CSN-mediated cullin deNEDDylation to reduction of microglial inflammation, attenuated cerebral endothelial inflammation, improved barrier integrity, as well as protection from ischemic stress-induced neuronal cell death. Specifically, MLN4924 reduced phagocytic activity, motility, and inflammatory cytokine expression of microglial cells, and this was linked to inhibition of inflammation-induced NF-&#x3ba;B and Akt signaling. Inversely, Csn5 knockdown and CSN5i-3 increased NF-&#x3ba;B signaling. Moreover, MLN4924 abrogated TNF-induced NF-&#x3ba;B signaling in cerebral microvascular endothelial cells (hCMECs) and rescued hCMEC monolayers from OGD/RO-triggered barrier leakage, while CSN5i-3 exacerbated permeability. In an ex vivo organotypic brain slice model of ischemia/reperfusion stress, MLN4924 protected from neuronal death, while CSN5i-3 impaired neuronal survival. Neuronal damage was attributable to microglial activation and inflammatory cytokines, as indicated by microglial shape tracking and TNF-blocking experiments. Our results indicate a protective role of the CSN in neuroinflammation via brain-resident cell types involved in ischemic brain disease and implicate CSN activity-mimicking deNEDDylating drugs as potential therapeutics.

### Keywords
Constitutive photomorphogenesis 9 signalosome (csn), Jab1, Csn5, Organoid, Ischemic stroke, Microglia

### Affiliations
Vascular Biology, Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research (ISD), LMU Klinikum, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU) Munich, Germany.
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), LMU Munich

### Submitter
Rahul Chakraborty

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Bernhagen
Vascular Biology, Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research (ISD), LMU Klinikum, Ludwig-Maximilians-University (LMU) Munich, Germany.


