### Accession
PXD027419

### Title
Peritoneal metastasis of colorectal cancer (pmCRC): Identification of predictive molecular signatures by a novel preclinical platform of matching pmCRC PDX/PD3D models

### Description
14 PDX models of pmCRC were established, including 9 matched PD3D/PDX models, and treatment response to 17 SoC and targeted therapies was monitored, which resulted in drug-dependent inter- and intra-patient specific growth inhibition. Analysis of the molecular data of the models and patient tissue resulted in the identification of predictive biomarkers for treatment with 5-FU, irinotecan, trametinib, erlotinib, cetuximab and avastin, oxaliplatin, selumetinib, docetaxel and everolimus. Conclusions: The establishment of a preclinical drug testing platform based on in vitro and in vivo matched pmCRC models, molecularly characterized by multi-omics technology, facilitated the identification of predictive biomarkers for treatment response, as well as cancer relevant signatures for effective therapies, ready for validation in clinical cohorts.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics and phospho-proteomics analysis, preparation of cryo-pulverized tissues and frozen cells was carried out in essence as described by Mertins et al. 23 using a TMT10 (Thermo) multiplexing approach. Phosphopeptides were enriched using IMAC on an AssayMap Bravo system (Agilent). Proteomics and phospho-proteomics samples were measured on a Q Exactive HF-X orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) connected to an EASY-nLC system (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
For analysis, MaxQuant version 1.6.0.13 24,25 was used employing MS2-based reporter ion quantitation, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and deamidation on asparagine and oxidized methionine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pd3d, Pdx, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Pmcrc

### Affiliations
Translational Oncology of Solid Tumors, Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, and Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Robert-Rössle-Str.10, 13125 Berlin, Germany
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrike Stein
Translational Oncology of Solid Tumors, Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité - University Medicine Berlin, and Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Robert-Rössle-Str.10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


