### Accession
PXD024201

### Title
Proteogenomics analysis of the digestive gland from the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis exposed to carbamazepine

### Description
teogenomics analysis from digestive glands from Mytilus galloprovincialis exposed to two concentrations of carbamazepine.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from lyophilized digestive glands.  Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
Carbamazepine is one of the most abundant pharmaceutical active compounds detected in aquatic systems. Based on laboratory exposures, carbamazepine has been proven to adversely affect aquatic organisms. However, the underlying molecular events remain poorly understood. This study aims to investigate the molecular mechanisms potentially associated with toxicological effects of carbamazepine on the mussel Mytilus galloprovincialis exposed for 3 days at realistic concentrations encountered in coastal environments (80&#xa0;ng/L and 8&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/L). An integrated metabolomics and proteogenomics approach, including data fusion strategy, was applied to gain more insight in molecular events and cellular processes triggered by carbamazepine exposure. Consistent metabolic and protein signatures revealed a metabolic rewiring and cellular stress at both concentrations (e.g. intensification of protein synthesis, transport and catabolism processes, disruption of lipid and amino acid metabolisms). These highlighted molecular signatures point to the induction of autophagy, closely related with carbamazepine mechanism of action, as well as a destabilization of the lysosomal membranes and an enzymatic overactivity of the peroxisomes. Induction of programmed cell death was highlighted by the modulation of apoptotic cognate proteins. The proposed integrative omics data analysis was shown to be highly relevant to identify the modulations of the two molecular levels, i.e. metabolites and proteins. Multi-omics approach is able to explain the resulting complex biological system, and document stronger toxicological pieces of evidence on pharmaceutical active compounds at environmental concentrations in sentinel organisms.

### Keywords
Marine organism, Invertebrate, Mussel, Proteogenomics, Mytilus galloprovincialis, Pharmaceutical active compound, Carbamazepine

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


