### Accession
PXD029084

### Title
Searching for interactors of endogenous SLX4

### Description
The project was aimed at identifying binding partners of endogenous SLX4 in HeLa cells. Whole cell extracts from HeLa Flp-In T-Rex cells were used for immunoprecipitation performed with anti-SLX4 antibodies from Bethyl Laboratories (A302-270A and A302-269A), either used alone or in combination. To discriminate bona fide SLX4 partners from non-specific proteins recognized by the anti-SLX4 antibodies, cells were transfected with control (Luc) siRNA or a siRNA targeting SLX4. After immunoprecipitation, protein complexes were analysed by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated protein complexes associated to SLX4 eluted from the beads with LDS sample buffer were loaded on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) to stack proteins in a single band.  Following staining with Imperial Blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific), protein bands were excised from the gel and the gel slices submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion after cysteines reduction and alkylation (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Peptides were extracted from the gel and dried under vacuum. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) online with a nanoRSLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were separated on a Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (2µm, 100A, 75 µm x 50 cm). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource in front of the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, spray voltage was set at 2.2 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The Orbitrap Lumos was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. Time between Masters Scans was set to 3 seconds. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1600 at a FWHM resolution of 120 000 measured at 400 m/z. AGC target was set at 4.0e5 with a 50 ms Maximum Injection Time. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. Number of precursor ions was automatically defined along run in 3s windows using the “Inject Ions for All Available parallelizable time option” with a maximum injection time of 300 ms. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 5000 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo fisher Scientific) to search against the human protein proteome of the swissprot database (20,368 entries, extracted from Uniprot on november 2019). Database search with Mascot were done using the following settings: a maximum of two trypsin miss cleavage allowed, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were allowed for search analysis. Only peptides with high stringency Mascot scores were selected for protein identification. False discovery rate was set to 1% for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The tumour suppressor SLX4 plays multiple roles in the maintenance of genome stability, acting as a scaffold for structure-specific endonucleases and other DNA repair proteins. It directly interacts with the mismatch repair (MMR) protein MSH2 but the significance of this interaction remained unknown until recent findings showing that MutS&#x3b2; (MSH2-MSH3) stimulates in vitro the SLX4-dependent Holliday junction resolvase activity. Here, we characterize the mode of interaction between SLX4 and MSH2, which relies on an MSH2-interacting peptide (SHIP box) that drives interaction of SLX4 with both MutS&#x3b2; and MutS&#x3b1; (MSH2-MSH6). While we show that this MSH2 binding domain is dispensable for the well-established role of SLX4 in interstrand crosslink repair, we find that it mediates inhibition of MutS&#x3b1;-dependent MMR by SLX4, unravelling an unanticipated function of SLX4.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Interactome, Endogenous slx4

### Affiliations
CRCM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Inserm,  CNRS, 13009 Marseille, France
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre-Henri Gaillard
CRCM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Université, Inserm,  CNRS, 13009 Marseille, France


