### Accession
PXD006989

### Title
Leaf proteome of Glycine max in response to ethylene, ABA and combined ABA+ethylene treatments

### Description
Phytohormones play a central role in plant physiology. Despite the significant understanding in the hormone signaling, a deep understanding of downstream targets is missing. Therefore, we used a shotgun proteomics approach to investigate the ethylene, ABA and ABA+ethylene signaling in soybean leaves. A protamine sulfate precipitation (PSP) method was used for the enrichment of the low-abundance proteins which were then identified by label-free quantitative proteomics. A total of 5171 unique proteins were identified, of which 1182 were differentially modulated in one or more treatments. Functional annotation of the differentially modulated proteins showed that these were mainly associated with the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and fatty acid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Soybean seeds (Glycine max cv. Daewon) were planted in soil and allowed to grow in a growth room at 25°C (16/8 h day/light cycle, 70% relative humidity). Ethephon (5 mM, a natural precursor of ethylene) and ABA (500 µM) were prepared in deionized water and 50 mL of solution was evenly sprayed using a foliar spray over six pots containing 5 soybean plants per pot. An equal volume of deionized water was sprayed as a control. Whole trays were shifted to the transparent acrylic chambers and sealed to prevent the evaporation of ethylene produced. Leaves were harvested after 72 hours for proteome analysis. For isolation of total proteins, 1 g of leaves were ground to fine powder using liquid nitrogen and homogenized in 10 mL of Tris-Mg/NP-40 buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2) followed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The protamine sulfate (PS) precipitation method was used for the enrichment of low-abundance proteins (LAPs). The collected supernatant after centrifugation was incubated with 0.1 % PS (w/v, in deionized water) on ice for 30 min. The extract was again centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C to separate PS-supernatant (PSS) and PS-pellet (PSP) fractions, as described earlier (Kim et al. 2013; Gupta et al. 2015). Proteins were precipitated from the PS supernatant by TCA/acetone precipitation (12.5% TCA in 100% acetone (w/v) containing 0.07 % β–mercaptoethanol) and stored at -20 °C in 80% until further analysis. Pellets were redissolved in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5. Cysteines were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min. Subsequently, alkylation was performed by adding chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 14 mM and incubation for 30 min. The reaction was quenched by addition of DTT. The solution was diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 and proteins were digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio) at 37 °C over night. Hydrolyzation was stopped by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptides were desalted and pre-fractionated into three fractions using the Empore Styrenedivenylbenzene Reversed Phase Sulfonate material (SDB-RPS). After elution, peptides were dried, redissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA, and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) on a 16 cm C18 column (3 µm bead size) with a 120 min segmented linear gradient. Peptides were analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a Top15 method.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.3.30). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the soybean protein database (Gmax_275_Wm82.a2.v1, 88 647 entries) and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analyses, hierarchical clustering analysis (HCL), and principal component analysis (PCA) were carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5). Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). Multiple sample test (ANOVA), controlled by permutation-based FDR threshold of 0.05, was applied to identify the significant differences (≥1.5 fold change) in the protein abundance. Functional annotation of the identified proteins was carried out by MapMan and KEGG tools. Further, metabolic pathways were generated by Blast KOALA and KEGG pathway analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Phytohormones are central to plant growth and development. Despite the advancement in our knowledge of hormone signaling, downstream targets, and their interactions upon hormones action remain largely fragmented, especially at the protein and metabolite levels. With an aim to get new insight into the effects of two hormones, ethylene (ET) and abscisic acid (ABA), this study utilizes an integrated proteomics and metabolomics approach to investigate their individual and combined (ABA+ET) signaling in soybean leaves. Targeting low-abundance proteins, our previously established protamine sulfate precipitation method was applied, followed by label-free quantification of identified proteins. A total of 4129 unique protein groups including 1083 differentially modulated in one (individual) or other (combined) treatments were discerned. Functional annotation of the identified proteins showed an increased abundance of proteins related to the flavonoid and isoflavonoid biosynthesis and MAPK signaling pathway in response to ET treatment. HPLC analysis showed an accumulation of isoflavones (genistin, daidzein, and genistein) upon ET treatment, in agreement with the proteomics results. A metabolome analysis assigned 79 metabolites and further confirmed the accumulation of flavonoids and isoflavonoids in response to ET. A potential cross-talk between ET and MAPK signaling, leading to the accumulation of flavonoids and isoflavonoids in soybean leaves is suggested.

### Keywords
Hidden proteome, Phytohormones, Soybean, Low-abundance proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience Pusan National University Miryang, 627-706 South Korea
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research

### Submitter
Katharina Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience Pusan National University Miryang, 627-706 South Korea


