### Accession
PXD033367

### Title
Paleoproteomic profiling for identification of animal skin species in ancient Egyptian archaeological leather using liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)

### Description
Ancient protein analysis provides clues to human life and diseases from ancient times. Paleoproteomics has the potential to give a better understanding of the modes of fabrication of ancient materials, their composition, and pathways of degradation, as well as the development of animal fibers through domestication and breeding. Thus, this study aimed at providing guidance for choosing proteomics workflows to analyze leather samples and their capacity to distinguish between unknown archeological species. Here, we performed shotgun proteomics of archeological animal skin for the first time. The raw output data were analyzed using three different software (Proteome Discoverer, Protein Pilot, and Peptide Shaker) with their impeded algorithms. The study found that the best species identification percentage was obtained using protein piolet with protein database. Particularly prevalent and relatively high collagen expression suggests its resistance to degradation, despite the samples’ exposure to environmental and chemical alterations. The success of this case study indicates that further analyses could assist in reworking historical baseline data for putative identification of unknown archeological samples.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun proteomics analysis was done on the reference and standrad samples. Proteins were extracted, quantified and then subjected to in-solution digestion. Peptides were quantified, purified then injected on LC-MSMSM.

### Data Protocol
Two databases were constructed with different search strategies. Three differen softwares were used for analysis; Proteome discoverer, protein pilot and peptide shaker with different algorithims.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Archaeological, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics and metabolomics unit, Basic research department, Children's Cancer Hospital, 57357 Cairo, (CCHE-57357), Egypt
Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research Department, Children’s Cancer Hospital, Cairo, Egypt.

### Submitter
Ali Anwar

### Lab Head
Dr Sameh Mohamed Magdeldin
Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research Department, Children’s Cancer Hospital, Cairo, Egypt.


