### Accession
PXD029830

### Title
proteomics analysis haustorium development of Taxillus chinensis

### Description
Loranthus (Taxillus chinensis) is an important medicinal and parasitic plant that attacks other plants for living. To reveal the mechanisms of haustorium development, we employed an iTRAQ proteomics-based approach to identify differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) of fresh seeds (CK), baby (FB), and adult haustoria (FD).

### Sample Protocol
The fresh seeds were collected from Taxillus chinensis (DC.) Danser which parasitized in the mulberry trees that were planted in the experimental field of Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal Plants in China. Then, the seeds were peeled, washed with sterile water, placed on a germination dish, and incubated under the controlled environment (25°C, 80% relative humidity, 10 h:14 h light: dark, 2000 Lx), as previously described (2). The fresh seeds were collected as control (CK). The seeds with protruding seed-type radicle and tiny suction device were collected after ten days of incubation (FB). And twenty days later, seeds with the loranthus haustoria and true leaves were used for the experiments (FD). Then, the samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until use.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched against the transcriptome database using Swquest software integration in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3, Thermo Scientific). The search parameters used as follows: Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modifications; and oxidation (M), acetylation in N-Term were set as variable modification. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance of precursor ions was 20 ppm, and a fragment ion tolerance was 0.05 Da, resulting in 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were identified based on the following criteria: P-values smaller than 0.05 and a mean relative abundance>1.2 or<0.83.

### Publication Abstract
Taxillus chinensis is an important medicinal and parasitic plant that attacks other plants for living. The development of haustorium is a critical process, imperative for successful parasitic invasion. To reveal the mechanisms underlying haustorium development, we performed an iTRAQ-based proteomics analysis which led to the identification of several differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) in fresh seeds (CK), baby (FB), and adult haustoria (FD). A total of 563 and 785 DAPs were identified and quantified in the early and later developmental stages, respectively. Pathway enrichment analysis revealed that the DAPs are mainly associated with metabolic pathways, ribosome, phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, and photosynthesis. In addition, DAPs associated with the phytohormone signaling pathway changed markedly. Furthermore, we evaluated the content of various phytohormones during different stages of haustoria development. These results indicated that phytohormones are very important for haustorium development. qRT-PCR results validated that the mRNA expression levels were consistent with the expression of proteins, suggesting that our results are reliable. This is the first report on haustoria proteomes in the parasitic plant, Taxillus chinensis, to the best of our knowledge. Our findings will enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanism of haustoria development.

### Keywords
Taxillus chinensis itraq haustorium

### Affiliations
Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal Plant
Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal Plant, Nanning, China

### Submitter
limei pan

### Lab Head
Dr Limei Pan
Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal Plant, Nanning, China


