### Accession
PXD033845

### Title
Insulin receptor signaling in pancreatic acinar cells contributes to KrasG12D-driven cancer initiation in the context of diet-induced obesity

### Description
Phosphoproteomic analysis to elucidate whether high-fat diet induced hyperinsulinemia contributes to pancreatic cancer directly through insulin receptor (INSR) signaling in KrasG12D-expressing pancreatic acinar cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cryopulverized tumors in buffer containing 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM TRIS pH 7.8 supplemented with PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Protein concentration of the lysate was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and protein disulfide bonds were reduced and free Cysteines alkylated with 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 30 mM iodoacetamide, respectively. 250 µg of total protein was used for proteolytic digestion using S-TRAP Mini columns (Protifi LLC, Huntington NY). Resultant tryptic peptides were then vacuum concentrated, and desalted using Oasis HLB SPE cartridges (Waters). Peptides were vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoro acetic acid (TFA), and 10% of the total sample was reserved for measurement of the total proteome. The remaining 90% of the sample was diluted in 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA for automated phosphopeptide enrichment using AssayMap Fe-NTA (III) immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) cartridges and a Bravo liquid handling system using the phosphopeptide enrichment v 2.1 application (Agilent).  Samples for both total proteome and phosphoproteome analysesanalysis were analyzed by data dependent acquisition (DDA) using an Easy-nLC 1200 and Q Exactive Plus (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were first loaded onto a precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 2 cm) in 0.1% formic acid (buffer A), and gradient elution was performed using a 100-min method from 3 to 40% buffer B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 2 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter x 25 cm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS scans were acquired between 350-1,500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 x 10e610E6 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 15 precursor ions with charge states +2, +,+3, and +4 were isolated with a window of 1.2 m/z, an AGC target of 2 x 10e410E4 and a maximum injection time of 64 ms and fragmented using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. MS/MS were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 and the dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s30s.

### Data Protocol
DDA MS raw data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Scientific) and searched using Sequest HT against the mouse reference proteome FASTA database from Uniprot (downloaded October 1st 2021). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications.  The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 parts per million, and the product ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Percolator was used to assess posterior error probabilities and the data was filtered using a false discovery rate (FDR) <1% on peptide and protein level. The Minora node of Proteome Discoverer was used for label free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The rising pancreatic cancer incidence due to obesity and type 2 diabetes is closely tied to hyperinsulinemia, an independent cancer risk factor. Previous studies demonstrated reducing insulin production suppressed pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) pre-cancerous lesions in Kras-mutant mice. However, the pathophysiological and molecular mechanisms remained unknown, and in particular it was unclear whether hyperinsulinemia affected PanIN precursor cells directly or indirectly. Here, we demonstrate that insulin receptors (Insr) in Kras<sup>G12D</sup>-expressing pancreatic acinar cells are dispensable for glucose homeostasis but necessary for hyperinsulinemia-driven PanIN formation in the context of diet-induced hyperinsulinemia and obesity. Mechanistically, this was attributed to amplified digestive enzyme protein translation, triggering of local inflammation, and PanIN metaplasia in&#xa0;vivo. In&#xa0;vitro, insulin dose-dependently increased acinar-to-ductal metaplasia formation in a trypsin- and Insr-dependent manner. Collectively, our data shed light on the mechanisms connecting obesity-driven hyperinsulinemia and pancreatic cancer development.

### Keywords
Obesity, Hyperinsulinemia, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Panin, Insulin resistance

### Affiliations
Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University
1¬ MRM Proteomics Inc, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 2 Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 3 Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Vincent Richard

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph H Borchers
1¬ MRM Proteomics Inc, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 2 Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 3 Gerald Bronfman Department of Oncology, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


