### Accession
PXD025639

### Title
Sulforaphane suppresses metastasis of breast cancer cells by targeting RAF/MEK/ERK pathway to inhibit actin stress fiber formation

### Description
SFN, including its two isomers of R-SFN and S-SFN, significantly inhibited TGF-1-induced migration and invasion in MDA-MB-231 cells. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis showed that SFN affected the formation of cytoskeleton. Subsequent experiments confirmed that SFN significantly inhibited TGF-1-induced actin stress fiber formation and the expression of actin stress fiber formation-associated proteins, including paxillin, IQGAP1, FAK, PAK2, and ROCK.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extracts were precipitated with 5 volumes of ice-cold acetone/ethanol/acetic acid (v/v/v = 50/50/0.1) at -20°C overnight. The precipitated protein sample was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 30 min, and washed with acetone and 75% ethanol. The protein sample was re-dissolved into 8 M urea/50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) solution and the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. Then, the proteins were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 1 h and alkylated by 20 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) IAA in the darkness at room temperature for 30 min. Then the protein concentration was diluted to 1 mg/mL with 100 mM HEPES buffer, and digested by trypsin (enzyme/substrate, 1/25 (w/w)) overnight at 37°C. Finally, the tryptic digests were isotopically labeled with dual mass-differentiate dimethyl groups. The phosphopeptides were enriched by Ti4+-IMAC microspheres.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw files were searched using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.5.1) with a Uniprot protein FASTA database of Human. Trypsin was selected as the specific enzyme with up to 2 miss cleavages. The oxidation of methionine (M) was set as variable modifications. Meanwhile, the carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide and protein identification were set below 1%. The results were then imported into the MaxQuant associated software suite Perseus for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer metastasis is the main cause of cancer death in women, so far, no effective treatment has inhibited breast cancer metastasis. Sulforaphane (SFN), a natural compound derived from broccoli, has shown potential health benefits in many cancers. However, research on breast cancer metastasis is still insufficient. Here, we showed that SFN, including its two isomers of R-SFN and S-SFN, significantly inhibited TGF-&#x3b2;1-induced migration and invasion in breast cancer cells. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis showed that SFN affected the formation of the cytoskeleton. Subsequent experiments confirmed that SFN significantly inhibited TGF-&#x3b2;1-induced actin stress fiber formation and the expression of actin stress fiber formation-associated proteins, including paxillin, IQGAP1, FAK, PAK2, and ROCK. Additionally, SFN is directly bound to RAF family proteins (including ARAF, BRAF, and CRAF) and inhibited MEK and ERK phosphorylation. These in vitro results indicate that SFN targets the RAF/MEK/ERK signaling pathway to inhibit the formation of actin stress fibers, thereby inhibiting breast cancer cell metastasis.

### Keywords
Human, Mda-mb-231 cells, Sulforaphane, Actin stress fiber formation

### Affiliations
Dalian Medical University

### Submitter
Jing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Liu
Dalian Medical University


