### Accession
PXD018596

### Title
The LC-MS/MS analysis of human leukocytes in atherosclerosis related and non-related to chronic kidney disease

### Description
We performed quantitative and qualitative proteomic analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS to study the global changes in proteome of leukocytes isolated from peripheral blood of patients in various stages of chronic kidney disease and cardiovascular disease as compared to healthy controls.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were isolated from peripheral blood by lysis of erythrocytes using RBC lysis solution procedure. The white cell pellets of leukocytes were suspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 0.2% SDS), homogenized using Precellys24 homogenizer and sonicated using an ultrasonic bath. The protein concentration was determined by the 2D-Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, Sigma Aldrich). The precipitation of proteins and in-solution digestion by trypsin was performed. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled with Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The following LC buffers were used: buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in Mili-Q water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of buffer B from 5% to 65% at a 300 nL/min (240 min. method). The instrument settings were as follows: the resolution was set to 70 000 for MS scans and 17 500 for the MS/MS scans to increase the acquisition rate.

### Data Protocol
Following LC-MS/MS analysis, the raw files were qualitatively analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (PD), version 1.4.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The LC-MS/MS runs with the number of PSMs below 150 000 were excluded from further analyses. The identification of proteins by PD was performed using the SEQUEST engine against the UniProt complete human proteome set (release 10-03-2019 with 123 619 sequences) using the following parameters: a tolerance level of 10 ppm for MS and 0.08 Da for MS/MS. Trypsin was used as the digesting enzyme, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. The raw files positively evaluated by PD were then quantitatively analyzed by MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), version 1.5.1.2 (http://coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start). The database search engine Andromeda was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the UniProt database, with the same parameters as those used for PD at ≤1% FDR. The analysis of the leukocytes samples was based on the label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
A progressive loss of functional nephrons defines chronic kidney disease (CKD). Complications related to cardiovascular disease (CVD) are the principal causes of mortality in CKD; however, the acceleration of CVD in CKD remains unresolved. Our study used a complementary proteomic approach to assess mild and advanced CKD patients with different atherosclerosis stages and two groups of patients with different classical CVD progression but without renal dysfunction. We utilized a label-free approach based on LC-MS/MS and functional bioinformatic analyses to profile CKD and CVD leukocyte proteins. We revealed dysregulation of proteins involved in different phases of leukocytes' diapedesis process that is very pronounced in CKD's advanced stage. We also showed an upregulation of apoptosis-related proteins in CKD as compared to CVD. The differential abundance of selected proteins was validated by multiple reaction monitoring, ELISA, Western blotting, and at the mRNA level by ddPCR. An increased rate of apoptosis was then functionally confirmed on the cellular level. Hence, we suggest that the disturbances in leukocyte extravasation proteins may alter cell integrity and trigger cell death, as demonstrated by flow cytometry and microscopy analyses. Our proteomics data set has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE repository with the data set identifier PXD018596.

### Keywords
Human, Atherosclerosis, Lc-ms/ms, Cardiovascular disease, Chronic kidney disease, Leukocytes

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Proteomics,  Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences Poznan, Poland
Department of Biomedical Proteomics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences Poznan

### Submitter
Joanna  Watral

### Lab Head
Dr Magdalena Luczak
Department of Biomedical Proteomics,  Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Polish Academy of Sciences Poznan, Poland


