### Accession
PXD009172

### Title
Olfactory cleft proteome does not reflect olfactory performance in patients with idiopathic and postinfectious olfactory disorder: A pilot study.

### Description
The pathophysiology of post-infectious and idiopathic olfactory loss is still poorly delineated. Since proteins are key players in olfaction and technical advances including LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry give us the opportunity for detailed analysis of the nasal mucus proteome we aimed to undertake a comparative analysis of the olfactory cleft mucus proteome using mucus samples of the olfactory cleft in patients with idiopathic and postinfectious olfactory disorders versus healthy controls. The study was conceived as a pilot study and included 7 patients with idiopathic hyp- and anosmia, 7 patients with postinfectious hyp- and anosmia and 7 healthy controls. In total, 1117 different proteins were detected in at least 5 patients in at least one group. No significant different overall protein concentrations in patients compared to healthy controls (0.4614 µg/µL, SD=0.26273 vs. 0.5143 µg/µL, SD=3087; p=0.689) were found.  Significant correlation regarding olfactory test results (TDI score) and protein concentrations (r=0.114, p=0.623) were either found. Results of this study did not show significant differences regarding the proteomic composition of the olfactory cleft mucus between patients suffering from postinfectious and idiopathic dysosmia versus healthy controls. Thus, central olfactory processing pathways may play a role in idiopathic and postinfectious olfactory disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Nasal mucus was collected from the olfactory cleft of patients after their primary diagnosis of idiopathic or postinfectious olfactory loss as well as in healthy controls under endoscopic control by an otorhinolaryngologist (AW) with meticulous care not to touch the mucosa. Samples were collected using a special suction device (Sinus Secretion Collector, Medtronic Xomed Inc., Jacksonvillw, Florida, USA). 500 µl phosphate buffered saline were added to the samples, thoroughly mixed and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min to remove insoluble particles. Protein content was estimated by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Vienna, Austria). 50 µg of protein was precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone at -20°C overnight. The Pellet was solubilized in 50 µl 25% TFE (2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol) in 50mM Tris-HCl pH=8.5, reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide at 95°C for 10 min and then diluted to 10% TFE with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein was digested by adding 1 µg of Promega modified trypsin and shaking overnight at 550 rpm at 37°C. The resulting peptide solution was acidified by adding 5% formic acid to get 0.1 % end concentration and stored at -20 °C until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identification and quantification using MaxQuant 1.5.8.3 against the human public SwissProt database with taxonomy homo sapiens (downloaded on 02.03.2017) and common contaminants (20233 sequences). Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 4.5 ppm; product mass tolerance +/- 0.5 Da; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR. In order for a protein to be positively identified, it had to have at least 2 different peptides detected by LC-MS/MS. In addition, a label free quantitation including the match between runs feature of MaxQuant was performed requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. Further data processing (filtering for reverse and contaminant hits, log2 transformation, filtering for min. 5 valid values in at least one group, imputation of missing values from shifted normal distribution) and statistical analysis (ANOVA corrected for multi-testing by permutation-based FDR, q ≤ 0.05) was performed using Perseus software version 1.5.8.5.

### Publication Abstract
Technical advances including liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and its data analysis enable detailed proteomic analysis of the nasal mucus. Alterations of the nasal mucus proteome may provoke substantial changes of the nasal physiology and have already been associated with rhinologic diseases such as allergic rhinitis. This study was conducted as a pilot study to map the olfactory cleft proteome using current techniques for proteomic analysis. Furthermore, we aimed to investigate proteomic changes as potential biomarkers in patients suffering from idiopathic and postinfectious olfactory disorders compared to healthy controls. Seven patients with idiopathic hyposmia and anosmia, seven patients with postinfectious hyposmia and anosmia and seven healthy controls were included in this study. In total, 1117 different proteins were detected in at least five patients in at least one group. Results of this study did not reveal significant differences regarding the proteomic composition of the olfactory cleft mucus between patients versus healthy controls. Among proteins involved in olfactory perception the G protein family was detected but also found unchanged between groups. Investigation of protein composition by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry enabled us to perform an in-depth analysis of the olfactory cleft mucus proteome regarding the diversity of different proteins in individual patients. However untargeted proteomics of the olfactory cleft mucus may not be an applicable approach to develop biomarkers for olfactory disorders. Targeted analyses of distinct proteins known to be involved in olfactory perception but not detected by our approach, e.g. odorant binding proteins, may provide more information regarding pathophysiology of olfactory diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Idiopathic and postinfectious olfactory disorder, Lc-ms/ms, Olfactory cleft

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria; Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (ACIB), Petersgasse 14, 8010 Graz, Austria; Medical University of Graz, Institute of Pathology, Research Unit Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria; Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 24, 8010 Graz, Austria.


