### Accession
PXD037768

### Title
Seb1 proximity dependent biotinylation (PDB) in Schizosaccharomyces pombe

### Description
Transcription by RNA polymerase I (RNAPI) represents most of the transcriptional activity in eukaryotic cells and is associated with the production of mature ribosomal RNA (rRNA). As several rRNA maturation steps are coupled to RNAPI transcription, the rate of RNAPI elongation directly influences processing of nascent pre-rRNA, and changes in RNAPI transcription rate can result in alternative rRNA processing pathways in response to growth conditions and stress. However, factors and mechanisms that control RNAPI progression by influencing transcription elongation rate remain poorly understood. Our project is to show that the conserved RNA-binding Seb1 is a pausing-promoting factor for RNA polymerases I to control cotranscriptional RNA processing.  Here, we did a proximity dependent biotinylation followed by mass spectrometry (PDB-MS) of the Seb1 protein in order to assess for physical interactions with the RNAPI transcription machinery. A mutant E. coli BirA enzyme is fused to the Seb1 protein. This mutant version of BirA uses biotin to catalyze the formation of biotinoyl-5′-AMP (bioAMP), thereby generating a ‘cloud’ of activated biotin molecules that can react with free primary amines (most often lysine residues) of neighboring proteins. This experiment will support the conclusion that Seb1 is located at the rDNA locus.

### Sample Protocol
50mL of cultures were grown in YES medium supplemented with 50µM biotin to an OD600nm of ∼0.5–0.6. Cell pellets were resuspended in cold 1X RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% SDS and 1% NP-40) supplemented with 0.4% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1× PLAAC and 1x cOmplete, then disrupted vigorously with a Fast prep (Mp Biomedical) with 3 cycles of 30s at 6.5m/s. Sample volume was increased to 500 µl using the same buffer before sonication for three cycles of 10 s at 20% intensity using a Branson Sonifier 250. Then, 1µl of benzonase 250U/µl (Sigma-Aldrich; E1014) was added at 4°C for 1 hour for DNA and RNA digestion. The whole cell extract (WCE) was then normalized for total protein concentrations by performing a Bradford protein assay. Then, 1mL of cold 1X RIPA buffer with supplement and 0.4% total SDS (instead of 0.1%) containing 5mg of protein was added to 50µl of Streptavidin–Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare; 17-5113-01) for 3 h at 4°C. Beads were washed once with washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5] and 2% SDS), three times with cold 1X RIPA buffer with addition of 1 mM DTT (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% SDS and 1% NP-40) and five times with ABC buffer (20mM ammonium bicarbonate). All washes were done for 5 min at room temperature with agitation. The proteins attached to the beads were then reduced by the addition of 10mM DTT and alkylated by the addition of 15mM iodoacetamide (IAA). To digest the proteins still bound to the beads, 1 μg of trypsin was added and incubated at 37°C overnight and stopped by adding formic acid (final concentration of 1%). Peptides were then extracted twice with acetonitrile, lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Desalting was done using ZipTips (EMD Milipore). After a second lyophilization, the peptides were resuspended in 25µl of TFA then quantified with a nanodrop (Thermo Fisher) at 205nm and returned to the mass spectrometry platform.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software package used to process, search and quantify the data collected, employing the S. pombe Uniprot proteome with 5122 protein annotations (Proteome ID: UP000002485). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: two miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was trypsin; variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. For precursor ions, 7 ppm was used as mass tolerance and for fragment ions, 20 ppm was used as tolerance threshold. To obtain candid identifications with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%, every protein was considered based on the criterion that the amount of forward hits in the database was minimally 100-fold higher than the amount of reverse database hits. Each protein had a minimum of three peptides quantified. Isoforms and proteins that were indistinguishable based on their identified peptides were grouped and organized in a single line with various accession numbers.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seb1, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Turboid

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Departement of biochemistry and functional genomic, Sherbrooke university, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
François Bachand

### Lab Head
Dr François Bachand
Departement of biochemistry and functional genomic, Sherbrooke university, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada


