### Accession
PXD011324

### Title
GASP and FASP are complementary for LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis of drug-metabolising enzymes and transporters in pig liver

### Description
Sample preparation is a critical step in the proteomic workflow. Numerous different approaches are used, tailored to the type of sample, the aims of the experiment, analytical method, and to an extent, user preference. This has resulted in large variation in reported protein abundances. In this study we demonstrate the complementarity of two different sample preparation techniques for the study of absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) related proteins from pig liver tissue. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) is a well-established and widely used method, whilst gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) is a relatively new method optimised and simplified from previous gel-associated digestion techniques. To investigate each method the number of peptides and proteins characterised, reproducibility of results and their real-time application were examined. Whilst both methods have their merits and limitations, for example, FASP is the less technical of the two methods, whilst GASP is time efficient, ultimately the two methods show significant differences in the peptides identified and therefore the use of both methods should be considered when examining and quantifying ADME related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Poole, UK) unless otherwise indicated. Our in-house FASP method utilises sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in place of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to reduce interference with downstream LC-MS analysis. To ensure a direct comparison between the two methods, this step was kept the same for GASP. Two biological replicates, Pig Liver 1 (PL1) and Pig Liver 2 (PL2), were processed in triplicate, making a total of six samples in each arm of the study. Microsomal fractions were prepared as previously described by Achour et al. (2011) with amendments to the initial homogenisation step. 1 g of liver tissue from two pigs (Axons Butchers, Manchester, UK) was homogenised using a digital handheld homogenizer TT-30K (Cambio Ltd., Cambridge, UK) in homogenisation buffer (1 mM EDTA, 10 mM HEPES, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 0.2 mM Pefabloc, pH 7.4), at 10 ml buffer per gram of tissue, containing 1 cOmplete™ mini protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Sciences, Mannheim, Germany). The microsomal fraction was extracted using differential centrifugation and stored in storage buffer (0.25 M potassium phosphate, pH 7.25, 30% v/v glycerol) at -80ºC. Microsomal protein concentration was determined by BCA assay in triplicate. Sample preparation was carried out in triplicate for each method (technical replicates) using 50 µg of microsomal protein. Solubilisation and reduction of proteins was achieved using 5% SDC and 0.1 M DTT, followed by incubation for 30 mins at 56ºC.  GASP – Reduced and solubilised proteins were incorporated into 2x volume 20% acrylamide/bis-acrylamide gel and left at room temperature for 10 mins before adding TEMED and 10% APS for polymerisation. The solid gel-protein plug was transferred to a modified spin X tube (see [10] for details) and pulse centrifuged to cut and increase gel surface area. Gel pieces were fixed (1 ml 50/40/10 methanol/acetic acid/water), washed (500 µl 6 M urea), dehydrated (1 ml acetonitrile [MeCN]), rehydrated (500 µl ammonium bicarbonate [AmBic]) and further dehydrated (1 ml acetonitrile) until gel pieces agglomerated at the bottom of the tube. Each stage lasted 10 mins on a rotator. All solution was aspirated and 1 µg Lys-C and subsequently 2 µg trypsin per 50 µg protein was added to the same volume as original gel plug. Gel pieces were incubated for 3-4 hrs, 30ºC and 18 hrs, 37ºC respectively. Peptide extraction as described by Fischer and Kessler (2015).   FASP – All centrifugation steps were carried out at 14,000 rpm, for 20 mins RT, all flow through was discarded and each stage was carried out twice unless otherwise indicated. Reduced and solubilised proteins were added to a pre-washed Amicon-Ultra filter (MWCO 10 kDa), centrifuged at 13,000 rpm once and then washed (400 µl 8 M urea/tris buffer). Proteins were alkylated (100 µl 50 mM iodoacetamide [IAA]) in the dark for 30 mins before further washes (200 µl 8 M and then 200 µl 1 M urea/tris buffer). Filters were incubated with 1 µg Lys C (3-4 hrs, 30ºC) and 2 µg trypsin (18 hrs, 3ºC) per 50 µg protein. Filters were centrifuged in a collection tube, followed by centrifugation with 100 µl 0.5 M NaCl, to collect the peptides.   Extracted peptides were cleaned using Pierce® C18 spin columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Rockford, IL) as per the manufacture’s guidelines. Eluted peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a multistep gradient from 95% Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 7% B at 1 min, 22% B at 58 min, 30% B at 73 min and 60% B at 75 min at 300 nl min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 µm CSH C18 analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data-dependant acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.3 default parametersexcept for the following: Fixed Modification: FASP - Carbamidomethyl (C), GASP - Propionamide (C) Variable Modification: FASP - Oxidation (M) Deamidation (NQ), GASP - Oxidation (M) Deamidation (NQ) Propionamide (K), Match between run feature between technical replicates used

### Publication Abstract
Sample preparation is a critical step in the proteomic workflow. Numerous different approaches are used, tailored to the type of sample, the aims of the experiment, analytical method, and to an extent, user preference. This has resulted in large variation in reported protein abundances. In this study, the complementarity of two different sample preparation techniques is demonstrated for the study of absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME) related proteins from pig liver tissue. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) is a well-established and widely used method, while gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) is a relatively new method optimized and simplified from previous gel-associated digestion techniques. To investigate each method, the number of peptides and proteins characterized, reproducibility of results, and their real-time application are examined. While both methods have their merits and limitations, for example, FASP is the less technical of the two methods, while GASP is time efficient, ultimately the two methods show significant differences in the peptides identified and therefore, the use of both methods should be considered when examining and quantifying ADME related proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011324.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Gasp, Lc-ms/ms, Fasp, Pig liver

### Affiliations
University of Manchester, Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research (CAPKR), University of Manchester

### Submitter
Martyn Howard

### Lab Head
Dr Jill Barber
Centre for Applied Pharmacokinetic Research (CAPKR), University of Manchester


