### Accession
PXD028701

### Title
The nucleoporin Nup50 activates the Ran guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 to promote NPC assembly at the end of mitosis

### Description
During mitotic exit, thousands of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) assemble concomitant with the nuclear envelope to build a transport-competent nucleus. Here, we show that Nup50 plays a crucial role in NPC assembly independent of its well-established function in nuclear transport. RNAi-mediated downregulation in cells or immunodepletion of Nup50 protein in Xenopus egg extracts interferes with NPC assembly. We define a conserved central region of 46 residues in Nup50 that is crucial for Nup153 and MEL28/ELYS binding, and for NPC interaction. Surprisingly, neither NPC interaction nor binding of Nup50 to importin /, the GTPase Ran, or chromatin is crucial for its function in the assembly process. Instead, an N-terminal fragment of Nup50 can stimulate the Ran GTPase guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 and NPC assembly, indicating that Nup50 acts via the Ran system in NPC reformation at the end of mitosis. In support of this conclusion, Nup50 mutants defective in RCC1 binding and stimulation cannot replace the wild-type protein in in vitro NPC assembly assays, while excess RCC1 can compensate the loss of Nup50.

### Sample Protocol
FLAG-tagged Nup50 fragment aa 1-120 or empty vector were transfected into HEK293T cells. 24 hours after transfection the respective cell pellets were lysed and the lysate was incubated with Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads for 2 hours. The beads were washed thee times with IP buffer aand then washed three times with IP buffer without detergent. The dried beads were then frozen at -80°C until sample preparation. The bead-bound proteins were then treated 1 hour with 5 μg/ml Trypsin (in 2 M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5) at room temperature (see also Turriziani et al, 2014)). The resulting supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the beads were washed twice with 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and 1 mM DTT. All individual supernatants were subsequently combined and subjected to overnight digestion at room temperature. The resulting peptide solution was then treated with iodoacetamide, acidified, desalted (using home-made C18-tips) and lyophilized. The peptides were then resuspended in 15 µl 3% formic acid (FA)/5% acetonitrile (ACN) and loaded onto a nanoLC system (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific). Trapping of the peptides was performed for 10 min on a precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific), which was then followed by separation on an analytical column (Easyspray 50 cm column (ES803) at 45°C; Thermo Scientific) using a 125 min gradient (0–10 min: 5% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1 % FA; buffer B: 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA), 10–60 min: 5–20 % buffer B, 60-98 min: 20-35 % buffer B, 98-101 min: 35-99 % buffer B, 101-106 min: 99 % buffer B, 106-109 min: 99-5 % buffer B, 109-125 min: 5 % buffer B) with a spray voltage of 2 kV and the capillary temperature set at 250 °C. Analysis of the samples was performed on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in data dependent mode. Full MS settings: 70,000 resolution; AGC target, 1e6; maximum injection time, 50 milliseconds; scan range, 350-1600 m/z. dd-MS2 settings were: 17,500 resolution; AGC target: 1e5; maximum injection time: 55 milliseconds; top 20 precursor fragmentation; isolation window, 2.0 m/z; collision energy, 27. dd settings were: minimum AGC, 5e2; 20 second dynamic exclusion; only 2+ to 5+ peptides were allowed.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software suite (using the built-in Andromeda search engine) was used for analysis of the raw data, which was searched against the human UniProt database version 12/2020 (only containing reviewed and canonical sequences): MaxQuant default settings (including the mass tolerance) were used. Specific settings were: Specific settings: Trypsin as the specific protease (two missed cleavages); Carbamidomethylation (Cys) as fixed modification; Oxidation (Met) and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was 0.01 on both peptide and protein level and the minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. Quantification was done using the label free quantitation algorithm from MaxQuant. The resulting proteinGroups.txt file (Dataset EV2) from the MaxQuant search was then used for statistical analysis employing the Perseus software suite (version 1.6.14.0) (Tyanova et al, 2016b). The LFQ intensities from all biological replicates were used as the main columns. First, contaminant, reversed and “only identified by site” entries were removed from the protein list. Prior to subsequent analysis only entries with a minimum of 1 unique peptide and 2 total peptides (razor + unique) were left in the protein list. The three individual biological replicates were grouped as NUP and ctrl and the data was log2-transformed. Proteins were only included in the final data set if they were identified in all replicates in at least one group (min 3 in one group). Missing data points (“NaN”) were then imputed by replacing them with values based on normal distribution (using the default settings of Perseus). Further analysis was done by performing a two sample test (Perseus default settings). The resulting file was used for generation of the Volcano plots (Fig. 8A). The settings for the volcano plot were: p-value<0.01 and a ratio of >4-fold change (>2 (–log (10) p-value) and >2 (log (2) ratio).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xenopus, Ap-ms, Nuclear pore complex

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Medical School, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Antonin
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Medical School, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany


