### Accession
PXD026704

### Title
Coating and corruption of human neutrophils by bacterial  outer membrane vesicles

### Description
Porphyromonas gingivalis is a keystone oral pathogen that successfully manipulates the human innate immune defenses, resulting in a chronic pro-inflammatory state of periodontal tissues and beyond. Here we demonstrate that secreted outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) are deployed by P. gingivalis to selectively coat and activate human neutrophils, thereby provoking degranulation without neutrophil killing. Secreted granule components with antibacterial activity, especially LL-37 and MPO, are subsequently degraded by potent OMV-bound proteases known as gingipains, thereby ensuring bacterial survival. In contrast to neutrophils, the P. gingivalis OMVs are efficiently internalized by macrophages and epithelial cells. Importantly, we show that neutrophil coating is a conserved feature displayed by OMVs of at least one other oral pathogen, namely Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. Altogether, we conclude that P. gingivalis deploys its OMVs for a neutrophil-deceptive strategy to escape phagocytosis and to create a favorable inflammatory niche.

### Sample Protocol
The composition of the purified MPO preparation and MPO citrullination by PPAD were analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS). For the latter purpose, recombinant PPAD was purified from Lactococcus lactis as described previously. Subsequently, PPAD (1 µg) was incubated with MPO (2 µg) overnight at 37°C.  Purified MPO and MPO+PPAD samples were prepared according to Hughes et al. 2019 applying the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol. In brief, samples were reduced with TCEP (5 mM,45 min, 65°C) and alkylated with IAA (10 mM, 20 min, room temperature, in the dark). SP3 beads (2 µl) (hydrophobic: Sera-Mag Speedbeads carboxylate-modified particles [GE Healthcare]; hydrophilic: Speedbead magnetic carboxylate-modified particles [GE Healthcare]) were added to the samples. Subsequently, ethanol was added to a final concentration of 50% (v/v) and the samples were incubated in a thermomixer (5 min, 24°C, 900 rpm). Tubes were placed in a magnetic rack to collect the beads and the supernatant was removed. Beads were washed twice with 80% (v/v) ethanol and air dried. Afterwards, proteins were digested by adding 25 µl digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) containing 100 ng of trypsin followed by 30 s sonication in a water bath to disaggregate the beads, and incubation at 37°C was continued for 18 h. Beads were removed by centrifugation (20,000 g, 1 min) and by placing the tubes in a magnetic rack to transfer the supernatant to a glass vial. The supernatants were dried by vacuum centrifugation and peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl 0.1% acetic acid in water. Finally, samples were analyzed by MS.  All MPO samples were analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS. Thus, an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Fischer) was coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer). Peptides were loaded onto in-house self-packed fused silica columns (75 µm x 20 cm) containing reversed-phase C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120-AQ 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted using a non linear binary gradient of 31 min from 2% to 99% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The full scan was recorded with a mass range from 300 1650 m/z and a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most abundant ions were isolated with an isolation width of 3 Th and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. Fragment ion spectra were recorded with a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z. Ions with unassigned charge states as well as charge 1 and higher than 6 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragmented ions were excluded from fragmentation for 10 s. Lock mass correction was enabled.

### Data Protocol
For database searches, spectra were searched using MaxQuant with the implemented Andromeda search algorithm (version 1.6.17.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry)against the Human Reference Proteome (reviewed) downloaded from Uniprot (09/28/2020). Parameters for precursor mass deviation were set to 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for fragment mass tolerance. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 on protein, peptide and spectral levels was applied as well as a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids and two unique peptides per protein. Full tryptic specificity with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was applied. Variable modifications were oxidation on methionine (M) and N-terminal acetylation (Protein N-term), citrullination on arginine (R) and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine (NQ). Furthermore, MaxQuant’s generic contamination list was included.  Classical database search algorithms still overestimate the number of potential citrullinated peptides and citrullination sites. Therefore, a manual validation according to Lee et al. 2018 of all spectra including potential citrullination was indispensable. Accordingly, the spectra were inspected for the presence of diagnostic ions with the neutral loss of isocyanic acid, the presence of the immonium ion at 130.097 m/z and incomplete fragment ion series without N/Q ambiguity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Citrullination, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Ll-37, Neutrophils, Gingipains, Myeloperoxidase, Omvs

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute for Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute for Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Claudia Hirschfeld

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute for Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany


