### Accession
PXD033614

### Title
TTC30A and TTC30B redundancy protects IFT complex B integrity and its pivotal role in ciliogenesis

### Description
Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is a microtubule-based system that supports the assembly and maintenance of cilia, an essential organelle for development and maintenance of cellular integrity. Dysfunction of IFT was shown to lead to a wide spectrum of disease phenotypes, so called ciliopathies of variable severity. In previous studies two distinct complexes (IFT-A; IFT-B) were identified, containing multiple proteins that are part of the IFT machinery. Two of the IFT-B components are TTC30A and TTC30B and in contrast to all other IFT components, only these two are paralogues. To investigate whether these two proteins have a similar and essential ciliary or constitute redundant functions, CRIPSR/Cas9 was used to specifically knock-out TTC30A or B and to generate a double knock-out. Localization studies showed a redundancy of both proteins in ciliogenesis while polyglutamylation of cilia was affected by both single knockouts. Further, the localization of other IFT components was not affected by the depletion of a single paralogue. A loss of both proteins led to a severe ciliogenesis defect, resulting in no cilia formation which can be rescued by expression of TTC30A or B. The redundancy can be explained by highly similar interaction patterns of both paralogues, both equally interact with the IFT-B machinery. In summary our study demonstrates that a loss of one TTC30 paralogue can mostly compensate severe ciliary defects, due to redundancy. However, cells assemble shorter cilia which are potentially limited in their functions, especially because of impaired polyglutamylation. A complete loss of both proteins leads to a deficit in IFT complex B integrity followed by disrupted IFT and subsequently no cilia.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis an Ultimate3000 nano-RSLC was coupled to a Fusion by a nanospray ion source. Prepared peptide mixtures were loaded onto a nano trap column (µ-Precolumn 300µm i.d. x 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Dionex). Injection was conducted with a flow rate of 30 µL/min in 98 % of buffer C (0,1 % TFA in HPLC-grade water) and 2 % of buffer B (80 % ACN, 0.08 % formic acid in HPLC-grade water). After 3 min peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (75 µm x 25 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 2 µm, 100 Å; Dionex) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 2 % up to 30 % of buffer B in buffer A (2 % ACN, 0.1 % formic acid) for 82 min after an initial step of 3 min at 2 % buffer B. Remaining peptides were eluted with a steep gradient (30 % to 95 % in 5 min) followed by 5 min at constant 95 % of buffer B before the gradient was decreased rapidly in 5 min to 2 % of solvent B for the final 20 minutes. In the data-dependent analysis full scan MS spectra were measured on the Fusion in a mass-charge range from m/z 335-1,500 with a resolution of 70,000. The ten most abundant precursor ions were selected with a quadrupole mass filter, if they exceeded an intensity threshold of 5.0 e4 and were at least doubly charged, for further fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) followed by mass analysis of the fragments in the iontrap. The selected ions were excluded for further fragmentation the following 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Max Quant software 1.6.0.16 was used for label free quantification and Perseus software 1.6.2.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016) for data and statistical analysis (Student t-Test; Significance A).

### Publication Abstract
Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is a microtubule-based system that supports the assembly and maintenance of cilia. The dysfunction of IFT leads to ciliopathies of variable severity. Two of the IFT-B components are the paralogue proteins TTC30A and TTC30B. To investigate whether these proteins constitute redundant functions, CRISPR/Cas9 was used to generate single TTC30A or B and double-knockout hTERT-RPE1 cells. Ciliogenesis assays showed the redundancy of both proteins while the polyglutamylation of cilia was affected in single knockouts. The localization of other IFT components was not affected by the depletion of a single paralogue. A loss of both proteins led to a severe ciliogenesis defect, resulting in no cilia formation, which was rescued by TTC30A or B. The redundancy can be explained by the highly similar interaction patterns of the paralogues; both equally interact with the IFT-B machinery. Our study demonstrates that a loss of one TTC30 paralogue can mostly be compensated by the other, thus preventing severe ciliary defects. However, cells assemble shorter cilia, which are potentially limited in their function, especially because of impaired polyglutamylation. A complete loss of both proteins leads to a deficit in IFT complex B integrity followed by disrupted IFT and subsequently no cilia formation.

### Keywords
Ift, Cilia

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen
Medical Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Marius Ueffing
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen


