### Accession
PXD028142

### Title
KCNQ2 and KCNQ5 can form a channel complex in the brain independent of KCNQ3 channels

### Description
KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 channels are associated with multiple neurodevelopmental disorders and are also therapeutic targets for neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases. The current dogma is that, in the brain, KCNQ2 forms diheteromeric channels with KCNQ3, but not with KCNQ5, a channel also resident in neurons. Here, we investigated whether KCNQ2 channels can form functional triheteromeric channels with KCNQ3 and KCNQ5. We applied split-intein-mediated protein trans-splicing to form KCNQ2-KCNQ5 diheteromeric channels followed by co-expression with KCNQ3 to form triheterometic channels. Unexpectedly, we found that KCNQ2-KCNQ5 tandems can form functional channels that are regulated by KCNQ3 and PIP2 levels. Using an epitope-tagged Kcnq2 mouse and mass spectrometry, we also demonstrated that KCNQ2 channels can associate with KCNQ5 channels in the absence of KCNQ3 channels in the brain. Thus, KCNQ2 channel composition is much more diverse than has been previously recognized, necessitating a re-examination of the genotype–phenotype relationship of KCNQ2 pathogenic variants.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitated proteins were isolated on magnetic beads, washes, and resupended in 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate in water. The protein and bead slurry was reduced and alkylated at 37°C using 5 mM dithiothreitol and 10 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate for 1.5 h uncovered and 45 min in the dark, respectively. Proteins were digested using trypsin at a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio overnight at 37°C rotating at 700 rpm in a Thermo Thermal Mixer Block. Peptides were removed with the supernatant, acidified to pH 3 with concentrated formic acid and desalted with Pierce C18 Peptide Desalting Columns using the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted, desalted peptides were dried to completion using a Labconco Speedvac Concentrator, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water, and frozen at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis.Peptides were quantified using a Thermo Scientific Nanodrop Spectrophotometer and diluted with 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 2 mg/mL. Peptides were analyzed with nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nUPLC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC UPLC system and Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. A 2 hr linear reversed phase gradient was used to elute peptides into the mass spectrometer with electrospray ionization.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant v1.6.1.0 searches against the Flag-KCNQ plus Uniprot mus musculus database. All proteomics results were visualized using Scaffold Q+S v.5 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 channels are associated with multiple neurodevelopmental disorders and are also therapeutic targets for neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases. For more than two decades, it has been thought that most KCNQ channels in the brain are either KCNQ2/3 or KCNQ3/5 heteromers. Here, we investigated the potential heteromeric compositions of KCNQ2-containing channels. We applied split-intein protein trans-splicing to form KCNQ2/5 tandems and coexpressed these with and without KCNQ3. Unexpectedly, we found that KCNQ2/5 tandems form functional channels independent of KCNQ3 in heterologous cells. Using mass spectrometry, we went on to demonstrate that KCNQ2 associates with KCNQ5 in native channels in the brain, even in the absence of KCNQ3. Additionally, our functional heterologous expression data are consistent with the formation of KCNQ2/3/5 heteromers. Thus, the composition of KCNQ channels is more diverse than has been previously recognized, necessitating a re-examination of the genotype/phenotype relationship of KCNQ2 pathogenic variants.

### Keywords
Autism spectrum disorders, Co-immunoprecipitation, Kcnq5, Channelopathy, Epilepsy, Kcnq3, Kcnq2, Neurodevelopmental disorders, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut
University of Connecticut

### Submitter
Jeremy Balsbaugh

### Lab Head
Dr Jeremy Balsbaugh
Proteomics & Metabolomics Facility, University of Connecticut


