### Accession
PXD001985

### Title
CF sputum LC-MSMS -  Proteomic profile of cystic fibrosis sputum cells in adults chronically infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Lung disease is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF), and involves chronic infection by a destructive microbiota and perturbed innate and adaptive immune responses. Tissue damage is considered to be mediated mostly by proteases, but other bacterial and host factors may also play a role. To determine the presence of potentially injurious proteins we employed semi-quantitative Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology to identify sputum cellular proteins with consistently altered expression in CF compared to healthy controls. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, Gene Ontology functions, protein abundance and correlation with lung function were used to infer their clinical significance. The CF proteome exhibited differential expression of proteins relating to Rho family small GTPase activity, immune cell movement and activation, generation of reactive oxygen species and dysregulation of cell death and proliferation. Compositional breakdown established neutrophil extracellular trap proteins as the consistently most abundant cellular proteins detected, while a further 13 biologically relevant proteins were found to correlate negatively with lung function. These findings expand the current understanding of the mechanisms underlying CF lung disease and identify sputum cell proteins which might be useful as markers of disease status, prognostic indicators, stratification determinants for treatment prescription or as therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of sputum cellular proteins All work was carried out at 4°C and using prechilled buffers. Approximately 1g of mucus plug was separated from each sputum sample and mixed with 9 ml sterile phosphate buffered saline pH 7.4 (PBS) containing Roche Complete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC). The mixture was homogenised thoroughly by repeat syringing (no needle) and cells pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 4,000 x g. The cells were washed twice more in 10 ml PBS+PIC and strained through a 70 µm nylon cell strainer (BD Biosciences) to remove any remaining cell clumps. The cells were pelleted once more to remove all supernatant before protein extraction. Cell pellets were resuspended in 0.2 - 3.0 ml lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1% v/v Nonidet P 40, 4% w/v SDS, pH 8.0) depending on pellet size and Sigma protease inhibitor cocktail added at 10 µl per 1 ml as directed. After thorough homogenisation by vortexing and repeat passage through an 18-gauge needle, the mixtures were subjected to 5 freeze-thaw cycles and water bath sonication to ensure lysis. Insoluble cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g and the soluble protein supernatants were stored at -80°C.  Protein digestion and iTRAQ labelling Protein digestion and iTRAQ labelling were performed as described previously 90. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA Protein Assay (Pierce). ProteaseMax (Promega) made up in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to a final concentration of 0.1% to 70 µg of each protein sample. The samples were reduced with 5 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 55°C for 20 min and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulphonate at room temperature for 20 min. Following methanol/chloroform precipitation for 60 min at 4°C, protein pellets were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB, 0.1% Proteasemax and trypsin digested overnight at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were dried to <5 µl by vacuum centrifugation and diluted with 500 mM TEAB to a final volume of 30 µl, before acidification with trifluoroacetic acid and labelling with 8plex iTRAQ Reagents (AB Sciex) according to kit instructions.  MudPIT Six test samples and a reference sample were mixed for simultaneous analysis by 2D liquid chromatography MudPIT, using a two-dimensional Vented Column Setup with a Proxeon nano-flow high-performance liquid pump as described previously. Sample mixes were dried to approximately 5 µl by vacuum centrifugation, before resuspension in Buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a protein concentration of 1 µg/µl. 70 µg of mixed sample was loaded onto a tri-phasic fused silica capillary column – 250 µm internal diameter packed with 3 cm of 5 µm Aqua C18 (Phenomenex), 3 cm of 5 µm Luna SCX (Phenomenex) and 2 cm of 5 µm Aqua C18. Each salt step was eluted at 3.5 µl/min on an analytical column (100 µm internal diameter packed with 12 cm of 5 µm Aqua C18) on line with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Electron). Data were acquired in profile mode using the following parameters: for full-scan Fourier transform mass spectrometry, resolution = 60,000, m/z = 380–1,700 and the 10 most intense ions were fragmented with higher-collision dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 40% and an activation time of 0.1. Minimum threshold signal was at 5,000 and isolation width at 1.2. Dynamic exclusion settings were repeat count 1, repeat duration of 30, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 and exclusion mass width 10 p.p.m.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS database search Peaklists were generated by Mascot Distiller (Matrix science; version 2.3). Protein identification was performed by the Mascot search engine version 2.3 against the International Protein Index (IPI) human database version 3.87 (91,464 sequences) plus NCBI non-redundant database (2011), taxonomy P. aeruginosa (48,845 sequences) with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m., with iTRAQ8plex (N-terminal) and iTRAQ8plex (lysine) as fixed modifications and oxidation (methionine) and deamidated (asparagine & lysine) as variable modifications. Trypsin was set as the cleavage enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. A mass tolerance of 0.3 Da was set for fragment ions. Mascot Percolator was used to re-score the results to false discovery rates of 0.74-1.16% for protein identification. Protein identifications with a MOWSE score less than 65 were rejected. Protein-level iTRAQ ratios were calculated as intensity weighted, using only peptides with expectation values less than 0.05. Global ratio normalization was performed using intensity summation, with no outlier rejection.

### Publication Abstract
Lung disease is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF), and involves chronic infection and perturbed immune responses. Tissue damage is mediated mostly by extracellular proteases, but other cellular proteins may also contribute to damage through their effect on cell activities and/or release into sputum fluid by means of active secretion or cell death.We employed MudPIT (multidimensional protein identification technology) to identify sputum cellular proteins with consistently altered abundance in adults with CF, chronically infected with <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, compared with healthy controls. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, Gene Ontology, protein abundance and correlation with lung function were used to infer their potential clinical significance.Differentially abundant proteins relate to Rho family small GTPase activity, immune cell movement/activation, generation of reactive oxygen species, and dysregulation of cell death and proliferation. Compositional breakdown identified high abundance of proteins previously associated with neutrophil extracellular traps. Furthermore, negative correlations with lung function were detected for 17 proteins, many of which have previously been associated with lung injury.These findings expand our current understanding of the mechanisms driving CF lung disease and identify sputum cellular proteins with potential for use as indicators of disease status/prognosis, stratification determinants for treatment prescription or therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Sputum, Cystic fibrosis

### Affiliations
Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland, BT9 7BL, UK.
Centre for Infection and Immunity

### Submitter
S Pattison

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Stuart Elborn
Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland, BT9 7BL, UK.


