### Accession
PXD008863

### Title
CSA-FLAG UV Treatment -  TRiC controls transcription resumption after UV damage by regulating Cockayne syndrome protein A

### Description
SILAC comparison between CSA interactome before and after UV treatment.

### Sample Protocol
CSA IP from SILAC labeled CS3BE cells before and after UV irradiation, SDS-PAGE, LC-MS/MS (Q Exactive): 1 lane CS3BE CSA-FLAG (K8/R10)/CS3BE FLAG (K0/R0) 2 lane CS3BE CSA-FLAG UV Treatment 20J/m2 (K8/R10) / CS3BE CSA-FLAG mock (K0/R0)

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS, MaxQuant, SILAC multiplicity = 2 settings (K0/R0, K8R10), human Uniprot database

### Publication Abstract
Transcription-blocking DNA lesions are removed by transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) to preserve cell viability. TC-NER is triggered by the stalling of RNA polymerase II at DNA lesions, leading to the recruitment of TC-NER-specific factors such as the CSA-DDB1-CUL4A-RBX1 cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase complex (CRL<sup>CSA</sup>). Despite its vital role in TC-NER, little is known about the regulation of the CRL<sup>CSA</sup> complex during TC-NER. Using conventional and cross-linking immunoprecipitations coupled to mass spectrometry, we uncover a stable interaction between CSA and the TRiC chaperonin. TRiC's binding to CSA ensures its stability and DDB1-dependent assembly into the CRL<sup>CSA</sup> complex. Consequently, loss of TRiC leads to mislocalization and depletion of CSA, as well as impaired transcription recovery following UV damage, suggesting defects in TC-NER. Furthermore, Cockayne syndrome (CS)-causing mutations in CSA lead to increased TRiC binding and a failure to compose the CRL<sup>CSA</sup> complex. Thus, we uncover CSA as a TRiC substrate and reveal that TRiC regulates CSA-dependent TC-NER and the development of CS.

### Keywords
Csa, Uv treatment, Silac, Flag

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center


