### Accession
PXD015754

### Title
The exon junction complex component CASC3 is a major effector of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in human cells

### Description
In metazoans, the exon junction complex (EJC) is a central component of spliced messenger ribonucleoprotein particles (mRNPs). CASC3 has been reported to be a core component of the EJC and to be crucial for assembly, the splicing regulating function of the EJC and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). However, recent evidence suggests that CASC3 functions differently from other EJC core components. To elucidate the cellular role of CASC3, we have established human cell lines in which CASC3 was inactivated by means of CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing. We show that in these cells CASC3 is dispensable for the splicing regulatory role of the EJC. However, we find that CASC3 depletion results in the upregulation of many known and novel NMD substrates, suggesting that CASC3 is required for the efficient execution of EJC-dependent NMD. Taken together, our results challenge the model of CASC3 as an assembly factor and core component of the EJC. Our data rather show that CASC3 is involved in the degradation of NMD substrates and therefore uncover the primary molecular function of CASC3 in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
293 WT and 293 CASC3 KO clone H cells expressing either FLAG or FLAG-EIF4A3 were labeled by maintaining them for 5 passages in DMEM for SILAC medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with FBS (Silantes), Penicillin-Streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the respective amino acids at a final concentration of 0.798 mmol/L (Lysine) and 0.398 (Arginine). Unlabeled proline was added to prevent enzymatic Arginine-to-Proline conversion. The conditions were “light” (unlabeled Lysine/Arginine), “medium” (Lysine 4/Arginine 6) and “heavy” (Lysine 68/Arginine 610). A label switch was performed between the three replicates according to the experimental setup listed in Supplementary Table 2. The expression of FLAG or FLAG-EIF4A3 was induced for 72 h with 1 µg/ml doxycycline. The cells were lysed in buffer E with RNAse (20 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.9), 100 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, Protease Inhibitor, 1 µg/ml RNAse A) and sonicated with 15 pulses (1.5 mm tip in 600 µl volume, 1s, 50% amplitude). 600 µl of a 1.6 mg/ml total protein lysate were incubated with 30 µl Anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma) at 4° C while rotating for 2 h. The beads were washed three times for 5 min with EJC-buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.9), 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2% Triton X-100, 0.1% NP-40, 0.05% Sodium deoxycholate) and eluted in 43 µl of a 200 mg/ml dilution of FLAG peptides (Sigma) in 1x TBS. The samples were merged according to Supplementary Table 2. 1 volume of 10% SDS was added and the samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with CAA (final concentrations 5 mM and 40 mM, respectively). Tryptic protein digestion was performed using a modified version of the single pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3).  In brief, reduced and alkylated proteins were supplemented with paramagnetic Sera-Mag speed beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and mixed in a 1:1-ratio with 100% acetonitrile (ACN). After 8 min incubation protein-beads-complexes were captured using an in-house build magnetic rack and two times washed with 70% EtOH. Afterwards, samples were washed once with 100% ACN, air-dried and reconstituted in 5 µl 50 mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate supplemented with 0.5 µg trypsin and 0.5 µg LysC and incubated overnight at 37°C. On the next day the beads were resuspended and mixed with 200 µl ACN, incubated for 8 min and again placed on the magnetic rack. Tryptic peptides were washed once with 100% ACN, airdried, dissolved in 4% DMSO and transferred into 96-well PCR tubes. After acidification with 1 µl of 10% formic acid, samples were ready for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS RAW files were analysed using the standard settings of the MaxQuant suite (version 1.5.3.8) with the before mentioned SILAC labels.  Peptides were identified by matching against the human UniProt database using the Andromeda scoring algorithm.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. Trypsin/P was selected as digestion protein. A false discovery Rate (FDR) < 0.01 was used for identification of peptide-spectrum matches and protein quantification. Data processing and statistical analysis was done in the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3).  Significantly changed proteins were identified by One-sample t-testing (H0 = 0, fudge factor S0 = 0.1), 1D annotation enrichment was used for identification of enriched GO terms.

### Publication Abstract
The exon junction complex (EJC) is an essential constituent and regulator of spliced messenger ribonucleoprotein particles (mRNPs) in metazoans. As a core component of the EJC, CASC3 was described to be pivotal for EJC-dependent nuclear and cytoplasmic processes. However, recent evidence suggests that CASC3 functions differently from other EJC core proteins. Here, we have established human CASC3 knockout cell lines to elucidate the cellular role of CASC3. In the knockout cells, overall EJC composition and EJC-dependent splicing are unchanged. A transcriptome-wide analysis reveals that hundreds of mRNA isoforms targeted by nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) are upregulated. Mechanistically, recruiting CASC3 to reporter mRNAs by direct tethering or via binding to the EJC stimulates mRNA decay and endonucleolytic cleavage at the termination codon. Building on existing EJC-NMD models, we propose that CASC3 equips the EJC with the persisting ability to communicate with the NMD machinery in the cytoplasm. Collectively, our results characterize CASC3 as a peripheral EJC protein that tailors the transcriptome by promoting the degradation of EJC-dependent NMD substrates.

### Keywords
Nonsense-mediated mrna decay, Exon junction complex, Splicing

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr Niels H. Gehring
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany


