### Accession
PXD029730

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of UBQLN2 mutant cells

### Description
In the project “Phosphoproteomic analysis of UBQLN2 mutant cells” by Laura Strohm, Zehan Hu, Jörn Dengjel, and Christian Behrends eight sets of SILAC experiments were performed, two times four biological replicates, comparing proteome and phosphoproteome of control and UBQLN2 mutant, patient-derived lymphoblasts (LCLs).

### Sample Protocol
LCL cells were cultured in lysine- and arginine-free DMEM (GIBCO) supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 10% dialyzed FBS and antibiotics as well as with 146 mg/ml light (K0, Sigma) or heavy lysine (K8, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and 84 mg/ml light (R0, Sigma) or heavy (R10, CambridgeIsotope Laboratories) arginine, respectively. Cell pellets were lysed in 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Protein concentrations were determined by a BCA assay and protein amounts were adjusted to equal concentrations. Cell lysates were reduced by 1 mM DTT, alkylated by 5 mM iodoacetamide, and digested by Lys C for 4 h. The urea solution was diluted to 1 M urea before tryptic digestion overnight. Resulting peptides were purified and fractionated as described previously (Hu et al., 2019). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on an Automated Liquid Handling Platform (AssayMap Bravo, Agilent) (Post et al., 2017) using Fe (III)-NTA cartridges (5 µL).

### Data Protocol
. MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) (Cox & Mann, 2008) using a Uniprot full-length homo sapiens database (March, 2016), and common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in-gel digestion as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation, serine-, threonine- and tyrosine-phosphorylation, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and three missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Peptide, site, and protein FDR based on a forward-reverse database were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, the minimum score for modified peptides was 40, and minimum number of peptides for identification of proteins was set to one, which must be unique. The “match-between-run” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquilin-2 (UBQLN2) is a ubiquitin-binding protein that shuttles ubiquitinated proteins to proteasomal and autophagic degradation. UBQLN2 mutations are genetically linked to the neurodegenerative disorders amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia (ALS/FTD). However, it remains elusive how UBQLN2 mutations cause ALS/FTD. Here, we systematically examined proteomic and transcriptomic changes in patient-derived lymphoblasts and CRISPR/Cas9-engineered HeLa cells carrying ALS/FTD UBQLN2 mutations. This analysis revealed a strong up-regulation of the microtubule-associated protein 1B (MAP1B) which was also observed in UBQLN2 knockout cells and primary rodent neurons depleted of UBQLN2, suggesting that a UBQLN2 loss-of-function mechanism is responsible for the elevated MAP1B levels. Consistent with MAP1B's role in microtubule binding, we detected an increase in total and acetylated tubulin. Furthermore, we uncovered that UBQLN2 mutations result in decreased phosphorylation of MAP1B and of the ALS/FTD-linked fused in sarcoma (FUS) protein at S439 which is critical for regulating FUS-RNA binding and MAP1B protein abundance. Together, our findings point to a deregulated UBQLN2-FUS-MAP1B axis that may link protein homeostasis, RNA metabolism, and cytoskeleton dynamics, three molecular pathomechanisms of ALS/FTD.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Lcl, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


