### Accession
PXD035180

### Title
Arthritis protection conferred by a subset of antibodies to citrullinated proteins in rheumatoid arthritis - human synovium fluids samples

### Description
Anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) are one of the hallmarks in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but the in vivo function remained unclear. To investigate the effects of ACPAs, we expressed monoclonal ACPAs derived from RA patients, and analyzed the functions in mouse models, as well as the reactivity to tissue and peptides/proteins. All ACPAs showed no arthritogenicity and could not induce pain-like behavior in mice whereas one of them (E4) profoundly protected against antibody-induced arthritis. E4 showed a tissue binding pattern restricted to skin epithelial cells, to macrophages and dendritic cells in lymphoid tissue and to cartilage from mouse and human arthritic joints. Proteomic analysis showed that E4 had a distinct binding pattern to macrophage and RA synovial fluid proteins (e.g. alpha-enolase). The protective effect was epitope specific but also dependent on Fc-FCGR2B interaction on macrophages following the immune complex formation, resulting an increased IL-10 production and osteoclastogenesis reduction. The findings suggest that certain ACPAs could be protective in arthritis with therapeutic potentials.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were resuspended in 50 mM Tris at pH 8.5 and 2 M urea and protein concentration was determined by BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with 5 mM Dithiothreitol, followed by 15 mM of iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark. For Macrophage samples, urea concentration was reduced to 1 M and 1:50 (w/w) Trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample for overnight digestion. Human synovial fluid samples were digested for 2 h with 1:100 (w/w) LysC (Fujifilm Wako), then urea concentration was reduced to 1 M and 1:100 (w/w) Trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample for overnight digestion. Samples were acidified by formic acid until the pH was below 3 and desalted by Pierce™ C18 Tips (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3)61. For peptides search, acetylation of N-terminal and oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. Trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages was set as protease and the spectrum was searched against the UniProt mus musculus database or the Swissprot homo sapiens database, for the macrophage and human synovium fluids samples, respectively. The FDR was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. The match between run feature and LFQ were enabled. For all other parameters, the default settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anti-citrullinated protein antibodies, Rheumatoid arthritis, Autoimmune

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I
Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics
Karolinska Institutet
Division of Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden

### Submitter
Christian Beusch

### Lab Head
Dr Rikard Holmdahl
Division of Medical Inflammation Research, Dept. Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Sweden


