### Accession
PXD035768

### Title
Proteomics of human naive pluripotent and trophoblastic stem cells

### Description
This project aims at identifying missing proteins in naive pluripotent and trophoblastic stem cells in the framework of the human proteome project (HPP). To date, as much as 1343 missing proteins remain to be credibly identified essentially, but not entirely, by mass spectrometry. The present results also constitute a first step towards the identification of potential biological markers for assessing stem cells and early embryo development.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins from human naive pluripotent and trophoblastic stem cells were lysed, digested with Trypsin and Lys-C and purified with the IST Kit (PreOmics GmbH, Planegg, Germany) before LC-MS-MS analysis in data-dependent acquisition mode using a TIMS TOF Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Ion mobility resolved mass spectra, nested ion mobility vs m/Z distributions, as well as summed fragment ion intensities were extracted from the raw data file with DataAnalysis 6.0 (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). Signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio were increased by summations of individual TIMS scans. Mobility peak positions and peak half-widths were determined based on extracted ion mobilograms (±0.05 Da) using the peak detection algorithm implemented in the DataAnalysis software. Features detection were also performed using DataAnalysis 6.0 software and exported in .mgf format. Peptides identification were then performed using Mascot version 2.6.2 applying the previously described search parameters and using its automatic decoy database search to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) (Jumeau et al., J. Proteome Res. 2015, Melaine et al., J. Proteome Res. 2018); against the Human Proteome Parsing Proline protein sequence database (Bouyssie et al., Bioinformatics 2020) and with the PaSER search engine (Bruker Daltonik). Briefly, 1 miscleavage for trypsin was allowed and mass tolerance of peptides and fragments was established at 15 ppm and 0,05 Da for Mascot. The mass tolerance of peptides for PaSER was fixed at 30 ppm. Moreover, mass modifications of peptides are taken into account. For fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteines and for variable modifications, oxidations and acetylation of lysines and N-termn proteins was parameterized at the peptide level and not at the protein level like Mascot. After interrogations on Mascot, data processing was performed using the Proline software (version 2.1.0). All the results of the queries performed on Mascot were imported into Proline with a subset threshold of 1. After importation, the results were validated with a peptide pretty rank of 1, an FDR for PSM of 1% on adjusted e-value and an FDR for protein set of 1% with a standard scoring. Peptide and protein identifications summaries were generated for each sample with the PaSER search engine and with the Mascot search engine.

### Publication Abstract
The Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) aims at identifying the proteins as gene products encoded by the human genome, characterizing their isoforms and functions. The existence of products has now been confirmed for 93.2% of the genes at the protein level. The remaining mostly correspond to proteins of low abundance or difficult to access. Over the past years, we have significantly contributed to the identification of missing proteins in the human spermatozoa. We pursue our search in the reproductive sphere with a focus on early human embryonic development. Pluripotent cells, developing into the fetus, and trophoblast cells, giving rise to the placenta, emerge during the first weeks. This emergence is a focus of scientists working in the field of reproduction, placentation and regenerative medicine. Most knowledge has been harnessed by transcriptomic analysis. Interestingly, some genes are uniquely expressed in those cells, giving the opportunity to uncover new proteins that might play a crucial role in setting up the molecular events underlying early embryonic development. Here, we analyzed naive pluripotent and trophoblastic stem cells and discovered 4 new missing proteins, thus contributing to the C-HPP. The mass spectrometry proteomics data was deposited on ProteomeXchange under the data set identifier PXD035768.

### Keywords
Human proteome project; missing proteins; human naive pluripotent and trophoblastic stem cells

### Affiliations
Protim Core facility - Irset Inserm U1085 - UAR Biosit CNRS 380 Inserm 018
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim Core facility - Irset Inserm U1085 - UAR Biosit CNRS 380 Inserm 018


