### Accession
PXD002645

### Title
Proteomic profiling of ubiquitylated proteins in urinary exosomes

### Description
Exosomes, derived from multivesicular bodies (MVBs), contain proteins and genetic materials from their cell of origin and are secreted from various cells types, including kidney epithelial cells. In general, it is thought that protein cargo is ubiquitylated, but that ubiquitin is cleaved by specific deubiquitylases during the process of cargo incorporation into MVBs. Here, we provide direct evidence that in vivo, deubiquitylation is not essential. Ubiquitin was detected within human MVBs and urinary exosomes by electron microscopy. Protein mass spectrometry identified >6000 proteins in human urinary exosomes, 15% of which were ubiquitylated with various topologies (K63>K48> K11>K6>K29>K33>K27). Ubiquitylated proteins involved in transcriptional regulation or solute transport were significantly enriched. Non-biased analysis of over-represented motifs uncovered a significant preference for basic amino acids upstream of the ubiquitylation site. The current studies demonstrate that in human epithelial cells, deubiquitylation of protein cargo is not necessary for MVB formation and exosome secretion and highlight that urinary exosomes are an enriched source for studying ubiquitin modifications in physiological or disease states.

### Sample Protocol
All data were obtained from urinary exosomes isolated by ultracentrifugation from healthy volunteers ages 19 - 45 years. In-gel digestion and in-solution digestion followed by di-glycine remnant (K-ε-GG) immunoaffinity purification were performed prior to mass spectrometry (MS). Protein alkylation was done using 55 mM chloroacetamide. MS was carried out on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) with a top 10 data dependent scan and dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using X! Tandem, Andromeda, and SEQUEST algorithms against human databases (ENSEMBL GRCh37.70: 104785 sequences and NCBI RefSeq: 35930 sequences) plus common contaminants concatenated with their reversed sequences. A target-decoy approach was used to limit a false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified peptides to less than 2%. For each MS2 scan, peptide sequences from the three search algorithms that passed the FDR threshold were compared and ambiguous identification was discarded. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine was used as a fixed modification mass. Variable modifications were oxidation at methionine, di-glycine (+114.042927, Unimod Accession #: 121) at lysine, and LeuArgGlyGly (LRGG, +383.228103, Unimod Accession #: 535) at lysine. A maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes, derived from multivesicular bodies (MVBs), contain proteins and genetic materials from their cell of origin and are secreted from various cells types, including kidney epithelial cells. In general, it is thought that protein cargo is ubiquitylated but that ubiquitin is cleaved by specific deubiquitylases during the process of cargo incorporation into MVBs. Here, we provide direct evidence that, in vivo, deubiquitylation is not essential. Ubiquitin was detected within human MVBs and urinary exosomes by electron microscopy. Of the &gt;6000 proteins identified in human urinary exosomes was mass spectrometry, 15% were ubiquitylated with various topologies (Lys63&gt;Lys48&gt; Lys11&gt;Lys6&gt;Lys29&gt;Lys33&gt;Lys27). A significant preference for basic amino acids upstream of ubiquitylation sites suggests specific ubiquitylation motifs. The current studies demonstrate that, in vivo, deubiquitylation of proteins is not necessary for their incorporation into MVBs and highlight that urinary exosomes are an enriched source for studying ubiquitin modifications in physiological or disease states.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Ubiquitylated proteins, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Chulalongkorn University
Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Trairak Pisitkun

### Lab Head
Dr Trairak Pisitkun
Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand


