### Accession
PXD041990

### Title
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A promotes mitochondrial fission by enhancing MFF succinylation in ovarian cancer

### Description
Mitochondria are dynamic organelles that are important for cell growth and proliferation. Dysregulated mitochondrial dynamics are highly associated with the initiation and progression of various cancers, including ovarian cancer. However, the regulatory mechanism underlying mitochondrial dynamics is still not fully understood. Previously, our study showed that carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) is highly expressed in ovarian cancer cells and promotes the development of ovarian cancer. Here, we find that CPT1A regulates mitochondrial dynamics and promotes mitochondrial fission in ovarian cancer cells. Our study futher shows that CPT1A regulates mitochondrial fission and function through mitochondrial fission factor (MFF) to promote the growth and proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. Mechanistically, we show that CPT1A promotes succinylation of MFF at lysine 302 (K302), which protects against Parkin-mediated ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation of MFF. Finally, the study shows that MFF is highly expressed in ovarian cancer cells and that high MFF expression is associated with poor prognosis in patients with ovarian cancer. MFF inhibition significantly inhibits the progression of ovarian cancer in vivo. Overall, CPT1A regulates mitochondrial dynamics through MFF succinylation to promote the development of ovarian cancer. Moreover, our findings suggest that MFF is a potential therapeutic target for ovarian cancer.

### Sample Protocol
SKOV-3 cells were harvested and MFF was enriched by immunoprecipitation with an anti-MFF antibody. After separation by SDS-PAGE, the MFF region was cut out digested, and separated using the EASY-nLC 1000 ultrahigh performance liquid phase system. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the NCBI human MFF sequence.

### Data Protocol
The search parameters as follows: the digestion protease was trypsin; modification of +114 Da on Lys was considered as ubiquitination, and modification of +100 Da on Lys was considered as succinylation. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial dynamics; mff; succinylation; ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Shaanxi Normal University

### Submitter
Yaqin Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Huanjie Shao
Shaanxi Normal University


