### Accession
PXD026342

### Title
Endometrial extracellular vesicle decidualization

### Description
Proper decidualization is vital in preparation for a potential embryo receptivity, placentation, menstrual health and subsequent endometrial regeneration. Given the importance of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in intercellular communication, and recently in embryo implantation and indicators of menstrual cycle and fertility, we investigated their role during decidualization. Overall, this study provides an insight into distinct variation in sEV composition depending upon the level of decidualization of endometrial stromal cells, with the signaling potential to coordinate endometrial health ranging from embryo implantation, facilitating placentation and subsequent endometrial regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
sEVs from day 2 and 14 (PD n = 13 and WD n = 10) were solubilized in 1% (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, and quantified by microBCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For mass spectrometry-based proteomics, samples (10 g in 50 L) were normalized and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 min at 25°C followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25°C in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM DTT. Magnetic beads were prepared by mixing Sera‐Mag Speed Beads A and B at 1:1 (v:v) ratio and washing twice with 200 µL MS-water, with Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analysed on a Dionex UltiMate NCS-3500RS nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with nanospray ion source in positive mode. MS raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016) software and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) as previously described. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo sapiens (human) reference proteome (75,777 entries, downloaded Sep-2020) with a contaminants database employed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was 0.05 for protein and 0.01 for peptide level with a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptides and this FDR was determined by searching a reverse sequence database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least one unique or razor peptide per protein group. Contaminants, and reverse identification were excluded from further data analysis. ‘Match between run algorithm’ in MaxQuant (Nagaraj et al., 2012) and label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed, analyzed as a single batch run.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endometrial, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes, Decidualization

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute


