### Accession
PXD034475

### Title
Cross-linked ammonia monooxygenase complex in BN-PAGE gel from Nitrososphaera viennensis

### Description
A band containing the ammonia monooxygenase complex from Nitrosospheara viennensis was cut from a Blue Native PAGE gel and cross linked using DSSO.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane fractions from Nitrosospheara viennensis were isolated using ultracentrifugation after lysis of cells.  Membrane proteins were extracted from membrane fractions using DDM and loaded onto Blue Native gels.  A band representing the ammonia monooxygenase complex was cut from the gel and cross-linked using DSSO. Cross-linked proteins were digested using trypsin and peptides were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nanosystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X, equipped with a nano-spray ion source using coated emitter tips (PepSep, MSWil). Full details can be found in publication.

### Data Protocol
The raw file from the cross-linked sample was converted per cv into raw files in Freestyle and analyzed using MaxQuant. The analysis was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications.  To identify cross-linked peptides, the raw data were searched with either MS Annikain Proteome Discoverer 2.3 or with MeroX 2.0 against the sequences of the top abundant protein hits (with at least 10 MS/MS counts) from the MaxQuant search. Although it had less than 10 MS/MS counts, the protein encoded by NVIE_004550 was also added based on other proteomic and syntenic analysis (see publication).  DSSO was selected as the cross-linking chemistry. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set for trypsin. Search results were filtered for 1% FDR on the PSM level limiting the precursor mass deviation to 10 ppm. Further filtering was done for only non-decoy and high confidence PSMs in MS Annika and for a score higher than 50 in MeroX 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ammonia oxidizing archaea, Nitrification, Copper membrane bound monooxygenase, Ammonia monooxygenase

### Affiliations
Department of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology University of Vienna
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Logan Hodgskiss

### Lab Head
Dr Christa Schleper
Department of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology University of Vienna


