### Accession
PXD009222

### Title
HEK-AXL glycopeptides supporting GlycopeptideGraphMS development

### Description
To support the development of a novel bioinformatic solution for glycopeptide identification, the cancer-associated AXL glycoprotein was used to validate the approach. AXL has 6 N-glycan sites.

### Sample Protocol
Following a previously described filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method18, 50 µg of recombinant AXL was reconstituted in 15 mM DTT, 4 M Urea in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 and reduced and denatured at 56°C for 1 hour, and transferred to a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Pall Corporation). The buffer was exchanged to 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, and the sample was alkylated in the dark for 30 minutes, and buffer-exchanged to 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) bicarbonate.The protein was digested at 37°C for 14 hours with sequencing grade trypsin (1:50 weight ratio, Promega) and Glutaminase-C (1:50 weight ratio, GluC, Promega) added 4 hours after Trypsin was added. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation and washing with three washes of 50uL of ammonium bicarbonate, and the pooled eluate was dried under vacuum (SpeedVac, Savant). Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid for injection into the LCMS.  A Thermo Ultimate3000 RSLCnano system was used to separate the peptides and glycopeptides. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) TFA/H2O and Solvent B was 99.9% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. AXL peptides were washed on a C18 Acclaim PepMap trap column and then resolved on a PepMap RSLC C18 nanoflow Easyspray column (2 µm diameter, 100 Å beads, 15 cm length, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40°C using a 104 min linear gradient from 2% B to 50% B, followed by a 5 min linear gradient from 50% B to 95% B, all at 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides and glycopeptides were detected by an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with cone voltage at 2000 V and 40°C. Precursors were detected by the Orbitrap at resolution 120,000. Tandem mass fragmentation (MS/MS) was performed by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD, energy 30%) of the most number of precursors within a duty cycle of 5 seconds, with a dynamic exclusion of 12 seconds and isolation window of m/z = +1.6. Fragments were detected by the Orbitrap (resolution 30,000). For additional sequencing of glycopeptides, HexNAc oxonium ions (m/z 204.08) in HCD triggered product-dependent electron transfer dissociation coupled with HCD (EThcD), with ETD reagent time of 125ms and HCD collisional energy of 30%. The LCMS was controlled by Thermo XCalibur software version 3.0.63.  For the exoglycosidase digested peptides, the MS/MS was generated by HCD stepped collisional energy of 25%±5% and analysed by ion trap scanning m/z 150-2000 at Enhanced scan rate (10,000 Da/sec), AGC 1x104, minimum injection time 100 ms and quadrupole isolation window of m/z 2.0.

### Data Protocol
Byonic (Protein Metrics) was used with the parameters: Cleavages C-terminus of RKDE and N-terminus of E (this unusual cleavage was manually verified), with 4 missed cleavages. Accuracy set to 25ppm for precursors and fragments. Modifications were Cys(Carbamidomethyl), M(Oxidation), His(Carbamidomethyl), N-glycans from am in-house database. Significance was set at 1% FDR, using a DecoyPyRat scrambled decoy.

### Publication Abstract
The leading proteomic method for identifying N-glycosylated peptides is liquid chromatography coupled with tandem fragmentation mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) followed by spectral matching of MS/MS fragment masses to a database of possible glycan and peptide combinations. Such database-dependent approaches come with challenges such as needing high-quality informative MS/MS spectra, ignoring unexpected glycan or peptide sequences, and making incorrect assignments because some glycan combinations are equivalent in mass to amino acids. To address these challenges, we present GlycopeptideGraphMS, a graph theoretical bioinformatic approach complementary to the database-dependent method. Using the AXL receptor tyrosine kinase (AXL) as a model glycoprotein with multiple N-glycosylation sites, we show that those LCMS features that could be grouped into graph networks on the basis of glycan mass and retention time differences were actually N-glycopeptides with the same peptide backbone but different N-glycan compositions. Conversely, unglycosylated peptides did not exhibit this grouping behavior. Furthermore, MS/MS sequencing of the glycan and peptide composition of just one N-glycopeptide in the graph was sufficient to identify the rest of the N-glycopeptides in the graph. By validating the identifications with exoglycosidase cocktails and MS/MS fragmentation, we determined the experimental false discovery rate of identifications to be 2.21%. GlycopeptideGraphMS detected more than 500 unique N-glycopeptides from AXL, triple the number found by a database search with Byonic software, and detected incorrect assignments due to a nonspecific protease cleavage. This method overcomes some limitations of the database approach and is a step closer to comprehensive automated glycoproteomics.

### Keywords
Human, Axl, Glycoprotein, Bioinformatics, Cancer

### Affiliations
Bioprocessing Technology Institute Analytics Group
Head of Analytics Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science Technology and Reseach

### Submitter
Matthew Choo

### Lab Head
Dr Terry Nguyen-Khuong
Head of Analytics Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science Technology and Reseach


