### Accession
PXD034051

### Title
p38a regulated networks in cancer cell homeostasis

### Description
p38a (encoded by MAPK14) is a protein kinase that regulates cellular responses to almost all types of environmental and intracellular stresses. Upon activation, p38a phosphorylates various substrates both in the cytoplasm and nucleus, allowing this pathway to regulate a wide variety of cellular processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation or survival. To investigate the signaling networks regulated by p38a during cancer cell homeostasis, we performed proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis. Our study identified with high confidence 35 proteins and 114 phosphosites that are modulated by p38a, and highlighted the implication of other protein kinases, such as MK2 and mTOR, in p38a-regulated cellular processes. Moreover, functional analysis of the proteome and phosphoproteome data revealed an important contribution of p38a to the regulation of the processes of cell adhesion, DNA replication and RNA metabolism. We provide experimental evidence supporting that p38a negatively regulates cell-cell adhesion, and showed that this p38a function is likely mediated by the transcriptional modulation of the adaptor protein ArgBP2. Collectively, our results illustrate the complexity of the p38a regulated signaling networks, provide valuable information on p38a-dependent phosphorylation events in cancer cell homeostasis, and document a mechanism by which p38a regulates the adhesion capacity of cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in SILAC medium DMEM (Silantes) supplemented with heavy, light or medium lysine and arginine until at least 95% of proteins were labeled. Heavy-labeled cells were treated with ethanol for 48h, washed, split, and harvested 48h later. Light-labeled cells were treated with 100 nM 4-OHT for 48h to induce p38a deletion, washed, split, and harvested 48h later. Medium-labeled cells were treated for 96h with 2 uM PH797804. Samples were then lysed, digested and enriched for phosphopeptides with TiO2.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt (Mus musculus, release 2018_11) and contaminants database using MaxQuant v1.6.2.6 with the andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008). Searches were run against targeted and decoy databases. Search parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethyl in cysteine as static modification and oxidation in methionine, acetyl in protein N-terminal and phosphorylation in Ser, Thr and Tyr as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was 20 ppm, and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids, the minimum score for modified peptides was 40, and the minimum delta score was 8. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell adhesion, P38a, Phosphoproteome, Cancer cell homeostasis, Argbp2

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Angel R. Nebreda
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. ICREA, Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.


