### Accession
PXD007148

### Title
Dissecting the molecular effects of cigarette smoke on proteasome function

### Description
Proteasome dysfunction is emerging as a novel pathomechanism for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a major leading cause of death in the world. Cigarette smoke is one of the main risk factors for COPD and has been shown to impair proteasome function in vitro and in vivo. Importantly, proteasome activity is inhibited in COPD lungs while expression levels of proteasome subunits are not altered.  In the present study, we dissected the molecular changes induced by cigarette smoke on proteasome function in lung epithelial cells and mouse lungs. We analyzed the integrity, composition, and the interactome of isolated 26S proteasome complexes from smoke-exposed cells and mouse lungs. Moreover, we applied native MS analysis to investigate whether reactive compounds of cigarette smoke directly modify and inhibit the 20S proteasome complex. Our data reveal that the 20S proteasome is slightly destabilized in the absence of any dominant modification of proteasomal proteins. 26S pulldown and stoichiometry analysis indicated that 26S proteasome complexes become instable in response to cigarette smoke exposure. Of note, the interactome of the 26S was clearly altered in smoke-exposed mouse lungs possibly reflecting an altered cellular composition in the lungs of the smoke-exposed mice. Taken together, our results suggest that cigarette smoke induces minor but detectable changes in the stability and interactome of 20S and 26S proteasome complexes which might contribute in a chronic setting to imbalanced proteostasis as observed in chronic lung diseases associated with cigarette smoking.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to mass spectrometry analyses, isolated 26S samples and pull-down controls were precipitated by four volumes of chilled acetone. The mixture was vortexed and incubated overnight at -20 °C. The next day, the mixture was vortexed and centrifuged (15,000 x g, 20 min). Supernatant was discarded and pellet was air-dried at room temperature. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 20 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and cysteine residues were reduced using 1 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60 °C for 10 min. After acetylation, using 1 µL of 300 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, samples were digested in-solution with 2 µg of trypsin (Sigma) over night at 37 °C. Samples were acidified with 0.5 % TFA and stored at -20 °C. Before loading, samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 4 °C. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously on a LTQ-OrbitrapXL (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC (Dionex). Samples were injected and loaded onto the trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) at a flow rate of 30 μL/min in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). After 5 min, peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated on an C18 analytical column (PepMap, 25 cm, 75μm ID, 2μm/100 Å pore size, LC Packings) by a 135 min gradient from 5 % to 50 % of buffer B (75 % ACN/ 0.1 % formic acid (FA) in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2 % ACN / 0.1 % FA in HPLC-grade water) at 300 nL/min flow rate, followed by a short gradient from 50 % to 95 % buffer B in 5 min. Between each sample, the gradient was set back to 5 % buffer B and left to equilibrate for 20 min. From the MS prescan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation in the linear ion trap if they exceeded an intensity of at least 200 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. During fragment analysis, a high-resolution (60,000 full-width half maximum) MS spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass range from 300 Da to 1,500 Da.

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were loaded to the Progenesis QI software (version 3.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) for label free quantification and analyzed as described previously. Briefly, profile data of the MS scans were transformed to peak lists with respective peak m/z values, intensities, abundances (areas under the peaks) and m/z width. MS/MS spectra were treated similarly. After reference selection, the retention times of the other samples were aligned by manual and automatic alignment to a maximal overlay of all features. Features with one charge or more than seven charges were excluded from further analyses. No minimal thresholds were set neither for the method of peak picking nor selection of data to use for quantification. All MS/MS spectra were exported as Mascot generic file and used for peptide identification with Mascot (version 2.6.0., MatrixScience, London, UK) in the Swissprot human (Release 2017_02, 20194 sequences. 11329970 residues) or Swissprot mouse protein database (Release 2017_02, 16868 sequences. 9511662 residues). Search parameters were as follows: mass tolerance was 10 ppm peptide and 0.6 Da fragment; one missed cleavage was allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of < 1 % when searches were performed with the mascot percolator score setting and a significance threshold p < 0.05. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software and the abundances of all peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. Raw abundances were used for calculation of enrichment factors of proteins comparing the three GST controls with the 26S proteasome pull-downs. Even though not all peptides were detected in the GST controls, numeric abundance values were assigned to allow for quantification. Normalized abundances were used for calculation of fold changes of proteins comparing the 26S proteasome pull-downs between cigarette smoke treated and untreated samples. An enrichment ratio cut-off of 3 and a significance threshold p < 0.05 (Student’s t-test) was used for the selection of specific proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasome dysfunction is emerging as a novel pathomechanism for the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), a major leading cause of death in the world. Cigarette smoke, one of the main risk factors for COPD, impairs proteasome function in vitro and in vivo. In the present study, we dissected the molecular changes induced by cigarette smoke on the proteasome in lung epithelial cells and mouse lungs. 26S proteasome pull-down, MS interactome, and stoichiometry analyses indicated that 26S proteasome complexes become instable in cigarette smoke-treated lung epithelial cells as well as in lungs of mice after three day smoke exposure. The interactome of the 26S was clearly altered in mouse lungs upon smoke exposure but not in cells after 24&#x202f;h of smoke exposure. Using native MS analysis of purified 20S proteasomes, we observed some destabilization of 20S complexes purified from cigarette smoke-exposed cells in the absence of any dominant and inhibitory modification of proteasomal proteins. Taken together, our results suggest that cigarette smoke induces minor but detectable changes in the stability of 20S and 26S proteasome complexes which might contribute to imbalanced proteostasis in a chronic setting as observed in chronic lung diseases associated with cigarette smoking.

### Keywords
Cigarette smoke, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Juliane Merl-Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Silke Meiners
Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC), University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany


