### Accession
PXD035805

### Title
A comprehensive SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interactome network that can identify pathobiology and host-targeting therapies for COVID-19

### Description
Physical interactions between viral and host proteins are responsible for almost all aspects of the viral life cycle and the host’s immune response. Studying viral-host protein-protein interactions is thus crucial for identifying strategies for treatment and prevention of viral infection. Here, we use high-throughput yeast two-hybrid and affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry to generate a comprehensive SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interactome network consisting of both binary and co-complex interactions. We report a total of 739 high-confidence interactions, showing the highest overlap of interaction partners among published datasets as well as the highest overlap with genes differentially expressed in samples (such as upper airway and bronchial epithelial cells) from patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Showcasing the utility of our network, we describe a novel interaction between the viral accessory protein ORF3a and the host zinc finger transcription factor ZNF579 to illustrate a SARS-CoV-2 factor mediating a direct impact on host transcription. Leveraging our interactome, we performed network-based drug screens for over 2,900 FDA-approved/investigational drugs and obtained a curated list of 23 drugs that had significant network proximities to SARS-CoV-2 host factors, one of which, carvedilol, showed promising antiviral properties. We performed electronic health record-based validation using two independent large-scale, longitudinal COVID-19 patient databases and found that carvedilol usage was associated with a significantly lowered probability (17%-20%, P &lt; 0.001) of obtaining a SARS-CoV-2 positive test after adjusting various confounding factors. Carvedilol additionally showed anti-viral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in a human lung epithelial cell line [(half maximal effective concentration (EC 50 ) value of 4.1 µM]), suggesting a mechanism for its beneficial effect in COVID-19. Our study demonstrates the value of large-scale network systems biology approaches for extracting biological insight from complex biological processes.

### Sample Protocol
Caco-2 (HTB-37; ATCC) cells were cultured in EMEM with 15% FBS at 37 °C with 5% CO 2 . All SARS-CoV-2 ORFs were codon-optimized and cloned into mammalian expression vectors that contained Strep, Myc, or FLAG affinity tags. Samples were labeled using TMT10plex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (catalog no. 90113; Thermo Scientific) at a (w/w) label-to-peptide ratio of 10:1 for 1 hr at room temperature. Labeled peptides were enriched and fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (catalog no. 84868; Thermo Scientific). Fractions were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 System (catalog no. LC140; Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-house 3 µm C18 resin- (Michrom BioResources) packed capillary column (75 µm × 25 cm) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Used SEQUEST as provided with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 to process the raw files and obtain the PSM list filtered at 1% FDR. Used default settings with appropriate TMT modifications for the search. MSstatsTMT (v1.8.2) R/Bioconductor package was used to process this PSM list and obtain FC and P-value (and FDR) estimates.

### Publication Abstract
Studying viral-host protein-protein interactions can facilitate the discovery of therapies for viral infection. We use high-throughput yeast two-hybrid experiments and mass spectrometry to generate a comprehensive SARS-CoV-2-human protein-protein interactome network consisting of 739 high-confidence binary and co-complex interactions, validating 218 known SARS-CoV-2 host factors and revealing 361 novel ones. Our results show the highest overlap of interaction partners between published datasets and of genes differentially expressed in samples from COVID-19 patients. We identify an interaction between the viral protein ORF3a and the human transcription factor ZNF579, illustrating a direct viral impact on host transcription. We perform network-based screens of &gt;2,900 FDA-approved or investigational drugs and identify 23 with significant network proximity to SARS-CoV-2 host factors. One of these drugs, carvedilol, shows clinical benefits for COVID-19 patients in an electronic health records analysis and antiviral properties in a human lung cell line infected with SARS-CoV-2. Our study demonstrates the value of network systems biology to understand human-virus interactions and provides hits for further research on COVID-19 therapeutics.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human, Ip-ms, Virus pathobiology, Tmt, Y2h

### Affiliations
Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Computational Biology, Cornell University
Cornell University

### Submitter
Shagun Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Haiyuan Yu
Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Computational Biology, Cornell University


