### Accession
PXD044119

### Title
Loss of the parkinsonism-associated protein FBXO7 in glutamatergic forebrain neurons in mice leads to anormal motor behavior and synaptic defects

### Description
Mutations in PARK15, which encodes for the F-box protein FBXO7 have been associated with Parkinsonian Pyramidal syndrome, a rare and complex movement disorder with Parkinsonian symptoms, pyramidal tract signs and juvenile onset. Our previous study showed that systemic loss of Fbxo7 in mice causes motor defects and premature death. We have also demonstrated that FBXO7 has a crucial role in neurons as the specific deletion in tyrosine hydroxylase-positive or glutamatergic forebrain neurons leads to late-onset or early-onset motor dysfunction, respectively. In this study, we examined NEXCre; Fbxo7fl/fl mice, in which Fbxo7 was specifically deleted in glutamatergic projection neurons. The effects of FBXO7 deficiency on striatal integrity were investigated with HPLC and histological analyses. NEX-Cre;Fbxo7fl/fl mice revealed an increase in striatal dopamine concentrations, changes in the glutamatergic, GABAergic and dopaminergic pathways, astrogliosis and microgliosis and little or no neuronal loss in the striatum. To determine the effects on the integrity of the synapse, we purified synaptic membranes, subjected them to quantitative mass spectrometry analysis and found alterations in the complement system, endocytosis and exocytosis pathways. These neuropathological changes coincide with alterations in spontaneous home cage behavior. Taken together, our findings suggest that FBXO7 is crucial for corticostriatal projections and the synaptic integrity of the striatum, and consequently for proper motor control.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosome preparations were seperated on SDS-gels. Gel bands were excised and digested with trypsin using standrd protocols. 30 samples (5 bands per lane, 3 biological replicates per condition) were analysed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument wusing 140 min gradients on  a 25cm Easyspray column.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data files were analysed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.10.43 ) with the label-free quantification algorithm and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The resulting spectra were searched against the mouse UniProt database version 02/2019.with default mass tolerance settings. Trypsin was set as the protease (with two missed cleavages being allowed .Fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (Cys); variable modifications: oxidation (Met), and N-terminal protein acetylation. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept at the default settings (0.01 for both peptides and proteins); minimum peptide length: seven amino acids.  The resulting MaxQuant file “proteinGroups.txt” was then analysed and filtered using Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). The protein entry list was filtered for entries corresponding to “reverse”, “only identified by site” and “potential contaminants”, which were all removed. To be considered for further evaluation, a protein had to be identified a) with at least two unique peptides and b) in all samples of at least one condition. Value imputation based on normal distribution was performed after the last filtering step using the default values in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in PARK15, which encodes for the F-box protein FBXO7 have been associated with Parkinsonian Pyramidal syndrome, a rare and complex movement disorder with Parkinsonian symptoms, pyramidal tract signs and juvenile onset. Our previous study showed that systemic loss of Fbxo7 in mice causes motor defects and premature death. We have also demonstrated that FBXO7 has a crucial role in neurons as the specific deletion in tyrosine hydroxylase-positive or glutamatergic forebrain neurons leads to late-onset or early-onset motor dysfunction, respectively. In this study, we examined NEX-Cre;Fbxo7fl/fl mice, in which Fbxo7 was specifically deleted in glutamatergic projection neurons. The effects of FBXO7 deficiency on striatal integrity were investigated with HPLC and histological analyses. NEX-Cre;Fbxo7fl/fl mice revealed an increase in striatal dopamine concentrations, changes in the glutamatergic, GABAergic and dopaminergic pathways, astrogliosis and microgliosis and little or no neuronal loss in the striatum. To determine the effects on the integrity of the synapse, we purified synaptic membranes, subjected them to quantitative mass spectrometry analysis and found alterations in the complement system, endocytosis and exocytosis pathways. These neuropathological changes coincide with alterations in spontaneous home cage behavior. Taken together, our findings suggest that FBXO7 is crucial for corticostriatal projections and the synaptic integrity of the striatum, and consequently for proper motor control.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Brain, Synapse, Mouse

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Dept of Neurology University Hospital RWTH Aachen Pauwelsstrasse 30 52074 Aachen Germany

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Judith Stegmüller
Dept of Neurology University Hospital RWTH Aachen Pauwelsstrasse 30 52074 Aachen Germany


