### Accession
PXD000280

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana Cytochrome c Novel Partners Identification by LTQ

### Description
Programmed cell death is an event displayed by many different organisms along the evolutionary scale. In plants, it is necessary for development and for the hypersensitive response to stress or pathogenic infection. A common feature to programmed cell death among organisms is the mitochondria-to-cytosol translocation of cytochrome c. To understand the role of cytochrome c in the onset of plant programmed cell death, a proteomic approach based on affinity chromatography has been developed, using Arabidopsis cytochrome c as bait. Eleven putative, new cytochrome c partners have been identified. Nine of them bind the heme protein in plant protoplasts and in human cells, as a heterologous system, according to Bimolecular Fluorescence Complementation. The binding affinities and the kinetic rate constants of three cytochrome c - target complexes have been estimated by Surface Plasmon Resonance. Our data suggest that the role of cytochrome c as a programmed cell death-signaling messenger could be evolutionarily well-conserved. Data Processing & data analysis: Peptides were analyzed using a nanoliquid chromatography-MS/MS on an LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron San Jose, CA, USA).  The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full MS and MS/MS acquisition. The parameters for ion scanning were the following: Full-scan MS(400-1800 m/z) plus top seven peaks Zoom/MS/MS (isolation width 2 m/z), normalized collision energy 35%. The scanning was performed using a dynamic exclusion list (120s exclusion list size of 50). Peak lists from all MS/MS spectra were extracted from the  Xcalibur  RAW  files  using  a  freely  available  program  DTAsupercharge  v.1.19 (http://msquant.sourceforge.net/). MASCOT 2.1 was used to search the Uniprot_Arabidopsis protein database 100323  (90895 sequences). Database search parameters used were the following: trypsin as enzyme; peptide tolerance, 300ppm; fragment ion tolerance, 0.6 Da; missed cleavage sites,1; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications, methionine oxidation. In all protein identifications the probability scores were greater than the score fixed by MASCOT (30) as  significant with a p-value <0.05.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Programmed cell death is an event displayed by many different organisms along the evolutionary scale. In plants, programmed cell death is necessary for development and the hypersensitive response to stress or pathogenic infection. A common feature in programmed cell death across organisms is the translocation of cytochrome c from mitochondria to the cytosol. To better understand the role of cytochrome c in the onset of programmed cell death in plants, a proteomic approach was developed based on affinity chromatography and using Arabidopsis thaliana cytochrome c as bait. Using this approach, ten putative new cytochrome c partners were identified. Of these putative partners and as indicated by bimolecular fluorescence complementation, nine of them bind the heme protein in plant protoplasts and human cells as a heterologous system. The in vitro interaction between cytochrome c and such soluble cytochrome c-targets was further corroborated using surface plasmon resonance. Taken together, the results obtained in the study indicate that Arabidopsis thaliana cytochrome c interacts with several distinct proteins involved in protein folding, translational regulation, cell death, oxidative stress, DNA damage, energetic metabolism, and mRNA metabolism. Interestingly, some of these novel Arabidopsis thaliana cytochrome c-targets are closely related to those for Homo sapiens cytochrome c (Mart&#xed;nez-F&#xe1;bregas et al., unpublished). These results indicate that the evolutionarily well-conserved cytosolic cytochrome c, appearing in organisms from plants to mammals, interacts with a wide range of targets on programmed cell death. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000280.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Cytochrome c, Programmed cell death, H2o2, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Cell Signaling and Immunology

### Submitter
Jonathan Martinez Fabregas

### Lab Head


