### Accession
PXD019758

### Title
Connecting exoproteome content and Monilinia laxa virulence

### Description
LC-MS/MS proteomic studies using in vitro peach cultures provided data on exoproteomes of the three isolates at equivalent stages of brown rot colonization

### Sample Protocol
Erlenmeyer flask containing 1% freeze-dried peach were inoculated with the conidial suspension of each isolate to a final concentration of 10^5 conidia ml-1. Proteins present in the culture media were precipitated by adding trichloroacetic acid to a final concentration of 10%. Samples were incubated on ice for 20 min, centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min at 4ºC to collect precipitated proteins. The pellets were washed firstly with 1 ml of ethanol-ethyl ether (1:1), centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4ºC and then secondly with 1 ml of ethanol-ethyl ether (1:3) followed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4ºC. Protein pellets from exoproteome were dried at room temperature and then dissolved in Laemmli cracking buffer and digested with trypsin for LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Exoproteome of each isolate sample raw files were searched with Sequest through Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 against M. laxa 8L proteome (Naranjo-Ortíz et al., 2018) with peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were considered fixed modifications. False discovery rate calculations were generated using Percolator at q ≤ 0,01 (Käll et al., 2007).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Monilinia laxa</i> is a necrotrophic plant pathogen able to infect and produce substantial losses on stone fruit. Three different isolates of <i>M. laxa</i> were characterized according to their aggressiveness on nectarines. <i>M. laxa</i> 8L isolate was the most aggressive on fruit, 33L isolate displayed intermediated virulence level, and 5L was classified as a weak aggressive isolate. Nectarine colonization process by the weak isolate 5L was strongly delayed. nLC-MS/MS proteomic studies using <i>in vitro</i> peach cultures provided data on exoproteomes of the three isolates at equivalent stages of brown rot colonization; 3 days for 8L and 33L, and 7 days for 5L. A total of 181 proteins were identified from 8L exoproteome and 289 proteins from 33L at 3 dpi, and 206 proteins were identified in 5L exoproteome at 7 dpi. Although an elevated number of proteins lacked a predicted function, the vast majority of proteins belong to OG group "metabolism", composed of categories such as "carbohydrate transport and metabolism" in 5L, and "energy production and conversion" most represented in 8L and 33L. Among identified proteins, 157 that carried a signal peptide were further examined and classified. Carbohydrate-active enzymes and peptidases were the main groups revealing different protein alternatives with the same function among isolates. Our data suggested a subset of secreted proteins as possible markers of differential virulence in more aggressive isolates, MlPG1 MlPME3, NEP-like, or endoglucanase proteins. A core-exoproteome among isolates independently of their virulence but time-dependent was also described. This core included several well-known virulence factors involved in host-tissue factors like cutinase, pectin lyases, and acid proteases. The secretion patterns supported the assumption that <i>M. laxa</i> deploys an extensive repertoire of proteins to facilitate the host infection and colonization and provided information for further characterization of <i>M. laxa</i> pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Brown rot, Monilinia laxa, Pathogenesis, Exoproteome, Necrotrophic fungi

### Affiliations
INIA - Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria

### Submitter
A De Cal

### Lab Head
Dr Antonieta De Cal
INIA - Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria


