### Accession
PXD015130

### Title
MiT/TFE factors control ER-phagy via transcriptional regulation of FAM134B

### Description
Lysosomal degradation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via autophagy (ER-phagy) is emerging as a critical regulator of ER homeostasis and function1. The selective incorporation of ER fragments into nascent autophagosomes is facilitated by ER resident proteins, ER-phagy receptors, that bind the autophagosomal LC3 protein via the cytosolic LC3 interacting domain (LIR) (REF).  However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate ER-phagy in response to cellular needs are still largely unknown. We found that the MiT/TFE transcription factors - master regulators of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy2- control ER-phagy by inducing the expression of the ER-phagy receptor FAM134B. This pathway is robustly activated in chondrocytes by FGF signaling, a critical regulator of chondrocyte differentiation3. FGF triggers TFEB/TFE3-mediated ER-phagy through JNK-dependent proteasomal degradation of the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) protein and inhibition of the insulin signaling. FAM134B knock-down impairs cartilage growth and mineralization in medaka fish, suggesting a physiological role for this process during skeletal growth. Notably, we showed that the TFEB/TFE3-FAM134B axis promotes ER-phagy activation upon prolonged starvation. Thus, this study identifies MiT/TFE-factors as key transcriptional activators of ER-phagy in response to both metabolic and developmental cues.

### Sample Protocol
Secreted proteins were enriched from cell culture supernatant with StrataClean (Bonn et al, 2016) and digested on-beads with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were desalted and anaylzed on a Q Exactive HF

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed with MaxQuant, with standard settings and activated LFQ quantification. Differentially expressed proteins were detected by FDR corrected 2 sample T-tests with Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomal degradation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via autophagy (ER-phagy) is emerging as a critical regulator of cell homeostasis and function. The recent identification of ER-phagy receptors has shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlining this process. However, the signaling pathways regulating ER-phagy in response to cellular needs are still largely unknown. We found that the nutrient responsive transcription factors TFEB and TFE3-master regulators of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy-control ER-phagy by inducing the expression of the ER-phagy receptor FAM134B. The TFEB/TFE3-FAM134B axis promotes ER-phagy activation upon prolonged starvation. In addition, this pathway is activated in chondrocytes by FGF signaling, a critical regulator of skeletal growth. FGF signaling induces JNK-dependent proteasomal degradation of the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1), which in turn inhibits the PI3K-PKB/Akt-mTORC1 pathway and promotes TFEB/TFE3 nuclear translocation and enhances FAM134B transcription. Notably, FAM134B is required for protein secretion in chondrocytes, and cartilage growth and bone mineralization in medaka fish. This study identifies a new signaling pathway that allows ER-phagy to respond to both metabolic and developmental cues.

### Keywords
Erphagy secretome

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
Cell Biology and Disease Mechanisms, TeleThon Institute of Genetics and Medicine

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Carmine Settembre
Cell Biology and Disease Mechanisms, TeleThon Institute of Genetics and Medicine


