### Accession
PXD028851

### Title
A substrate-like thrombin inhibitor from the saliva of the flea Xenopsylla cheopis is resistant to cleavage by the enzyme

### Description
XC-43 is a small peptide identified in the sialome of the flea Xenopsylla cheopis and act as a fast, tight-binding inhibitor of thrombin with a dissociation constant of less than 10 pM. The crystal structure of XC-43 in complex with thrombin shows that despite its substrate-like binding mode, XC-43 is not detectably cleaved by thrombin and that it interacts with the thrombin surface from the enzyme catalytic site through the fibrinogen-binding exosite I. The low rate of hydrolysis is verified in solution experiments with XC-43 which show the substrate to be largely intact after two hours of incubation with thrombin at 37°C. The potential of XC-43 as an anticoagulant is suggested by increased arterial occlusion time, tail bleeding time, and blood coagulation parameters in rat models of thrombosis.

### Sample Protocol
Salivary gland homogenate was prepared using intact salivary gland pairs collected from adult female X. cheopis fleas. Pools of 1,000 pairs of glands were disrupted in 1 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4 and centrifuged for 10 min, 12,000 x g at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, and the total protein concentration determined with the BCA Protein Kit assay. Approximately 11 μg of salivary gland homogenate was reduced in 50 μL of 50 mM HEPES, 5 mM DTT, pH 8.0 at 37 °C for 40 min. The solution was cooled to room temperature and iodoacetate was added and the mixture incubated for 20 minutes. The protein mixture was digested with trypsin (600 ng) for 15h at 37 °C. The reaction was performed in 0.5% TFA and the peptides were then desalted and concentrated using an Optimize micro scale polymer cartridge. Peptides were eluted with 100 μL 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and dried under vacuum at 50 °C. Finally, the mixture was dissolved in injection solvent (0.1% formic acid, 3% AcCN), the peptides quantified fluorometrically and adjusted to a final concentration of 200 ng/μL with injection solvent. The LC-MS experiment was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled to EASY nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA).  Peptides were first bound to a PepMap C18 column (3 µm particle, 100Å pore, 75 µm inner diameter, 2cm length) then separated using an EASY-Spray analytical column (PepMap C18, 2µm particle, 100Å pore, 75µm inner diameter, 25 cm length) using a linear gradient of 0 to 40% acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% formic acid for 80 min, (followed by 40-80% for 5 min, 80% hold for 5 min, 80-50% for 5 min, 0% hold for 5 min).  The analytical column was kept at 50 °C.  Data acquisition was done with the standard data-dependent acquisition strategy, where the survey MS1 scan was done at least every 2 sec with Orbitrap mass analyzer at 120,000 resolution and the MS2 scans were done with a linear ion trap mass analyzer for multiply charged precursor ions isolated with the 1.6 m/z window using a quadrupole and fragmented by CID at 35% collision energy. The EASY-IC internal calibration was utilized for Orbitrap scans, and the dynamic exclusion period was set at 15 sec.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2 and searched with ProLuCID against a flea database including Ctenocephalides felis and X. cheopis (36,610 entries) and reverse sequences of all entries. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a static modification. Data was searched with a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.4 Da fragment ion tolerance. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by Comet was assessed using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform. A cutoff score was established to accept a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. Results were post processed to only accept PSMs with < 10 ppm precursor mass error and proteins with a unique peptide. Normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) was used to re-present relative abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The salivary glands of the flea Xenopsylla cheopis, a vector of the plague bacterium, Yersinia pestis, express proteins and peptides thought to target the hemostatic and inflammatory systems of its mammalian hosts. Past transcriptomic analyses of salivary gland tissue revealed the presence of two similar peptides (XC-42 and XC-43) having no extensive similarities to any other deposited sequences. Here we show that these peptides specifically inhibit coagulation of plasma and the amidolytic activity of &#x3b1;-thrombin. XC-43, the smaller of the two peptides, is a fast, tight-binding inhibitor of thrombin with a dissociation constant of less than 10 pM. XC-42 exhibits similar selectivity as well as kinetic and binding properties. The crystal structure of XC-43 in complex with thrombin shows that despite its substrate-like binding mode, XC-43 is not detectably cleaved by thrombin and that it interacts with the thrombin surface from the enzyme catalytic site through the fibrinogen-binding exosite I. The low rate of hydrolysis was verified in solution experiments with XC-43, which show the substrate to be largely intact after 2&#xa0;h of incubation with thrombin at 37 &#xb0;C. The low rate of XC-43 cleavage by thrombin may be attributable to specific changes in the catalytic triad observable in the crystal structure of the complex or to extensive interactions in the prime sites that may stabilize the binding of cleavage products. Based on the increased arterial occlusion time, tail bleeding time, and blood coagulation parameters in rat models of thrombosis XC-43 could be valuable as an anticoagulant.

### Keywords
X-ray crystallography, Blood feeding, Flea, Thrombin

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, NIH
NIH/NIAID

### Submitter
Stephen Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Jose M.C. Ribeiro
Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, NIAID, NIH


