### Accession
PXD014052

### Title
Comparative proteomics of a stenotopic caddisfly (Trichoptera) identifies acclimation strategies

### Description
As a result of increasing thermal fluctuations and mean temperature values, organisms will experience conditions beyond their physiological limits. In situ adaptation to thermal regimes is mediated via directional selection and phenotypic plasticity. The latter involves physiological and morphological adjustments realized by underlying molecular mechanisms. Understanding species' adaptive capacities requires investigating these adjustive processes. Yet, acclimation through phenotypic plasticity remains largely unexplored, especially at the molecular level; For example, whether cold-adapted species inhabiting freshwater spring ecosystems have evolved adaptive mechanisms to cope with warming of freshwater habitats has, to our knowledge, never been investigated. This work reports a comprehensive proteomics study of the stenotopic species Crunoecia irrorata (Curtis, 1834) (Trichoptera: Lepistomatidae) acclimated to 10, 15 and 20 °C for 168 h. A liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based shotgun proteomics approach identified molecular mechanisms underlying acclimation. We constructed a homology-based database by combining genomic and transcriptomic data from related species and quantified 1356 proteins, of which 186 were differentially expressed between temperature treatments. Through functional annotation, we identified candidate proteins facilitating, among others, trehalose accumulation, tracheal system alteration, and heat shock protein regulation, then discuss concomitant ecophysiological implications. These results provide new insights into the mechanisms of adaptive responses to warming of species inhabiting freshwater ecosystems sensitive to climate change. Further, identified candidate proteins will aid in developing targeted experiments to understand their compensatory physiology. To our knowledge, this is the first study utilizing this approach to investigate the nature of phenotypic plasticity of aquatic macroinvertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
Acclimated C. irrorata larvae (6 biological replicates per treatment with 3 pooled individuals per biological replicate) were transferred into ice-cold 1.5 ml Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, Germany), shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C prior to protein extraction. After addition of 150 µl lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 (adjusted with NaOH/HCL)), samples were in-tube homogenized with a sterile glass pestle followed by 10 min incubation at -4 °C and 10 x 1 s ultrasonication (BandelinSonopuls HD270, Berlin, Germany). Samples were spun at 5,000 rpm for 10 min at -4 °C and 120 µl supernatant was subsequently transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were measured using a QubitTM 3 fluorometer and a QubitTM Protein Assay Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were incubated for 10 min at 95 °C at 300 rpm in a Thermomixer C (PCR 96 heating block, Eppendorf). After letting samples cool down at RT, they were spun down at 5,000 rpm for 10 s. Six µl of 0.75 M chloroacetamide solution was added to each sample and incubated at 37 °C for 10 min at 500 rpm and again spun down at 5,000 rpm for 10 seconds. After measuring the pH of each sample, 1 µl of trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) was added and extracted proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C and 300 rpm. Samples were acidified with 80 µl 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides purified using PreOmics cartridges (Martinsried, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were transferred to 2 ml Eppendorf tubes and concentrated by applying vacuum to dryness for 2 hours. Peptides were subsequently dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid before 1 x 10 s ultrasonication and shaking at 1,4000 rpm at 25 °C for 5 minutes. After spinning dissolved peptides down at 4,000 rpm for 10 min, peptide concentrations were determined based on absorbance values using a Spectrostar Nano plate reader (BMG Labtech). After calculating the final peptide concentrations for each sample, dissolved peptides were transferred to an LC-MS/MS vial. Finally, iRT-peptides were added to the vial and samples were stored at - 20 °C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a custom-made column heater set to 60 °C. Peptides were resolved using an RP-HPLC column (75 µm x 36 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 µl min-1. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 12% B over 5 min to 35% B over 65 min to 50% B over 20 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a cycle time of 3 s between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120000 full width at half maximum (at 200 m/z, MS1) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS/MS (MS2) scans of the most intense precursors in the linear ion trap at “Rapid” scan rate with isolation of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50 ms (MS1) and 35 ms (MS2) with an AGC target of 1.0E6, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 5.0E3. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search in MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008) v1.6.3.4. The “match between runs” option was enabled (match time window: 1 min, alignment time window: 20 min). Instrument type was set to Orbitrap, precursor mass tolerance to 15 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Enzyme specificity was set as fully tryptic, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. MS/MS spectra were searched against an in-house generated Trichoptera protein database (see publication for specification). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 267 sequences). For protein identification, unique and razor peptides were used. The peptide spectrum-match false discovery rate (FDR) and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Oxidation of methionine (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were specified as variable and Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) as fixed modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Peptides were assembled into proteins and proteins sharing the same identified peptides were grouped together in one protein group.

### Publication Abstract
Species' ecological preferences are often deduced from habitat characteristics thought to represent more or less optimal conditions for physiological functioning. Evolution has led to stenotopic and eurytopic species, the former having decreased niche breadths and lower tolerances to environmental variability. Species inhabiting freshwater springs are often described as being stenotopic specialists, adapted to the stable thermal conditions found in these habitats. Whether due to past local adaptation these species have evolved or have lost intra-generational adaptive mechanisms to cope with increasing thermal variability has, to our knowledge, never been investigated. By studying how the proteome of a stenotopic species changes as a result of increasing temperatures, we investigate if the absence or attenuation of molecular mechanisms is indicative of local adaptation to freshwater springs. An understanding of compensatory mechanisms is especially relevant as spring specialists will experience thermal conditions beyond their physiological limits due to climate change. In this study, the stenotopic species Crunoecia irrorata (Trichoptera: Lepidostomatidae, Curtis 1834) was acclimated to 10, 15 and 20&#xb0;C for 168&#xa0;hr. We constructed a homology-based database and via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based shotgun proteomics identified 1,358 proteins. Differentially abundant proteins and protein norms of reaction revealed candidate proteins and molecular mechanisms facilitating compensatory responses such as trehalose metabolism, tracheal system alteration and heat-shock protein regulation. A species-specific understanding of compensatory physiologies challenges the characterization of species as having narrow tolerances to environmental variability if that characterization is based on occurrences and habitat characteristics alone.

### Keywords
Climate change, Molecular adaptation, Environmental proteomics, Phenotypic plasticity, Freshwater springs, Acclimation

### Affiliations
University of Basel
University of Basel, Department of Environmental Sciences, Geoecology Research Group, Klingelbergstrasse 27, 4056 Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Joshua Ebner

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Niklas Ebner
University of Basel, Department of Environmental Sciences, Geoecology Research Group, Klingelbergstrasse 27, 4056 Basel, Switzerland


