### Accession
PXD042268

### Title
CTRP6 promotes macrophage inflammatory response and its deficiency attenuates LPS-induced inflammation

### Description
Macrophages play critical roles in inflammation and tissue homeostasis, and their functions are regulated by various autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine factors. We have previously shown that CTRP6, a secreted protein of the C1q family, targets both adipocytes and macrophages to promote obesity-linked inflammation in adipose tissue. However, the gene programs and signaling pathways directly regulated by CTRP6 in macrophage remain unknown. Here, we combine transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic analyses to show that CTRP6 activates inflammatory gene programs and signaling pathways in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs). Treatment of BMDMs with CTRP6 upregulates proinflammatory, and suppresses the anti-inflammatory, gene expression. We show that CTRP6 activates p44/42-MAPK, p38-MAPK, and NF-κB signalings to promote inflammatory cytokine secretion from BMDMs, and that pharmacologic inhibition of these signaling pathways largely abolish the effects of CTRP6. Pretreatment of BMDMs with CTRP6 further augments LPS-induced inflammatory signaling and cytokine secretion from BMDMs. Consistent with the metabolic phenotype of proinflammatory M1-like macrophages, CTRP6 treatment induces a shift toward aerobic glycolysis and lactate production, reduces oxidative metabolism, and elevates mitochondrial ROS production in BMDMs. We use a Ctrp6 knockout mouse model to further confirm the physiologic relevance of our in vitro findings. BMDMs from CTRP6-deficient mice are less inflammatory at baseline and show a marked suppression of LPS-induced inflammatory gene expression and cytokine secretion. Loss of CTRP6 in mice also dampens LPS-induced inflammation and hypothermia. Collectively, we provide mechanistic evidence that CTRP6 regulates macrophage function, and neutralizing CTRP6 activity may have beneficial effects in reducing inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM) were treated with 5 µg/mL CTRP6 or vehicle control (HEPES) for 30 min. The treatments were carried out in triplicates. Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, collected and lysed in lysis buffer (8M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM disodium β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium fluoride) by sonication. After centrifugation at 17,000 × g at 15°C for 20 min, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). An equal amount of protein from each sample was reduced by DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM at 60˚C for 20 min and alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. For tryptic digestion, protein extracts were diluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and incubated with TPCK-treated trypsin at 25 °C overnight. Protein digests were acidified by 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to centrifugation at 2000 × g at room temperature for 5 min. The supernatant of protein digests was loaded onto a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, WAT051910) equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Columns were washed with 12 ml of 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted in 6 ml of 40% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were lyophilized. 250 µg of tryptic peptides from each sample was reconstituted in 100 µL of 50 mM TEABC buffer and mixed with a 6-plex TMT reagent reconstituted in 41 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated at RT for 1 hr. All the labeled peptides from each sample were equally mixed, dried completely in a vacuum concentrator and kept at -80 ºC. TMT-labeled peptide mixture were resuspended in 1 mL of 10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0 and loaded on a XBridge BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 5 µm, 4.6 mm X 250 mm (Waters, Milford, MA, Cat # 186003117), and fractionated on an Agilent 1100 Series HPLC system by basic reversed-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 400 μL/min. Mobile phase consisted of 10 mM TEABC, pH 8.0 (buffer A) and 10 mM TEABC, 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.0 (buffer B). After loading 1 mL of sample (6.4 mg) onto the column, the peptides were separated using the following gradient: 5 min isocratic hold at 2% B, 5 to 7% solvent B in 2 min; 5 to 40% solvent B in 63 min; 40 to 100% solvent B in 2 min; hold at 100% solvent B for 3 min, 100 to 2% solvent B in 1 min, hold at 2% solvent B for 4 min for a total gradient time of 80 min. Using 96 x 1mL well plates (Fisher, #7701-5200), fractions were collected for a total of 96 fractions through the elution profile of the separation. 5% of collection from each well were merged into 12 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation for the LC-MS/MS analysis of the proteomic changes in cells. The rest of collection from each well were merged into 12 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation for TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. TiO2 beads were pretreated by incubation with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) solution (80% v/v ACN, 3% v/v TFA, 5% w/v DHB) for 20 min at room temperature. Each dried fraction was resuspended in DHB solution and incubated with pretreated TiO2 beads (Peptides:TiO2 = 1:1). Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 beads were washed twice with 400 µL of washing solution (80% v/v ACN, 3% v/v TFA). Peptides were eluted three times with 20 µl of 4% v/v ammonia into 20 µl of 20% v/v TFA and dried completely by vacuum centrifugation. The dried peptides were resuspended in 50 µL 0.15% TFA, and desalted using C18 Stage Tips for the LC-MS/MS analysis of the phosphoproteomic changes in cells

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were searched using the Andromeda search algorithm SEQUEST HT against a mouse UniProt database (released on May 2018) embedded in the Proteome Discoverer platform (ThermoFisher Scientific, version 2.2). The search parameters were set as follows: a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine and TMT at lysine and peptide N-terminus as a fixed modification and oxidation at methionine, acetylation at protein N-terminus, and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. The mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The reverse type of the target–decoy analysis was chosen. False discovery rates for both peptide and protein level filterings were set to 0.01. PhosphoRS was used to calculate phosphorylation site probability. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. The minimum number of peptides for protein identification was set to 1. The TMT reporter ion intensities were used to calculate the abundance changes of proteins and phosphopeptides in CTRP6- vs. control vehicle-treated BMDMs.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages play critical roles in inflammation and tissue homeostasis, and their functions are regulated by various autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine factors. We have previously shown that CTRP6, a secreted protein of the C1q family, targets both adipocytes and macrophages to promote obesity-linked inflammation. However, the gene programs and signaling pathways directly regulated by CTRP6 in macrophages remain unknown. Here, we combine transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic analyses to show that CTRP6 activates inflammatory gene programs and signaling pathways in mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs). Treatment of BMDMs with CTRP6 upregulated proinflammatory, and suppressed the antiinflammatory, gene expression. We also showed that CTRP6 activates p44/42-MAPK, p38-MAPK, and NF-&#x3ba;B signaling pathways to promote inflammatory cytokine secretion from BMDMs, and that pharmacologic inhibition of these signaling pathways markedly attenuated the effects of CTRP6. Pretreatment of BMDMs with CTRP6 also sensitized and potentiated the BMDMs response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory signaling and cytokine secretion. Consistent with the metabolic phenotype of proinflammatory macrophages, CTRP6 treatment induced a shift toward aerobic glycolysis and lactate production, reduced oxidative metabolism, and elevated mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production in BMDMs. Importantly, in accordance with our in&#xa0;vitro findings, BMDMs from CTRP6-deficient mice were less inflammatory at baseline and showed a marked suppression of LPS-induced inflammatory gene expression and cytokine secretion. Finally, loss of CTRP6 in mice also dampened LPS-induced inflammation and hypothermia. Collectively, our findings suggest that CTRP6 regulates and primes the macrophage response to inflammatory stimuli and thus may have a role in modulating tissue inflammatory tone in different physiological and disease contexts.

### Keywords
Signaling, Phosphoproteomics, Transcriptomics, Inflammation, Lps, Ctrp, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Delta Omics Inc
1Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA

### Submitter
Jun Zhong

### Lab Head
Dr G. William Wong
1Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA


