### Accession
PXD005125

### Title
PCV2 and CSFV coinfection LC-MSMS

### Description
Based on the coinfection model of porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2) and classical swine fever virus (CSFV), iTRAQ with LC-MS/MS was applied to map the cellular proteome profiles and explore cellular responses of cells coinfected with PCV2 and CSFV.

### Sample Protocol
PK15 and PK15-CSFV (PK15 harboring replicating CSFV) cells with or without PCV2 infection were collected, lysed with SDT buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 0.1 M DTT, 0.15 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) and ultrasonicated at the power of 100 w for 10 min with cycles of 10 s working-time and 15 s interval-time. Then samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatants were collected and stored at -80°C until used. Protein digestion was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure as described previously, and the resultant peptide mixture were labeled using the 4-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Labeled as mock-infected (NE)-114/117/116, PCV2-infected (SP)-115/116/117, CSFV-infected (SC)-116/115/114 and PCV2-CSFV coinfection (PC)-117/114/115 for three independent experiments, protein samples of each independent experiment were mixed and vacuum dried, respectively. iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography using the AKTA Purifier 100 system (GE Healthcare) and analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (version 2.2; Matrix Science, London, UK) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA) against the UniProt Sus scrofa database (55598 sequences, download at February 20, 2014), UniProt CSFV database (1356 sequences, download at December 31, 2013) and UniProt PCV2 database (2234 sequences, download at December 31, 2013). For protein identification, the following options were used: Peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da, Enzyme = Trypsin, Missed cleavage = 2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 4-plex (K), iTRAQ 4-plex (N-term), Variable modification: Oxidation (M), False discovery rate ≤ 0.01. The fold change and P value between samples were analyzed using Microsoft Excel 2013. In addition, the proteins with fold changes ≥ 1.200 or ≤ 0.833 and P < 0.05 were defined as dysregulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Viral coinfection or superinfection in host has caused public health concern and huge economic losses of farming industry. The influence of viral coinfection on cellular protein abundance is essential for viral pathogenesis. Based on a coinfection model for porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2) and classical swine fever virus (CSFV) developed previously by our laboratory, isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-coupled LC-MS/MS proteomic profiling was performed to explore the host cell responses to PCV2-CSFV coinfection. Totally, 3932 proteins were identified in three independent mass spectrometry analyses. Compared with uninfected cells, 304 proteins increased (fold change &gt;1.2) and 198 decreased (fold change &lt;0.833) their abundance in PCV2-infected cells (p &lt; 0.05), 60 and 61 were more and less abundant in CSFV-infected cells, and 196 and 158 were more and less abundant, respectively in cells coinfected with PCV2 and CSFV. Representative differentially abundant proteins were validated by quantitative real-time PCR, Western blotting and confocal laser scanning microscopy. Bioinformatic analyses confirmed the dominant role of PCV2, and indicated that mitochondrial dysfunction, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-mediated oxidative stress response and apoptosis signaling pathways might be the specifical targets during PCV2-CSFV coinfection.

### Keywords
Csfv, Coinfection, Lc-msms, Pcv2, Pk15, Itraq

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Niu Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jiyong Zhou
Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China


