### Accession
PXD027220

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Mkrn3 WT vs KO mouse brain

### Description
Mutations in the E3 ubiquitin ligase Mkrn3 are associated with precocious puberty in humans. In order to determine the targets of Mkrn3, we performed a TMT-based proteomic analysis of Mkrn3 WT vs KO mouse brains.

### Sample Protocol
Brains of mice at PND15 were extracted, rapidly embedded in Tissue-Tek O.C.T compound (Sakura Finetek) and frozen in a -50˚C isopentane solution (Fisher Scientific). Frozen tissue punches were extracted through the ARC with a 1mm diameter canula as described above and stored at -80˚C until use. were processed using the streamlined TMT labelling protocol1. Samples were lysed in 8M urea in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 with protease (Pierce A32953) and phosphatase (Pierce A32957) inhibitors, and passed through a 21-guage needle 10x. Samples were reduced with 5mM TCEP, alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide, and quenched with 5mM DTT, followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation of 100ug. Pellets were reconstituted in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5, digested overnight with LysC (Wako 129-02541) at 1:100 while shaking at room temperature, followed by digestion with trypsin (Pierce 90305) at 1:100 while shaking at 37°C. Anhydrous acetonitrile (Honeywell AS017-0100) was added to ~30%, followed by labelling with TMT11 (Thermo A37727) reagent. 1% of each labeled sample was combined and analyzed unfractionated to ensure labeling efficiency was >97% and that the samples are mixed at a 1:1 (total amount) ratio across all conditions. After mixing, labelled peptide samples were de-salted using a 100mg Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters WAT054925), followed by drying in a rotary evaporator. Samples were then reconstituted in 5% ACN 10mM ammonium bicarbonate for basic reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent 300extend-C18 column (3.5μm, 4.6x250mm) using an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC. Peptides were subjected to a 75 min linear gradient from 13% to 42% of Buffer B (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% ACN, pH 8) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min, resulting in a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24 by combining (in a chessboard pattern) four alternating wells down columns of the 96-well plate. Assuming adjacent fractions contain overlapping peaks, only 12 non-adjacent samples were analyzed by the mass spectrometer. The pooling scheme has been illustrated previously1,2. Each eluted fraction was desalted via StageTip for SPS-MS3 analysis.  Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 35 cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed in-house using a 150 min gradient (from 5% -30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nl/min. Each analysis used an SPS-MS3-based TMT method3,4. MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4e5, 400-1400 m/z). Determined charge states between 2 and 5 were required for sequencing and a 90 s dynamic exclusion window was used. MS2 scans consisted of collision-induced dissociation (CID), quadrupole ion trap analysis, automatic gain control (AGC) 2E4, NCE (normalized collision energy) 34 (11-plex) or 35 (16-plex), q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 35 ms, and isolation window of 0.7 Da using a Top10 method.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a COMET-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt Mouse database (April 2019), using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis, 1.0005 Da product ion tolerance, and 0.4 Da fragment bin offset. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (11-plex: +229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), and deamidation of N and Q (-0.984 Da) were set as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications and adjusted to normalize ratios across labelling channels. Lastly, for each protein, signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed and then normalized to 100.

### Publication Abstract
Makorin ring finger protein 3 (MKRN3) was identified as an inhibitor of puberty initiation with the report of loss-of-function mutations in association with central precocious puberty. Consistent with this inhibitory role, a prepubertal decrease in Mkrn3 expression was observed in the mouse hypothalamus. Here, we investigated the mechanisms of action of MKRN3 in the central regulation of puberty onset. We showed that MKRN3 deletion in hypothalamic neurons derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells was associated with significant changes in expression of genes controlling hypothalamic development and plasticity. Mkrn3 deletion in a mouse model led to early puberty onset in female mice. We found that Mkrn3 deletion increased the number of dendritic spines in the arcuate nucleus but did not alter the morphology of GnRH neurons during postnatal development. In addition, we identified neurokinin B (NKB) as an Mkrn3 target. Using proteomics, we identified insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 1 (IGF2BP1) as another target of MKRN3. Interactome analysis revealed that IGF2BP1 interacted with MKRN3, along with several members of the polyadenylate-binding protein family. Our data show that one of the mechanisms by which MKRN3 inhibits pubertal initiation is through regulation of prepubertal hypothalamic development and plasticity, as well as through effects on NKB and IGF2BP1.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Tmt, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Precocious puberty

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Harvard University Medical School, Department of Cell Biology

### Submitter
Brandon Gassaway

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard University Medical School, Department of Cell Biology


