### Accession
PXD011899

### Title
USP32 regulates late endosomal transport and recycling through deubiquitylation of Rab7

### Description
The endosomal system is a highly dynamic multifunctional organelle, whose complexity is regulated in part by reversible ubiquitylation. Despite the wide-ranging influence of ubiquitin in endosomal processes, relatively few enzymes utilizing ubiquitin have been described to control endosome integrity and function. Here we reveal the deubiquitylating enzyme (DUB) ubiquitin-specific protease 32 (USP32) as a powerful new player in this context. Loss of USP32 inhibits late endosome (LE) transport and recycling of LE cargos to the TGN, resulting in dispersion and swelling of the late compartment. Using SILAC-based ubiquitome profiling we identify the small GTPase Rab7—the logistical centerpiece of LE biology—as a substrate of USP32. Mechanistic studies reveal that LE transport effector RILP prefers ubiquitylation-deficient Rab7, while retromer-mediated LE recycling benefits from an intact cycle of Rab7 ubiquitylation. Collectively, our observations suggest that reversible ubiquitylation helps switch Rab7 between its various functions, thereby maintaining global spatiotemporal order in the endosomal system.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitome analysis MelJuSo cells were grown at a minimum of six passages in three batches IMDM media lacking lysine/arginine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 7.5% dialyzed FCS (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% penicilin/streptomycin and either light lysine/arginine (K0R0), medium (4,4,5,5-D4 Lys, 13C6Arg – K4R6) or heavy (13C615N2 Lys, 13C615N4Arg – K8R10) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) amino acids. USP32 abundance was either modulated by depletion using specific siRNA-mediated knockdown in MelJuSo cells or transient overexpression in HeLa cells. Control cells (scrambled siRNA-transfected MelJuSo cells or empty vector transfected HeLa cells) were grown in light media (K0R0); MelJuSo cells transfected with siRNAs targeting USP32 and HeLa cells over-expressing USP32 were grown in heavy media (K8R10 and K4R6, respectively). Approximately 108 cells per condition were used. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer 4 (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 0.5% NP-40; 150 mM NaCl; 20 mM MgCl2) containing 2 mM NEM (N-ethylmaleimide). Protein amounts were measured using BCA Protein assay kit (Pierce, #23225). Samples derived from cells cultured in different isotope-containing media were mixed 1:1 (for example 10 mg from control cells and 10 mg from either USP32-depleted or overexpressing cells), reduced in the presence of DTT (5 mM final concentration) and alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAA, 20 mM final concentration). Protein precipitation was performed with the methanol/chloroform extraction method as previously described [62]. The protein pellet was dissolved in 1 mL of 6 M urea and diluted with 5 mL MilliQ water. Proteins were digested with LysC (Wako, 129-02541, 1:250 (w:w) ~40mg) overnight at 37oC following an adjustment of the pH to 7.  The second digestion was performed with trypsin (Promega V5113, 1/100 volume of 1 mg/ml trypsin) overnight at 37oC. Digestion was stopped by addition of 1 % final concentration of TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). Peptides were purified on a Sep-Pak C18 Column (Waters, WAT020515, 50/pk) and dried using vacuum centrifugation. Peptide enrichment was carried out by di-gly antibody immunoprecipitation according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Cell Signalling Technology, Cat# 5562). After immunoprecipitation, enriched peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, WAT020515) and subsequently dried using vacuum centrifugation. Resulting peptides were resuspended in 10 µl H2O with 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and kept at -20oC until analysis. Enriched di-gly peptide samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described previously [Sepil I et al., Mol Cell Proteomics Oct 4, 2018, mcp.RA118.0000831].

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to Mascot generic files using msconvert [Kessner, D., et al., Bioinformatics, 2008. 24(21): p. 2534-6.], and database searches were performed with MASCOT [Perkins, D.N et al., Electrophoresis, 1999. 20(18): p. 3551-67]. Alternatively, for quantitative analysis, raw MS data was processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.1) and subsequently analyzed using Perseus software (v1.5.3.1).

### Publication Abstract
The endosomal system is a highly dynamic multifunctional organelle, whose complexity is regulated in part by reversible ubiquitylation. Despite the wide-ranging influence of ubiquitin in endosomal processes, relatively few enzymes utilizing ubiquitin have been described to control endosome integrity and function. Here we reveal the deubiquitylating enzyme (DUB) ubiquitin-specific protease 32 (USP32) as a powerful player in this context. Loss of USP32 inhibits late endosome (LE) transport and recycling of LE cargos, resulting in dispersion and swelling of the late compartment. Using SILAC-based ubiquitome profiling we identify the small GTPase Rab7-the logistical centerpiece of LE biology-as a substrate of USP32. Mechanistic studies reveal that LE transport effector RILP prefers ubiquitylation-deficient Rab7, while retromer-mediated LE recycling benefits from an intact cycle of Rab7 ubiquitylation. Collectively, our observations suggest that reversible ubiquitylation helps switch Rab7 between its various functions, thereby maintaining global spatiotemporal order in the endosomal system.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Usp32, Rab gtpase, Ubiquitin specific protease, Endosomal trafficking

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Headington OX3 7FZ, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Benedikt Kessler

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt M Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Headington OX3 7FZ, United Kingdom


