### Accession
PXD005615

### Title
Temperature induced remodeling of the photosynthetic machinery of the red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae

### Description
Cyanidioschyzon merolae is a thermophilic red alga with an optimum growth temperature of 42°C. In this study we investigated the acclimation process of the alga to a colder temperature (25°C). To this aim we performed quantitative proteomic analyses of whole cells as well as solubilized thylakoid protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Analysis of whole cells. Whole cell extracts of exponentially growing C. merolae cultures (25°C versus 42°C) were mixed on equal protein amount (50 µg from each sample, the 42°C culture was isotopically labeled with heavy nitrogen (15N)) and separated by SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was cut into 50 bands. Gel slices were in-gel-digested using trypsin and resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS (LTQ Orbitrap XL). Three different protein sets were analyzed: protein extracts from 42°C culture mixed with 25°C culture switched from 42°C; a second biological replicate of the same conditions; mix of 42°C culture with long-term adapted 25°C culture. Analysis of solubilized thylakoid membranes after fractionation on sucrose density gradients (SDG). Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed on 25°C versus 42°C cultures (first biological replicate), as well as on 14N labeled 42°C versus 15N labeled 25°C fractions (second biological replicate). Protein concentration of each SDG fraction was determined using the Pierce® BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. For label-free quantification same volume of each fraction was loaded on separate Amicon Ultra- 0.5 ml centrifugal filters (30-kD cutoff; Millipore) according to the FASP method with minor modifications. Same volume of each 14N and 15N fraction was tryptically digested in one filter device. Proteins were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and 8 M urea (UA) at room temperature for 30 min. Subsequently, excess dithiothreitol was removed by buffer exchange using UA. Alkylation of Cys residues was performed by adding 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA followed by incubation for 20 min in the dark. Afterwards, samples were washed each three times with UA and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Following tryptical digestion overnight (enzyme-to-protein ratio 1:50), peptides were eluted from the filter by centrifugation, acidified with 20 µl of 2% (v/v) formic acid, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Subsequently peptide samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS (Q Exactive Plus).

### Data Protocol
Gel based (whole cells): For the identification of peptides, OMSSA and XTandem were used with a target/decoy approach. The Uniprot reference proteome database of C. merolae (ProteomeId UP000007014) was used for database search. Decoy proteins were generated by sequence randomization of tryptic peptides. Posterior error probabilities (threshold: 0.01) were determined using QVality. Qtrace was used for peptide quantification. 14N/15N protein intensity ratios were calculated as described in Wiemann et al., 2013 (doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003475) Processing of 14N/15N-labeled samples (SDG): Peptide identification and quantification was carried out essentially as described for labeled whole cells. Instead of computing 14N/15N intensity ratios, non-normalized protein intensities for each labeling state were calculated by summing up intensities of proteotypic peptides.  Processing of unlabeled samples (SDG): MS data was searched against the Uniprot reference proteome database of C. merolae (ProteomeId UP000007014) using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.30). Default search and quantification settings were applied with the following exceptions: The feature ‘match between runs’ was activated and protein decoy sequences were generated by randomization.

### Publication Abstract
The thermophilic alga <i>C. merolae</i> thrives in extreme environments (low pH and temperature between 40&#xb0;C and 56&#xb0;C). In this study, we investigated the acclimation process of the alga to a colder temperature (25&#xb0;C). A long-term cell growth experiment revealed an extensive remodeling of the photosynthetic apparatus in the first 250 h of acclimation, which was followed by cell growth to an even higher density than the control (grown at 42&#xb0;C) cell density. Once the cells were shifted to the lower temperature, the proteins of the light-harvesting antenna were greatly down-regulated and the phycobilisome composition was altered. The amount of PSI and PSII subunits was also decreased, but the chlorophyll to photosystems ratio remained unchanged. The 25&#xb0;C cells possessed a less efficient photon-to-oxygen conversion rate and require a 2.5 times higher light intensity to reach maximum photosynthetic efficiency. With respect to chlorophyll, however, the photosynthetic oxygen evolution rate of the 25&#xb0;C culture was 2 times higher than the control. Quantitative proteomics revealed that acclimation requires, besides remodeling of the photosynthetic apparatus, also adjustment of the machinery for protein folding, degradation, and homeostasis. In summary, these remodeling processes tuned photosynthesis according to the demands placed on the system and revealed the capability of <i>C. merolae</i> to grow under a broad range of temperatures.

### Keywords
Cyanidioschyzon merolae, Red algae, Photosystems, Acclimation

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP), WWU Muenster, Germany
IBBP Muenster

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology (IBBP), WWU Muenster, Germany


