### Accession
PXD030348

### Title
A proteomics analysis of 5xFAD mouse brain regions reveals the lysosome-associated protein Arl8b as a candidate biomarker for Alzheimers disease

### Description
State-of-the-art mass spectrometry (MS) methods can comprehensively detect proteomic alterations in neurodegenerative disorders, providing relevant insights unobtainable with transcriptomics investigations. Analyses of the relationship between progressive aggregation and protein abundance changes in brains of 5xFAD transgenic mice have not been reported previously. We quantified progressive A? aggregation in hippocampus and cortex of 5xFAD mice and controls with immunohistochemistry and biochemical membrane filter assays. Protein changes in different mouse tissues were analysed by MS-based proteomics using label-free quantification (LFQ); resulting MS data were processed using an established pipeline. Results were contrasted with existing proteomic data sets from postmortem AD patient brains. Finally, abundance changes in the candidate marker Arl8b were validated in CSF from AD patients and controls using ELISAs. We report a comprehensive biochemical and proteomic investigation of hippocampal and cortical brain tissue derived from 5xFAD transgenic mice, providing a valuable resource to the neuroscientific community. We identified Arl8b, with significant abundance changes in 5xFAD and AD patient brains. Arl8b might enable the measurement of progressive lysosome accumulation in AD patients and have clinical utility as a candidate biomarker.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse brain material was weighed and homogenized in lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA) buffer (20% weight/volume), heated for 5 min at 95 °C, cooled on ice for 15 min, followed by sonication. After centrifugation for 30 min at 3,500g (4 °C), the supernatant (soluble protein fraction) was transferred to a fresh tube and mixed with 4 volumes of ice cold acetone, followed by incubation over night at -20 °C. Samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 12,000g (4 °C) and the resulting protein pellets were washed with ice cold 80% acetone, air dried and resuspended in digestion buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8). The samples were sonicated using a Branson probe SonifierTM (output 3-4, 50% duty cycle, 4× 30 s). Protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay (BioRad). Samples were stored at -80 °C until use. 50 ug protein per sample were used for tryptic digestion. First, Endopeptidase LysC (Wako, Japan) was added in a protein:enzyme ratio of 50:1 and incubated for 4 hours at room temperature. After dilution of the sample with 4 volumes 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0), sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added (protein:enzyme ratio 100:1) and digested overnight at room temperature. Trypsin and Lys-C activity was quenched by acidification with TFA to pH ~2. Peptides were cleaned up using the StageTip protocol. For mass spectrometric analyses peptide samples (2 µg per measurement) were separated by reversed phase chromatography using the Eksigent NanoLC 400 system (Sciex) on in-house manufactured 20 cm fritless silica microcolumns with an inner diameter of 75 µm, packed with 3 µm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads. A 8-60% acetonitrile gradient (224 min) at a nanoflow rate of 250 nl/min was applied. Eluting peptides were directly ionized by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 300 to 1,500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution with a 2 ? 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 m/z with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 2x103 and the maximum injection time was 300 ms. Only precursors with charge state 2Ð7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 second cycles, meaning the instrument would continuously perform MS2 events until the list of nonexcluded precursors diminishes to zero or 3 s. For all samples, 2 technical replicates were performed (for 5 months hippocampus, 3 technical replicates were measured).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by MaxQuant software (v1.5.1.2). The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a decoy human UniProt database (MOUSE.2014-10) containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (NQ) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. The integrated LFQ quantitation algorithm was applied. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 1. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the ÒMatch between runsÓ option, in which the maximal retention time window was set to 2 min. Quantification of differential protein abundance The analysis of protein expression was done on LFQ intensities (log10 scale) of batch-corrected data using ComBat. The data obtained from cortical and hippocampal tissues were kept separate for batch correction and subsequent analysis. Differential protein abundance between wild-type and 5xFAD animals was estimated separately at each age group, using empirical Bayes statistics implemented in limma. Replicate measures were taken into account by blocking the observations along mouse identifier. Statistical quantification of differential protein abundance was carried out only for proteins with robust LFQ intensity estimation: proteins with LFQ intensity missing in half of the samples or more in at least one condition (wild-type or 5xFAD) were not used in the statistical model. For these proteins, the q value false discovery rate (FDR) was computed separately for each of the 6 models (2, 5 and 8 months for both cortex and hippocampus). Proteins were considered differentially expressed when their FDR was below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amyloidogenesis, 5xfad, Proteomics, Mouse model, Alzheimers disease

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Neuroproteomics, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Robert-Roessle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Erich Wanker
Neuroproteomics, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, Robert-Roessle-Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany


