### Accession
PXD042990

### Title
Regulation of transcript abundance and translationny decapping activators Pat1 and Dhh1

### Description
We have examined the roles of yeast mRNA decapping-activators Pat1 and Dhh1 in repressing the translation and abundance of specific mRNAs in nutrient-replete cells using ribosome profiling, RNA-Seq, CAGE analysis of capped mRNAs, RNA Polymerase II ChIP-Seq, and TMT-mass spectrometry of mutants lacking one or both factors. Although the Environmental Stress Response (ESR) is activated in dhh1 and pat1 mutants, hundreds of non-ESR transcripts are elevated in a manner indicating cumulative repression by Pat1 and Dhh1 in WT. These mRNAs show reduced decapping and diminished transcription in the mutants, indicating that impaired mRNA turnover drives transcript derepression in cells lacking Dhh1 or Pat1. mRNA degradation stimulated by Dhh1/Pat1 is not dictated by poor translation nor enrichment for suboptimal codons. Pat1 and Dhh1 also collaborate to reduce translation and protein production from many mRNAs. Transcripts showing concerted translational repression by Pat1/Dhh1 include mRNAs involved in cell adhesion or utilization of the poor nitrogen source allantoin. Pat1/Dhh1 also repress numerous transcripts involved in respiration, catabolism of non-preferred carbon or nitrogen sources, or autophagy; and we obtained evidence for elevated respiration and autophagy in the mutants. Thus, Pat1 and Dhh1 function as post-transcriptional repressors of multiple pathways normally activated only during nutrient limitation.

### Sample Protocol
Replicate cultures of WT, dhh1∆, pat1∆, and dhh1∆pat1∆  strains were cultured in YPD medium for ~3 doublings to A600 of ~0.6, and harvested by centrifugation for 5 min at 3000 x g. Cells were resuspended in nuclease-free water, collected by centrifugation,  and stored at -80°C. WCEs were prepared in freshly prepared 8M Urea, 25 mM triethylammonium-bicarbonate (TEAB; Thermo Scientific, 90114) by washing the cell pellets once and resuspending again in the extraction buffer, then vortexing with glass beads in the cold room. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 30 min and the quality of extracted proteins was assessed following SDS-PAGE using GelCode™ Blue Stain (Thermo Scientific, 24592) and quantified with the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, 23225). Lysates were stored at -80°C. Sample preparation and TMT-MS/MS (34) was performed at the NHLBI Proteomics Core at NIH (Bethesda, MD) for the WT, dhh1∆, and pat1∆ strains, and at the IDeA National Resource for Quantitative Proteomics for the pat1∆dhh1∆ and WT strains. At NHLBI, 100 µg of WCEs was incubated for 1 h at 37°C with freshly prepared 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to reduce disulfide bridges. Alkylation was performed at RT for 1 h with freshly made 50 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the reaction was quenched by adding DTT to 50 mM (50 mM, final). Lysates were diluted 10-fold with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 3 µg of trypsin (Promega, v5111) overnight at 37°C. Digests were acidified by adding formic acid to (1%, final) and desalted with Waters Oasis HLB 1cc columns. Peptides were eluted from desalted samples with 1 ml of buffer E (0.1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile) and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were labelled with TMT reagents for multiplexing (TMT10plex label reagent set, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, resuspended TMT reagent is added to each sample, incubated for 1 hr at RT and the reaction is quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for 15 min. To increase the protein coverage, each set of pooled TMT samples was separated into 24 fractions using basic reverse phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC). Quantification of TMT-labelled peptides was conducted on an Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) and the MS2 spectra were searched in the SwissProt Yeast database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using the SEQUEST search engine (Eng et al. 1994). Peptide spectral matches (PSM) were validated using Percolator based on q-values at a 1% FDR (Brosch et al. 2009) (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/analysis/MascotPercolator/). Relative abundance of each peptide in a strain is measured by normalizing to the total abundance of that peptide coming from all the strains used in the study. We determined the protein-level fold changes based on the median of peptide-level fold changes from the Proteome Discoverer-produced abundances.

### Publication Abstract
We have examined the roles of yeast mRNA decapping-activators Pat1 and Dhh1 in repressing the translation and abundance of specific mRNAs in nutrient-replete cells using ribosome profiling, RNA-Seq, CAGE analysis of capped mRNAs, RNA Polymerase II ChIP-Seq, and TMT-mass spectrometry of mutants lacking one or both factors. Although the Environmental Stress Response (ESR) is activated in dhh1&#x394; and pat1&#x394; mutants, hundreds of non-ESR transcripts are elevated in a manner indicating cumulative repression by Pat1 and Dhh1 in wild-type cells. These mRNAs show both&#xa0;reduced decapping and diminished transcription in the mutants, indicating that impaired mRNA turnover drives transcript derepression in cells lacking Dhh1 or Pat1. mRNA degradation stimulated by Dhh1/Pat1 is not dictated by poor translation nor enrichment for suboptimal codons. Pat1 and Dhh1 also collaborate to reduce translation and protein production from many mRNAs. Transcripts showing concerted translational repression by Pat1/Dhh1 include mRNAs involved in cell adhesion or utilization of the poor nitrogen source allantoin. Pat1/Dhh1 also repress numerous transcripts involved in respiration, catabolism of non-preferred carbon or nitrogen sources, or autophagy; and we obtained evidence for elevated respiration and autophagy in the mutants. Thus, Pat1 and Dhh1 function as post-transcriptional repressors of multiple pathways normally activated only during nutrient limitation.

### Keywords
Translation, Mrna decay, S. cerevesiea

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health
Head, Section on Nutrient Control of Gene Expression Building 6, Room 230 6 Center Drive Bethesda, MD 20892 Phone: 301-496-4480

### Submitter
Anil Kumar Vijjamarri

### Lab Head
Dr Alan G Hinnebusch
Head, Section on Nutrient Control of Gene Expression Building 6, Room 230 6 Center Drive Bethesda, MD 20892 Phone: 301-496-4480


