### Accession
PXD025287

### Title
Nucleosome recognition and DNA distortion by the Chd1 remodeler revealed at 2.6 Å resolution

### Description
Chromatin remodelers are ATP-dependent enzymes that reorganize nucleosomes within all eukaryotic genomes. The Chd1 remodeler specializes in shifting nucleosomes into evenly spaced arrays, a defining characteristic of chromatin in gene bodies that blocks spurious transcription initiation. Linked to some forms of autism and commonly mutated in prostate cancer, Chd1 is essential for maintaining pluripotency in stem cells. Here we report a complex of yeast Chd1 bound to a nucleosome in a nucleotide-free state, determined by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to 2.6 Å resolution. The structure shows a bulge of the DNA tracking strand where the ATPase motor engages the nucleosome, consistent with an initial stage in DNA translocation. Unlike other remodeler-nucleosome complexes, nucleosomal DNA compensates for the remodeler-induced bulge with a bulge of the complementary DNA strand one helical turn downstream from the ATPase motor. Unexpectedly, the structure also reveals an N-terminal binding motif, called ChEx, which binds on the exit-side acidic patch of the nucleosome. The ChEx motif can displace a LANA-based peptide from the acidic patch, which suggests a means by which Chd1 remodelers may block competing chromatin remodelers from acting on the opposite side of the nucleosome.

### Sample Protocol
Histones H3(C110A), H4, H2A, and H2B(S53C) from Xenopus laevis were expressed, purified, and reconstituted into octamers. Purified FAM-40N40 nucleosomesere were dialyzed overnight against two 1 L changes of 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.9, 2.5 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0. Reaction mixtures (100 µl) contained a 1:1 mixture of 40N40 601[TA-rich +1] nucleosomes and Chd1[wt], each at 4.6 µM, in 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.9, 60 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, and 1.25 mM ATPgS.Cross-linking was initiated by adding a 100 mM stock of either disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU; Thermo Fisher, cat #A35459) or carbonyldiimdazole (CDI; Sigma-Aldrich cat #115533), both in anhydrous DMSO, to a final concentration of 1 mM. After a 45 min incubation at room temperature, reactions were quenched by addition of Tris-HCl pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 100 mM. After cross-linking, proteins were unfolded by addition of solid urea to 8 M, reduced with addition of 10 mM DTT at 37˚C for 45 min, and cysteines were alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 2 M urea with the addition of 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (Pierce, cat# 90058) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 25ºC. Following the primary digest, samples were divided into equal volumes. Half of the sample was prepared for serial digestion with Glu-C (Pierce, cat# 90054) by dilution to a final concentration of 0.8 M urea with 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 8.0. Glu-C was added to these samples at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio and digested overnight at 30ºC.     Single and serial digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. Desalting was carried out using Sep-Pak C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Cartridges were loaded onto a vacuum manifold and conditioned using 1 mL 80% ACN, 0.5% TFA, then equilibrated with 4X 1 mL 0.5% TFA. Samples were slowly loaded onto the cartridges under a diminished vacuum and washed with 4X 1 mL 0.5% TFA. After removing cartridges from vacuum, peptides were eluted using by adding 1 mL 80% ACN, 0.5% TFA to the cartridges and centrifuging at 350xg for 2 minutes. Eluates were transferred to microfuge tubes, dried, and stored at -80 ºC. Before analysis, the peptides were vigorously resuspended in 0.1% FA to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL.    Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an UltiMate3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with a Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Approximately 1 µg of peptides were injected onto the column for each run, and each sample was run in duplicate. Column and trap cartridge temperatures were maintained at 40ºC, and the flow rate was set to 300 µL/min for the duration of the run. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% FA in 2% ACN, 98% water, and solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in ACN. Peptides were accumulated onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3µm, 100 Å column). After washing the trap column with solvent A for 10 minutes, the trap column was switched to be in-line with the separating column, an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, C18, 75 µm x 25 cm, 2µm, 100 Å column (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resolved on a linear gradient from 2% B to 35% B (100 minutes), 35% to 40% B (25 minutes), 40% to 90% B (5 minutes). Residual peptides were purged from the column with a saw-tooth gradient at the end of each injection.     Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode. Each full MS scan used a mass range from 350-1500 m/z, a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Peptides were fragmented with stepped higher-energy collision-induced dissociation and normalized collision energies of 22%, 25%, and 28%. For each full MS scan, ten data-dependent MS/MS scans were collected using a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z, an AGC target of 2E5, a minimum AGC target of 8E3, a maximum injection time of 250 ms, an isolation window of 2.0 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion window of 60.0 s. Fragments with charges of <3, and >8 were excluded from analysis, and all spectra were recorded in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
The msConvert GUI from the ProteoWizard Toolkit was used to centroid and convert the raw data to the mzML file format. MeroX Version 2.0 was used for crosslink identification. For tryptic digests, protease sites were allowed after Arg and Lys residues, with Lys blocked by Pro as a cleavage site. For serial digests, protease sites were allowed at Arg, Asp, Glu, and Lys with Lys blocked by Pro as a cleavage site. For both single and serial digests, a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed, the minimum peptide length was set to 3, and the maximum peptide length was set to 30. A maximum of one variable oxidation of methionine was allowed, and Cys alkylation by IAA was defined as a static modification. The proper crosslinker (CDI or DSBU) was defined for each sample, and the default MeroX settings were used for each. For the mass comparison, precursor precision was set to 5 ppm, fragment ion precision was 10 ppm, the mass recalibration on both the MS1 and MS2 level were 9.0 ppm, the mass range was 200.0-6000.0 Da, the signal-to-noise ratio was 2.0, b and y ions were selected, the minimum number of fragments per peptide was 3, the minimum charge was 2, and deisotoping mode was used. Searches were conducted in quadratic mode. The FDR cut off was set to 1%, and all scores above the FDR cutoff were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin remodelers are ATP-dependent enzymes that reorganize nucleosomes within all eukaryotic genomes. Here we report a complex of the Chd1 remodeler bound to a nucleosome in a nucleotide-free state, determined by cryo-EM to 2.3&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. The remodeler stimulates the nucleosome to absorb an additional nucleotide on each strand at two different locations: on the tracking strand within the ATPase binding site and on the guide strand one helical turn from the ATPase motor. Remarkably, the additional nucleotide on the tracking strand is associated with a local transformation toward an A-form geometry, explaining how sequential ratcheting of each DNA strand occurs. The structure also reveals a histone-binding motif, ChEx, which can block opposing remodelers on the nucleosome and may allow Chd1 to participate in histone reorganization during transcription.

### Keywords
Chd1, Chromatin remodeler, Nucleosome, Xl-ms

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Stephen Fried Johns Hopkins University  Fried Lab Chemistry Department

### Submitter
Stephen Fried

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Fried
Stephen Fried Johns Hopkins University  Fried Lab Chemistry Department


