### Accession
PXD001427

### Title
Cytoplasmic complex comprising TAF2, TAF8, TAF10 provides evidence for nuclear holo-TFIID assembly from preformed submodules

### Description
General transcription factor TFIID is a cornerstone of RNA polymerase II transcription initiation in eukaryotic nuclei. Human TFIID is a megadalton-sized multiprotein complex composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs). The cellular mechanism of TFIID assembly is poorly understood. In the cytoplasm of human cells, we discovered a heterotrimeric TFIID sub-complex consisting of the TAF2, TAF8 and TAF10 proteins. Native mass-spectrometry uncovered the interactions between the TAFs, defining a central role of TAF8 in nucleating the complex. X-ray crystallography revealed a non-canonical arrangement of the TAF8-TAF10 histone fold domains (HFDs). TAF2 binds to multiple motifs within the TAF8 C-terminal region, and these interactions dictate TAF2 incorporation into a core-TFIID complex that exists in the nucleus. Our results provide evidence for a step-wise assembly pathway of nuclear holo-TFIID, regulated by nuclear import of preformed cytoplasmic submodules.

### Sample Protocol
Protein mixtures were TCA precipitated, urea-denaturated, reduced, alkylated and digested with endoproteinase Lys-C followed by modified trypsin digestion. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a triphasic 100 mm diameter fused silica microcapillary column. Loaded microcapillary columns were placed in-line with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC pump and a LTQ Velos Pro linear ion trap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-LC electrospray ionization source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). A fully automated 12-steps MudPIT run was performed  during which each full MS scan (from 300 to 1700 m/z range) was followed by 20 MS/MS events using data-dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using SEQUEST with ThermoProteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Tandem mass spectra were searched against a human protein sequence database (from the Homo sapiens 2013-04-03 Swissprot release). In all searches, cysteine residues were considered to be fully carboxyamidomethylated (+57 Da statically added) and methionine considered to be oxidized (+16 Da dynamically added). Relative protein abundance for each protein in a given sample was estimated by Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF). The NSAF values were calculated from the spectral counts of each identified protein. To account for the fact that larger proteins tend to contribute more peptide/spectra, spectral counts were divided by protein length to provide a spectral abundance factor (SAF). SAF values were then normalized against the sum of all SAF values in the corresponding run allowing the comparison of protein levels across different runs.

### Publication Abstract
General transcription factor TFIID is a cornerstone of RNA polymerase II transcription initiation in eukaryotic cells. How human TFIID-a megadalton-sized multiprotein complex composed of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs)-assembles into a functional transcription factor is poorly understood. Here we describe a heterotrimeric TFIID subcomplex consisting of the TAF2, TAF8 and TAF10 proteins, which assembles in the cytoplasm. Using native mass spectrometry, we define the interactions between the TAFs and uncover a central role for TAF8 in nucleating the complex. X-ray crystallography reveals a non-canonical arrangement of the TAF8-TAF10 histone fold domains. TAF2 binds to multiple motifs within the TAF8 C-terminal region, and these interactions dictate TAF2 incorporation into a core-TFIID complex that exists in the nucleus. Our results provide evidence for a stepwise assembly pathway of nuclear holo-TFIID, regulated by nuclear import of preformed cytoplasmic submodules.

### Keywords
Tafstructure, Mudpit analysis, Tfiid, Assembly

### Affiliations
Cellular Signaling and Nuclear Dynamics Program, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 7104, INSERM U964, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch, France.
IGBMC

### Submitter
Laszlo Tora

### Lab Head
Dr Tora  
Cellular Signaling and Nuclear Dynamics Program, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 7104, INSERM U964, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch, France.


