### Accession
PXD024573

### Title
SAPT, a fast and efficient approach for simultaneous profiling of protein N- and C-terminome

### Description
Protein termini play pivotal roles in various biological processes. Although a series of terminomic strategies have been proposed for the analysis of protein N-termini or protein C-termini separately, few can analyze both ends of proteins at the same time. Herein, we developed a workflow, termed Simultaneous Analysis of Protein N- and C- Terminome (SAPT) based on strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) to study protein terminome simultaneously.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Harvested Hela cells were lysed in 6 M GndHCl, 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) and 1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail via sonication at 0 °C. After centrifugation at 14 000g, 4 °C for 20 min, the supernatant was collected, and the concentration of proteins was measured by Bradford assay. Proteins were then reduced by 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 30 mM IAA in the dark at 25 °C for 40 min. The excess IAA was extinguished with an additional 10 mM DTT. After that, the protein lysates were diluted with 50 mM TEAB until the final concentration of GndHCl was less than 2 M. The lysates were then digested with trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 overnight. In a parallel digestion strategy, protein lysates were subjected to chemical derivatization with propionic anhydride and trypsin digestion via a FASP protocol as described below. After protein digestion, both two samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1% (v/v), desalted with SepPak C18 cartridges and lyophilized in a vacuum drier. Protein propionylation and digestion via a FASP protocol (1) Add 10 μL propionic anhydride to 1 mg protein lysate and vortex the solution. Adjust the solution to pH 8 with an adequate volume of 5 M NaOH. Carry out the reaction at room temperature for 1 h. (2) Repeat (1) twice to ensure the completeness of derivatization. (3) Terminate the reaction by adding 100 μL of 1 M ABC buffer and incubating the solution at room temperature for 30 min (4) Transfer the solution to a 10-kDa-MWCO filter (Millipore). Centrifuge the filter at 12 000g for 20 min and washed it three times with 50 mM TEAB. (5) Add 400 μL of 50 mM TEAB and trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 into the 10-kDa-MWCO filter. Carry out the digestion process at 37 °C overnight. (6) Add 20 μL 50% NH2OH to reverse the unwanted partial propionylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr residues. Carry out the reaction at room temperature for 30 min. (7) Centrifuge the 10-kDa-MWCO filter at 12 000g for 20 min and collect the filtrate. Then wash the 10-kDa MWCO filter by adding 400 μL of 50 mM TEAB and centrifuge it at 12 000g for 20 min. Collect the filtrate again and combine the obtained filtrates together. Peptide separation through SCX-SPE column. Oasis MCX Cartridges were used for peptide separation. Specifically, 900 μL elution buffer 3 (5 mM KH2PO4, 500 mM KCl, pH 7.0, 30% ACN) was added to wash the SCX-SPE. Then it was equilibrated by adding 2 × 900 μL loading buffer (5 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.7, 30% ACN). Lyophilized sample peptides were dissolved in 900 μL loading buffer and loaded onto SCX-SPE. After sample loading, another 600 μL loading buffer was added. These two fractions were combined and marked as “flow through”. Then 2 × 750 μL elution buffer 1 (5 mM KH2PO4, 30 mM KCl, pH 2.7, 30% ACN), 2 × 750 μL elution buffer 2 (5 mM KH2PO4, 40 mM KCl, pH 2.7, 30% ACN) and 2 × 750 μL elution buffer 3 were added in sequence and the resulting fractions were marked as “elution 1”, “elution 2”, and “elution 3”, respectively. All four fractions were lyophilized in a vacuum drier, redissolved in 900 μL 0.1% TFA (v/v) and desalted with SepPak C18 cartridges. The peptide concentration of each fraction was measured by BCA assay. A total of 1 μg peptides from each fraction were preserved for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were searched against the Swiss-Prot database (downloaded on August 20, 2020, containing 20375 protein sequence entries) by using PEAKS Online Xpro Software (v1.4) for peptide and protein identifications. Mass tolerances were set as 15 ppm for parent ions and 50 mmu for fragments. Trypsin and ArgC were selected as the protease for non-propionylated and propionylated samples, respectively, allowing three missed cleavages. The digestion mode was set as semi-specific. PTM identification was performed in PEAKS PTM searching module. PTMs were obtained directly from PEAKS Online database. False discovery rate (FDR) at PSM and protein level was controlled below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Protein termini play pivotal roles in various biological processes. Although several terminomic strategies have been proposed for the analysis of protein N-termini or protein C-termini separately, few can analyze both ends of proteins at the same time. Herein, we developed a workflow, termed Simultaneous Analysis of Protein N- and C-Terminome (SAPT) based on strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) fractionation. Taking advantage of terminal peptides' reduced charge states in low pH SCX for their selective separation, we identified 3724 canonical human protein N-termini and 3129 canonical human protein C-termini, as well as 1463 neo-N-termini from the HeLa cell line, representing the largest human protein C-termini data set and the second largest human protein N-termini data set so far. The whole fractionation procedure was simple and rapid with considerable selectivity by utilizing a commercially available SCX-SPE column. In addition, we report for the first time the comprehensive screening of protein N-terminal and C-terminal modifications, leading to an identification of 8 kinds of protein N-terminal PTMs other than acetylation and 1 kind of protein C-terminal PTM other than amidation. Our results demonstrate the excellent performance and great potential of SAPT in terminomic studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD024573.

### Keywords
Human, Protein termini, Hela cell

### Affiliations
Shanghai Cancer Center and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, P. R. China Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugates Research Ministry of Public Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China
Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University

### Submitter
zhongjie wang

### Lab Head
Dr Haojie Lu
Shanghai Cancer Center and Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, P. R. China Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugates Research Ministry of Public Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China


