### Accession
PXD027334

### Title
Peroxide antimalarial drugs impact redox homeostasis in Plasmodium falciparum infected red blood cells

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum causes the most lethal form of malaria. The frontline treatments for this severe disease are combination therapies based on semisynthetic peroxide antimalarials, known as artemisinins. There is growing resistance to artemisinins and new drugs with novel mechanisms of action are urgently required. Synthetic peroxide antimalarials, known as ozonides, exhibit potent antimalarial activity both in vitro and in vivo. Here, we used chemical proteomics to investigate the protein alkylation targets of clickable artemisinin and ozonide probes, including an analogue of the ozonide clinical candidate, OZ439. We greatly expanded the list of protein targets for peroxide antimalarials and identified redox processes as being significantly enriched from the list of protein targets for both artemisinins and ozonides. Disrupted redox homeostasis was confirmed with the use of a genetically encoded fluorescence-based biosensor comprising a redox-sensitive GFP (roGFP) fused to human glutaredoxin 1. This facilitated specific and dynamic live imaging of the glutathione redox potential in the cytosol of peroxide-treated infected red blood cells with high sensitivity and temporal resolution. We also used a targeted LC-MS based thiol metabolomics assay to accurately measure relative changes in cellular thiol levels (including thiol metabolites, glutathione precursors and oxidised and reduced glutathione) within peroxide-treated P. falciparum-infected red blood cells. This work shows that peroxide antimalarials disproportionately alkylate proteins involved in redox homeostasis and that disrupted redox processes are involved in the mechanism of action of these important antimalarials.

### Sample Protocol
Copper catalysed click chemistry enrichment of alkylated proteins Proteins were extracted by solubilising parasite proteins using 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 100 mM HEPES buffer and heating each sample at 90 °C for 5 min. This was followed by 3 x 30 sec cycles of probe sonication on ice. The soluble fraction was separated by centrifugation at 14,800 x g for 5 min and the protein concentration determined using the Pierce BCA assay kit (Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™). The protein concentration of each sample was adjusted to 693 µg/mL. Alkyne labelled proteins were enriched and affinity purified by direct attachment to azide agarose beads (Jena Bioscience) using copper catalysed click chemistry. For each reaction, 50 µL of azide agarose beads (prewashed with 1,400 µL of Milli-Q water), 22.6 µL of TCEP (50 mM in Milli-Q water), 68 µL of THPTA ligand (1.7 mM in DMSO/t-butanol, 1:4 ratio) and 22.6 µL of CuSO4 (50 mM in Milli-Q water) were sequentially added to 837 µL of the cell lysate. The lysate was incubated at room temperature for 1 h while rotating end-over-end. Following the click reaction, the agarose resins containing the clicked proteins were washed with 1 mL of Milli-Q water. Washing and on-bead digestion of clicked proteins The washed resins with the clicked proteins attached were resuspended in 1 mL of agarose wash buffer (100 mM HEPES, 1% SDS, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, pH 8). Samples were reduced by addition of 10 µL of 1 M DTT and heated at 70 °C for 15 min, before being allowed to cool for a further 15 min. The supernatant was then removed by centrifugation at 4000 g for 5 min and the samples were alkylated in the dark with 40 mM iodoacetamide in 1 mL of agarose wash buffer for 30 min at room temperature. The beads were then extensively washed five times with agarose wash buffer, five times with 8 M urea and a further 5 times with 20% acetonitrile (ACN). Between each wash, samples were centrifuged at 4000 g for 3 min. Following the final wash, the resins were resuspended in 500 µL of digestion buffer (100 mM HEPES, 2 mM CaCl2, 10% ACN) and the contents were transferred to a fresh tube. The tube was rinsed with a further 500 µL of digestion buffer and this was transferred to the same fresh tube. The resins were then pelleted by centrifugation at 4000 g for 5 min and ~800 µL of supernatant was removed. On-bead protein digestion was performed by adding 1 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) to the samples, which were incubated overnight at 37 °C while spinning end-over-end. On the following day, the beads were separated from the digested peptides by centrifuging the samples at 4000 g for 5 min and supernatant transferred to a clean tube. The resins were briefly vortexed and washed with a further 500 µL of Milli-Q water, which was then transferred to the same clean tube containing the digested peptides. Each sample was made up to 1 mL volume with Milli-Q water and acidified by addition of 2 µL of formic acid. The samples were then desalted using in-house generated StageTips, dried and resuspended in 10 µL of 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid containing indexed retention time (RT) peptides for LCMS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysisProteomics LC-MS/MS data was acquired using Dionex Ultimate® 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) carried out as described previously, with minor mod

### Publication Abstract
<i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> causes the most lethal form of malaria. Peroxide antimalarials based on artemisinin underpin the frontline treatments for malaria, but artemisinin resistance is rapidly spreading. Synthetic peroxide antimalarials, known as ozonides, are in clinical development and offer a potential alternative. Here, we used chemoproteomics to investigate the protein alkylation targets of artemisinin and ozonide probes, including an analogue of the ozonide clinical candidate, artefenomel. We greatly expanded the list of proteins alkylated by peroxide antimalarials and identified significant enrichment of redox-related proteins for both artemisinins and ozonides. Disrupted redox homeostasis was confirmed by dynamic live imaging of the glutathione redox potential using a genetically encoded redox-sensitive fluorescence-based biosensor. Targeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based thiol metabolomics also confirmed changes in cellular thiol levels. This work shows that peroxide antimalarials disproportionately alkylate proteins involved in redox homeostasis and that disrupted redox processes are involved in the mechanism of action of these important antimalarials.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Redox homeostasis, Peroxides, Glutathione., Ozonides

### Affiliations
Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, 381 Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Ghizal Siddiqui

### Lab Head
Dr darren creek
Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, 381 Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia


