### Accession
PXD026663

### Title
CSF quantitative proteomics reveals potential diagnostic biomarker of pediatric bacterial meningitis

### Description
In this study, we performed label-free based CSF quantitative proteomics to identify and analyze the differentially expressed proteins among bacterial meningitis, viral meningitis and hospital controls (children with benign intracranial hypertension). Compared with viral meningitis and hospital controls, we screened 135 differentially expressed proteins to distinguish bacterial meningitis from viral meningitis and controls.  Among of them, 69 proteins as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis, including both novel and previously reported candidate protein markers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed by using In-solution digestion method. Briefly, each CSF sample was transferred 50μl into a clean 1.5ml EP tubes, added with 6μl 1% Rapigest SF surfactant (Waters, USA) in 50mM NH4HCO3 and denatured at 60℃ for 30min. Then, DTT at a final concentration of 10mM was added to these samples and incubated at 56°C for 45min reduction reactions, followed by alkylation with IAM at final concentration of 50mM for 30min at room temperature, alkylation should protect from light and a few DTT was added to neutralize the excess IAM after reaction. Thereafter, an appropriate amount of 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution was added to each sample to adjust the pH to 8.0, which could maintain the maximum activity of trypsin. Finally, digestion process was conducted with trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37°C for overnight, the amount of trypsin was depended on the protein concentration of each CSF and the ratio of protein: trypsin was 30:1. Formic acid at a final concentration of 0.5% was added to each sample and incubated at 37°C for 50min to terminate the protein digestion, followed by centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 10min. The resulting peptides were desalted and the peptide concentration was determined by BCA peptide assay, and then the remained peptide samples were subjected to lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diagnostic biomarker, Bacterial meningitis, Csf

### Affiliations
Hunan Children’s Hospital
Hunan Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Ting Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Liping Li
Hunan Children’s Hospital


