### Accession
PXD006356

### Title
Rat podocyte degradomics -  N-Degradomic Analysis Reveals a Proteolytic Network Processing the Podocyte Cytoskeleton

### Description
Regulated intracellular proteolysis is essential in maintaining the integrity of podocytes and the glomerular filtration barrier of the kidney. Altered proteolytic substrate turnover has been associated with various glomerular diseases ranging from diabetic nephropathy to focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis. However, thus far it has not been possible to systematically identify proteolytically cleaved proteins although some of the proteases have been characterized. Here we applied TAILS to identify N-termini in rat glomeruli and their changes on PAN-induced injury.

### Sample Protocol
Rats were PAN-treated, sacrificed and kidneys were perfused with magnetic beads to isolate glomeruli as described (Rinschen et al J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2014). Acetone precipitation was performed and pellets were washed three times with ice-cold methanol. Then, pellets were dried and resuspended with 1mL 6M GHCl and HEPES 200mM, pH 7.5 with a protease inhibitor cocktail, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processed. N-termini were enriched by Terminal Amine Isotope Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) as described (Kleifeld et al Nature Protocols 2011), using formaldehyde isotopes for light (+28.0313) or heavy (+34.063117) dimethylation of primary amines at protein N termini and Lys side chains. Enriched N terminal peptides were desalted using home made C18 STAGE tips. estimated 1 ug of desalted enriched N termini were separated on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo) operated in a two column setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, particle size 3 µm, ID 75 µm, trap column length 2 cm, analytical column length 25 cm, Thermo) using a 60 min gradient (2% ACN to 30% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The nanoLC system was on-line coupled to an Impact II high resolution Q-TOF (Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray nano ESI source (Bruker) essentially as described (Beck et al Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015;14(7):2014-29) . Nitrogen gas flow in the emitter device was saturated with acetonitrile as dopant using a nanoBooster device (Bruker). MS1 spectra with a mass range from m/z 200 to 1600 were acquired at 4 Hz, with the Top 15 most intense peaks selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity-dependent spectra acquisition time between 2 and 20 Hz and stepped collision energy (5.6 eV and 8.4 eV for 50% of the acquisition time).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were matched to peptide sequences from the Uniprot rat proteome at a false discovery rate of 0.01 using the Andromeda algorithm 40 as implemented in the MaxQuant Software package v.1.5.6.5. We noted that endogenously N-terminally modified peptides were only unreliably quantified if an N-terminal dimethyl label was defined. As a workaround, datafiles were searched twice. In both searches, enzyme specificity was set to semi-specific (free N-terminus) ArgC , Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed and Met oxidation as variable modifications and isotope labeling by light (+28.031300) or heavy (+34.063117) dimethylation of Lys residues. The first search set additionally required light (+28.031300) or heavy (+34.063117) N-terminal dimethyl labeling for the identification of natural and protease-generated termini with unblocked alpha amines. The second search considered variable N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565) or N-terminal pyroGlu formation from Glu (-18.010565) or Gln (-17.026549), covering endogenously blocked termini and internal peptides carried over by incomplete coupling to the polymer (present as unmodified peptides) or pyro-glu formation.

### Publication Abstract
Regulated intracellular proteostasis, controlled in part by proteolysis, is essential in maintaining the integrity of podocytes and the glomerular filtration barrier of the kidney. We applied a novel proteomics technology that enables proteome-wide identification, mapping, and quantification of protein N-termini to comprehensively characterize cleaved podocyte proteins in the glomerulus <i>in vivo</i> We found evidence that defined proteolytic cleavage results in various proteoforms of important podocyte proteins, including those of podocin, nephrin, neph1, <i>&#x3b1;</i>-actinin-4, and vimentin. Quantitative mapping of N-termini demonstrated perturbation of protease action during podocyte injury <i>in vitro</i>, including diminished proteolysis of <i>&#x3b1;</i>-actinin-4. Differentially regulated protease substrates comprised cytoskeletal proteins as well as intermediate filaments. Determination of preferential protease motifs during podocyte damage indicated activation of caspase proteases and inhibition of arginine-specific proteases. Several proteolytic processes were clearly site-specific, were conserved across species, and could be confirmed by differential migration behavior of protein fragments in gel electrophoresis. Some of the proteolytic changes discovered <i>in vitro</i> also occurred in two <i>in vivo</i> models of podocyte damage (WT1 heterozygous knockout mice and puromycin aminonucleoside-treated rats). Thus, we provide direct and systems-level evidence that the slit diaphragm and podocyte cytoskeleton are regulated targets of proteolytic modification, which is altered upon podocyte damage.

### Keywords
Glomeruli, Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Tails

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Forschugnszentrum Jülich  ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str 52425 Jülich Germany

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter Huesgen
Forschugnszentrum Jülich  ZEA-3 Analytics Wilhelm-Johnen-Str 52425 Jülich Germany


