### Accession
PXD017609

### Title
ErbB2 Site-Specific α2,6-Sialylation Regulates Gastric Cancer Cell Sensitivity to Trastuzumab

### Description
The clinical performance of trastuzumab in the treatment of ErbB2-positive gastric cancer is severely hampered by the emergence of molecular resistance. The glycosylation landscape of ErbB2’s extracellular domain, and the molecular mechanisms through which it tunes gastric cell malignancy, including the acquisition of trastuzumab resistance, remain elusive. We show that the expression of ErbB2 sialylated glycoforms holds clinical utility in the prediction of clinical outcome and stratification of gastric cancer patients. In-depth glycoproteomic and glycomic analysis of ErbB2 extracellular region disclosed a site-specific profile in gastric cancer cells. We further demonstrate that ST6Gal1 sialyltransferase specifically targets ErbB2 N-glycosylation sites within the trastuzumab binding domain. Moreover, the abrogation of ST6Gal1-mediated α2,6-sialylation reshapes ErbB2 glycome and sensitizes gastric cancer cells to trastuzumab-induced cytotoxicity through receptor membrane stabilization and a downregulation of ErbB2 activation. Overall, this data demonstrates that aberrant sialylation tunes the molecular resistance of ErbB2-driven gastric cancer cells to trastuzumab.

### Sample Protocol
ErbB2 immunoprecipitates from NCI-N87 whole cell lysates and fresh frozen ErbB2-positive gastric tumors were separated by SDS-PAGE on NuPAGETM 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels (InvitrogenTM) for sample clean-up. Protein gels were stained for 3h with the Colloidal Blue staining kit (InvitrogenTM) and rinsed with distilled water ON. A strong ~185 kDa band was excised for further protein identification and glycoproteomic analysis. Briefly, excised bands were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and in-gel digested with trypsin using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). Tryptic peptides were analysed via on-line C18-nano-HPLC-MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM (Thermo) mass spectrometer. Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 0% to 50% solvent B (100/0.1 water/formic acid (FA) v/v) in 20 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode (top-10) with a normalized collision energy of 32% and recording of the MS/MS spectrum in the Orbitrap. To increase the fragmentation of N-glycosylated peptides, the HexNAc oxonium ion at m/z = 204.087 was set as Product Ion Trigger, and three additional MS/MS scans of the corresponding precursor ion were performed with HCD normalized collision energies of 32, 37 and 41 %, respectively, and a collision-induced dissociation (CID) energy of 35 V.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Electron), and then searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database (67911 entries), using Mascot v. 2.2.04 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with a tolerance of 5 and 20 ppm for precursor and fragment ions, respectively, and trypsin was selected as enzyme. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl on Cys was set as a fixed modification. The data was also analysed using ByonicTM version 2.13.2 (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA, USA) using default settings [43]. In addition to the settings for common modifications as described above, the “N-glycan 309 mammalian no sodium” database was used for the search and assignment of N-glycosylated peptides. Only glycopeptides high a ByonicTM score ≥ 200 were selected for representation in Figure 6b. Manual spectra interpretation was performed using the XcaliburTM software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
The clinical performance of the therapeutic monoclonal antibody trastuzumab in the treatment of ErbB2-positive unresectable gastric cancer (GC) is severely hampered by the emergence of molecular resistance. Trastuzumab's target epitope is localized within the extracellular domain of the oncogenic cell surface receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) ErbB2, which is known to undergo extensive N-linked glycosylation. However, the site-specific glycan repertoire of ErbB2, as well as the detailed molecular mechanisms through which specific aberrant glycan signatures functionally impact the malignant features of ErbB2-addicted GC cells, including the acquisition of trastuzumab resistance, remain elusive. Here, we demonstrate that ErbB2 is modified with both &#x3b1;2,6- and &#x3b1;2,3-sialylated glycan structures in GC clinical specimens. In-depth mass spectrometry-based glycomic and glycoproteomic analysis of ErbB2's ectodomain disclosed a site-specific glycosylation profile in GC cells, in which the ST6Gal1 sialyltransferase specifically targets ErbB2 N-glycosylation sites occurring within the receptor's trastuzumab-binding domain. Abrogation of ST6Gal1 expression reshaped the cellular and ErbB2-specific glycomes, expanded the cellular half-life of the ErbB2 receptor, and sensitized ErbB2-dependent GC cells to trastuzumab-induced cytotoxicity through the stabilization of ErbB dimers at the cell membrane, and the decreased activation of both ErbB2 and EGFR RTKs. Overall, our data demonstrates that ST6Gal1-mediated aberrant &#x3b1;2,6-sialylation actively tunes the resistance of ErbB2-driven GC cells to trastuzumab.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Glycosylation, Gastric cancer, Trastuzumab

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medcial Center
Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute for Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Celso A. Reis
Institute for Research and Innovation in Health, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Institute for Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.


