### Accession
PXD009441

### Title
Probing the Sensitivity of the Lumos Mass Spectrometer using a Standard Reference Protein in a Complex Background

### Description
we determined the sensitivity of the Lumos mass spectrometer using the NIST monoclonal antibody reference material at various concentrations to detect its peptides in a background of S. cerevisiae whole cell lysate, which was kept at a constant concentration.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast (S288C) was grown overnight to and OD600=1.5 in YPD media. The cells were pelleted by centrifuging at 6000 x g for 6 minutes at 4oC. Cells were resuspended in TAP extraction buffer (40 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 10% glycerol, 350 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5 mM DTT) and lysed by freezing in liquid nitrogen. Proteins were extracted by breaking the cells using a blender (Waring Commercial). Heparin (Sigma) and salt active nuclease (ArticZymes, Tromso, Norway) were added for 20 minutes at room temperature before proteins were separated from cellular material by centrifuging for 15 minutes at 4000 rpm at 4oC on a table top centrifuge (Eppendorf 5810-R). The supernatant was reserved and the cell pellet resuspended in TAP extraction up to 6 times to extract all soluble proteins. The supernatants were pooled and further clarified by centrifuging at 14, 000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4oC using a tabletop centrifuge (Beckman Coulter Microfuge 22R). Protein content was quantitated using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo). Yeast whole cell lysate or the NIST mAb, Humanized IgG1κ Monoclonal Antibody (Refimab Reference material 8671) was denatured by adding 8M urea and disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes before modifying the cysteine residues by carbamidomethylation (10 mM for 30 min in the dark). Endoproteinase Lys-C was added and proteins digested overnight at 37oC. Urea was diluted to 2M with 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 before adding trypsin to digest overnight at 37oC. The digestion reaction was quenched by the addition of formic acid to 5%. Peptides were stored at -20oC until use. The NIST monoclonal antibody (NIST mAb) digest was diluted to the final concentration with buffer A (5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water) and spiked into 250ng of yeast whole cell lysate, which had been diluted in the buffer A.  The samples were injected in triplicate using the auto-sampler on an UltiMate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) connected inline to the Q Exactive Plus or Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) fitted with the Nanospray Flex NG ion source. Peptides were trapped on a 15cm reverse phase column (5µm Aqua (Phenomenex), 100µm i.d.) and equilibrated with 2% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) for 15 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min before increasing the concentration of buffer B to 7% over 5 minutes. A linear gradient to 32% buffer B over 122 minutes was used to elute the majority of the peptides before increasing buffer B to 95% over 15 min and holding for an additional 12 minutes. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% buffer B before the next injection. The eluted peptides were ionized for detection by the Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Lumos) or Q Exactive Plus (QE+) mass spectrometer. Source conditions for both instruments were as follows: voltage, 2.5 kV, transfer tube temperature, 275oC. Peptides (MS1) were detected in the Orbitrap with the following settings: Lumos resolving power 60,000, QE+ resolving power 70,000; scan range m/z 400-1600; S-Lens RF 55%; Lumos AGC target 4.0 x 105, QE+ AGC target 1.0 x 106; microscans, 1. The top 15 peptides were selected in a data dependent mode for MS/MS fragmentation by CID   at 35% NCE (Lumos) or HCD at 27% NCE (QE+) to be detected in the Orbitrap (Lumos resolving power 15,000 or QE+ resolving power 17,500) or ion trap on the Lumos with dynamic exclusion for 30s with the Lumos AGC target set to 1.0 x 104 and QE+ AGC target at 1.0 x 105.

### Data Protocol
All datasets were searched with the ProLuCID search engine (v. 1.3.3) against the S. cerevisiae database downloaded from NCBI updated on May 16, 2017 with the NIST mAb sequence added as well as 160 common contaminants. The database also contained the shuffled protein sequences to estimate false discovery rates (FDRs). The result files from ProLuCID were further processed with DTASelect (v 1.9) to correlate peptide level information into protein information. Using in-house developed software, swallow, the peptide spectrum matches were maintained at FDR less than 5% for peptide and protein level matches. The datasets were compared using Contrast and quantitated using our in-house software NSAF7 (v 0.0.1).

### Publication Abstract
The use of mass spectrometry as a tool to detect proteins of biological interest has become a cornerstone of proteomics. The popularity of mass spectrometry-based methods has increased along with instrument improvements in detection and speed. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer has recently been shown to have better fragmentation and detection than its predecessors. Here, we determined the sensitivity of the Lumos using the NIST monoclonal antibody reference material at various concentrations to detect its peptides in a background of S. cerevisiae whole cell lysate, which was kept at a constant concentration. The data collected by data-dependent acquisition showed that the spiked protein could be detected at 10 pg by an average of 4 peptides in 250 ng of whole cell lysate when the instrument was operated by detecting the peptide masses in the Orbitrap and the fragment masses in the ion trap (FTIT mode). In contrast, when the peptides and fragments were both detected in the Orbitrap on either the Lumos or Q-Exactive Plus (FTFT mode), the lowest concentration of NIST monoclonal antibody detected was 50 pg. The Lumos can detect a single protein at a level 2500 times lower than the whole cell background and the combination of detecting ions in the Orbitrap and ion trap can improve the identification of low abundance proteins. Furthermore, the total number of proteins identified from decreasing starting amounts of whole cell extracts was determined. The Lumos, when operated in FTIT mode, was able to identify twice as many proteins compared to the Q-Exactive+ at 5 ng of whole cell lysate. Similar numbers of proteins were identified on both platforms at higher concentrations of starting material. Therefore, the Lumos mass spectrometer is especially useful for detecting proteins of low abundance in complex backgrounds or samples that have limited starting material.

### Keywords
Limit of detection, Data-dependent acquisition, Sensitivity, Orbitrap lumos, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics
The Stowers Institute for Medical Research

### Submitter
Laurence Florens

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Florens
The Stowers Institute for Medical Research


