### Accession
PXD019598

### Title
Protein interactions of TMEM147 and TMEM129 proteins from HeLa cells in co-IP experiments

### Description
IP/MS waw used to identify protein interactions for TMEM147.

### Sample Protocol
For co-IP experiment, cells were lysed in lysis buffer [20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% v/v NP40 and 1X CompleteTM(a protease inhibitor cocktail by Roche)]. Each of the extracts was incubated with a 10 μl slurry of GFP-Trap_A beads (Chromotek) for 2 h at RT. After binding, beads were extensively washed in lysis buffer and bound proteins were eluted from beads using 30 μl SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Samples were heated to 60 °C for 10 min. Proteomic analysis was carried out at the EMBL Heidelberg Proteomics Facility. IP samples (TMEM147-GFP IP as test sample, TMEM129-GFP IP for comparison, and GFP-only IP as negative control) from two independent experiments in parallel (6 samples in total) were prepared for MS analysis using the SP3 protocol (Hughes et al., 2019). Peptides were labelled with TMT6plex Isobaric Label Reagent (ThermoFisher), according the manufacturer’s instructions, pooled and cleaned up further with an OASIS® HLB µElution Plate (Waters). Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was carried out on an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography system, equipped with a Gemini C18 column (Phenomenex) (Reichel et al., 2016). MS data acquisition was performed with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Dionex), fitted with a trapping cartridge (µ-Precolumn C18 PepMap 100) and an analytical column (nanoEase™ M/Z HSS T3 column Waters), directly coupled to a Fusion Lumos (Thermo) mass spectrometer, using the proxeon nanoflow source in positive ion mode. Peptides were introduced via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and an applied spray voltage of 2.4 kV at capillary temperature at 275°C. Full mass scan was acquired with mass range 375-1500 m/z in profile mode with Orbitrap resolution of 60000 and fill time at maximum of 50 ms. Data-dependent acquisition was performed with Orbitrap resolution at 15000, fill time of 54 ms and a limitation of 1x105 ions. A normalized collision energy of 36 was applied and MS2 data acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For MS data analysis, IsobarQuant (Franken et al., 2015) and Mascot (v2.2.07) were used to process the acquired data, which were searched against Uniprot H. sapiens UP000005640 proteome database, containing common contaminants and reversed sequences. Raw output files of IsobarQuant (protein.txt – files) were processed using the R programming language (ISBN 3-900051-07-0). Only proteins quantified with at least two unique peptides were used for data analysis. Raw signal-sums (signal_sum columns) were cleaned with the ‘removeBatchEffect’ function from the limma package (Richie et al., 2015) and further normalized using the variance stabilization normalization package (Huber et al., 2002). All experimental conditions were normalized separately to keep differences in protein abundance. Proteins were tested for differential expression using limma. A protein with a false discovery rate (fdr) < 5 % and a fold-change of at least 100% was annotated as a hit.

### Publication Abstract
The structurally and functionally complex endoplasmic reticulum (ER) hosts critical processes including lipid synthesis. Here, we focus on the functional characterization of transmembrane protein TMEM147, and report that it localizes at the ER and nuclear envelope in HeLa cells. Silencing of <i>TMEM147</i> drastically reduces the level of lamin B receptor (LBR) at the inner nuclear membrane and results in mistargeting of LBR to the ER. LBR possesses a modular structure and corresponding bifunctionality, acting in heterochromatin organization via its N-terminus and in cholesterol biosynthesis via its sterol-reductase C-terminal domain. We show that TMEM147 physically interacts with LBR, and that the C-terminus of LBR is essential for their functional interaction. We find that TMEM147 also physically interacts with the key sterol reductase DHCR7, which is involved in cholesterol biosynthesis. Similar to what was seen for LBR, <i>TMEM147</i> downregulation results in a sharp decline of DHCR protein levels and co-ordinate transcriptional decreases of <i>LBR</i> and <i>DHCR7</i> expression. Consistent with this, lipidomic analysis upon <i>TMEM147</i> silencing identified changes in cellular cholesterol levels, cholesteryl ester levels and profile, and in cellular cholesterol uptake, raising the possibility that TMEM147 is an important new regulator of cholesterol homeostasis in cells.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Protein nifie 14, E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase tm129, Er multi-pass transmembrane proteins

### Affiliations
EMBL
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Cyprus

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Niovi Santama
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Cyprus


