### Accession
PXD011670

### Title
Chromatin capture links the metabolic enzyme AHCY to stem cell proliferation

### Description
Profiling the chromatin-bound proteome (chromatome) in a simple, direct, and reliable manner might be key to uncovering the role of yet uncharacterized chromatin factors in physiology and disease. Here, we have design an experimental strategy to survey the chromatome of proliferating cells by using the DNA-mediated chromatin pull-down technology (Dm-ChP). Our approach provides a global view of cellular chromatome in normal physiological conditions and enables the identification of chromatin-bound proteins de novo. Integrating Dm-ChP with genomic and functional data, we have discovered an unexpected chromatin function for adenosylhomocysteinase (AHCY), a major one-carbon pathway metabolic enzyme, in gene activation. Our study reveals a new regulatory axis between the metabolic state of pluripotent cells, ribosomal protein production, and cell division during early phase of embryo development, in which the metabolic flux of methylation reactions is favored in a local milieu

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested to peptide mixtures using LysC and Trypsin. Trptic peptide mixtures were desalted using a C18 UltraMicroSpin column.   For chromatin bound proteome in ESCs experiments: Samples were analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to nano-LC (Proxeon) equipped with a C18 25-cm chromatography column with 120 min gradients. For proteomic profiling in shControl and shAhcy-KD ESCs: Samples were analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) coupled to EasyLC (Proxeon) equipped with a C18 50-cm chromatography column with 90 min gradients.

### Data Protocol
Chromatin bound proteome in ESCs experiments: Proteome Discoverer v1.4 and Mascot search engine was used for peptide identification and quantification. The analysis of specific chromatin interactors was carried out with SAINT.  Proteomic profiling in shControl and shAhcy-KD ESCs: Proteome Discoverer v2.0 and Mascot search engine was used for peptide identification and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Profiling the chromatin-bound proteome (chromatome) in a simple, direct, and reliable manner might be key to uncovering the role of yet uncharacterized chromatin factors in physiology and disease. Here, we have designed an experimental strategy to survey the chromatome of proliferating cells by using the DNA-mediated chromatin pull-down (Dm-ChP) technology. Our approach provides a global view of cellular chromatome under normal physiological conditions and enables the identification of chromatin-bound proteins de novo. Integrating Dm-ChP with genomic and functional data, we have discovered an unexpected chromatin function for adenosylhomocysteinase, a major one-carbon pathway metabolic enzyme, in gene activation. Our study reveals a new regulatory axis between the metabolic state of pluripotent cells, ribosomal protein production, and cell division during the early phase of embryo development, in which the metabolic flux of methylation reactions is favored in a local milieu.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Ahcy, Proteomics, Stem cells

### Affiliations
Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG)
UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG)


