### Accession
PXD021132

### Title
Targeting of disease-linked mutations in PI3K gamma

### Description
Using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and molecular dynamics we have identified mutation specific conformational changes, and provide a molecular framework for how they alter kinase activity.Many of the activating conformational changes mimicked previously described changes that occur upon membrane binding and allosteric inhibitor binding. We surveyed a diverse panel of PI3K inhibitors using HDX-MS and X-ray crystallography, and find that inhibitors that interact with the activation loop lead to allosteric conformational changes that partially mimic the R1021C mutation. Intriguingly, inhibitors that showed similar conformational changes to the activating mutant showed increased potency (~3 fold) for the mutant over wild type PI3K. Overall this work provides unique insight into the regulatory mechanisms that control PI3K kinase activity, and reveals a framework for the potential design of PI3K isoform and mutant selective inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
HDX experiments were performed similarly as described before {Dornan:2017hud}. For HDX with mutants, 3 L containing 13 picomoles of protein was incubated with 8.25 L of D 2 O buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 98% (v/v) D 2 O) for four different time periods (3, 30, 300, 3000 s at 20 o C). After the appropriate time, the reaction was stopped with 57.5 L of ice-cold quench buffer (2M guanidine, 3% formic acid), immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 o C. For HDX with inhibitors, 5 L of p110p110g at 2 M was mixed with 5 L of inhibitor at 4 M in 10% DMSO or 5 L of blank solution containing 10% DMSO and incubated for 20 minutes on ice. 40 L of D2O buffer was added to this solution to start the exchange reaction which was allowed to proceed for four different time periods (3, 30, 300, 3000 s at 20 o C). After the appropriate time, the reaction was terminated with 20 mL of ice- cold quench buffer and the samples were frozen. Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto a ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) system at 2 °C. Protein was run over two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems, Porosyme, 2-3131-00) at 10 °C and 2 °C at 200 μl/min for 3 min, and peptides were collected onto a VanGuard precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an Acquity 1.7-μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18  UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 5–36% B (buffer A, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% acetonitrile) over 16 min. Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on an Impact II TOF (Bruker) acquiring over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200 °C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV. Peptides were identified using data-dependent acquisition methods following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5-s precursor scan from 150–2000 m/z; 12 0.25-s fragment scans from 150–2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants.

### Data Protocol
HD-Examiner software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. The results for these proteins are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation, and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (62% for experiments with mutants and 75.5% for experiments with inhibitors). Changes in any peptide at any time point greater than both 5% and 0.4 Da between conditions with a paired t test value of p &lt; 0.01 were considered significant. The raw HDX data are shown in two different formats. The raw peptide deuterium incorporation graphs for a selection of peptides with significant differences are shown, with the raw data for all analyzed peptides in the source data. To allow for visualization of differences across all peptides, we utilized number of deuteron difference (#D) plots. These plots show the total  difference in deuterium incorporation over the entire H/D exchange timecourse, with each point indicating a single peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Class I Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) are master regulators of cellular functions, with the class IB PI3K catalytic subunit (p110&#x3b3;) playing key roles in immune signalling. p110&#x3b3; is a key factor in inflammatory diseases and has been identified as a therapeutic target for cancers due to its immunomodulatory role. Using a combined biochemical/biophysical approach, we have revealed insight into regulation of kinase activity, specifically defining how immunodeficiency and oncogenic mutations of R1021 in the C-terminus can inactivate or activate enzyme activity. Screening of inhibitors using HDX-MS revealed that activation loop-binding inhibitors induce allosteric conformational changes that mimic those in the R1021C mutant. Structural analysis of advanced PI3K inhibitors in clinical development revealed novel binding pockets that can be exploited for further therapeutic development. Overall, this work provides unique insights into regulatory mechanisms that control PI3K&#x3b3; kinase activity and shows a framework for the design of PI3K isoform and mutant selective inhibitors.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Pi3k, Kinase assay, Pi3k gamma, Molecular dynamics, Inhibitor

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E Burke
University of Victoria


