### Accession
PXD012010

### Title
Phosphoproteome of cyclic stretch A549 and IMR-90

### Description
Lung cancer is one of the leading causes of death. However, most of the researches were based on the traditional cell-culturing method. Whereas cells of lung are subjected to the mechanical forces periodically while breathing. In the present study, we applied cyclic stretch to stimulate the continuously contracting physical condition. We uncovered the stretching force-induced phosphoproteome in lung cancer cell A549 and fibroblast IMR-90. 2048 and 2604 phosphosites corresponding to 837 and 1008 phosphoproteins were identified in A549 and IMR-90, respectively. Interestingly, cytoskeleton reorganization and mitochondrial localization were enriched in the significantly expressed phosphoproteins in response to cyclic stretch. Indeed, we found this physical stress changed cell alignment thus disrupted mitochondrial dynamics. We proved that mitochondrial fusion is induced by uniaxial stretch in 2 cell lines. This study reveals the molecular mechanism of cyclic stretch and supports that stretching force enhanced cellular rearrangement and mitochondrial fusion in lung cells.

### Sample Protocol
1. Reduction, Alkylation and Protein digestion Protein extract was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, WAKO, Osaka, Japan) at room temperature for 30 minutes and carbidomethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. Alkylated proteins were digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO) for 3 hours and then digested by sequencing grade modified trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega, Mannhein, Germany) overnight at 37°C water bath. The peptide mixture was combined with an equal volume of ethyl acetate (Sigma-Aldrich) and centrifuged at 15700 xg at room temperature for 2 minutes. Peptides were collected by removing the organic solution and then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) to pH < 3.  The acidified sample was desalted using StageTips with SDB-XC Empore disc membranes (SDB-XC StageTip) (3M, Neuss, Germany) and eluted in a buffer containing 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile. The digested peptides solution is vaccum dried and resolved in 0.1 M TEAB solution prior to dimethyl labeling. 2.Dimethyl labeling Trypsinized samples from control and treatment samples were labeled with stable-isotope dimethyl. Control and treatment sample were mixed with 4 μL of 4% (v/v) formadehyde-H2 (Sigma-Aldrich) for light and 4% (v/v) formadehyde-D2 for heavy respectively. 4 μL of freshly prepared 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample and incubated for a hour at room temperature with shaking. The reaction was quenched by adding 16 μL ammonia solution (WAKO) to the samples on ice and subsequently added 25 μL of 10% formic acid (WAKO) to the sample. The light-labeled and heavy-labeled samples were mixed and acidified with 10 μL of TFA before process to desalt.  3. Phosphopeptide Enrichment with HAMMOC and Fractionation The phosphopeptides were enriched by aliphatic hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) as previously described. TiO2 has higher affinity to phosphate groups followed by lactic acid, with weaker affinity to the carboxylic groups of acidic amino acid residues, i.e., aspartic and glutamic acid. To efficiently reduce the non-specific binding of acidic non-phosphorylated peptides to TiO2, the TiO2 beads are blocked with lactic acid first. Then the phosphopeptides will compete out lactic acid for TiO2 binding, whereas acidic non-phosphopeptides remain unbound due to the weaker affinity than lactic acid to TiO2. Briefly, custom-made HAMMOC tips were prepared by packing 0.5-mg TiO2 beads (10 μm, GL sciences, Tokyo, Japan) into 10- μL C8 StageTips. Prior to sample loading, the HAMMOC tips were equilibrated with solution A containing 0.1% TFA, 80% acetonitrile and 300 mg/mL of lactic acid. About 100 ug of the desalted peptide mixture was mixed with an equal volume of solution A and then loaded onto the HAMMOC tips (100 μg of mixed peptides per tip). After successive washing with solution A and solution B (0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile), the resulting phosphopeptides were eluted by 0.5 and 5% piperidine (WAKO). The eluent was acidified with TFA and desalted with SDB-XC StageTip. The phosphopeptides were resuspended in 0.5% TFA and subjected to nanoliquid chromatography (nanoLC)-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
We performed the data analysis by Maxquant version 1.5.3.30. Detail information was listed below. Raw MS spectral information was processed for peak detection and quantification by using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.0. Peptide identification was performed by using the Andromeda search engine against to the Swiss-PROT human database version canonical (Published May 10, 2017). Search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY). Two and more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of six amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. By using decoy database strategy, peptide identification was accepted based on the posterior error probability with a false discovery rate of 1%. Precursor intensities of already identified peptides were further searched and recalculated by using the “match between runs” opinion in MaxQuant. For multiple phosphopeptides, the localization probability of all putative phosphosites was determined by using the MaxQuant PTM score algorithm. For single peptides with multiple hits, all matched proteins were count separately.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is a leading cause of death. Most previous studies have been based on traditional cell-culturing methods. However, lung cells are periodically subjected to mechanical forces during breathing. Understanding the mechanisms underlying the cyclic stretching induced in lung cells may be important for lung cancer therapy. Here, we applied cyclic stretching to stimulate the continual contraction that is present under physiological conditions in lung cells. We first uncovered the stretching-induced phosphoproteome in lung cancer cell line A549 and fibroblast cell line IMR-90. We identified 2048 and 2604 phosphosites corresponding to 837 and 1008 phosphoproteins in A549 and IMR-90, respectively. Furthermore, we combined our phosphoproteomics and public gene expression data to identify the biological functions in response to cyclic stretching. Interestingly, cytoskeletal and mitochondrial reorganization were enriched. We further used cell imaging analysis to validate the profiling results and found that this physical force changed cell alignment and mitochondrial length. This study not only reveals the molecular mechanism of cyclic stretching but also provides evidence that cell stretching causes cellular rearrangement and mitochondrial length change.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome; cyclic stretch; lund cancer; lung fibroblast

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University,  Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University,  Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, National Taiwan University,

### Submitter
Wang Weihsuan

### Lab Head
Dr Hseuh-Fen Juan
Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University,  Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University,  Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, National Taiwan University,


