### Accession
PXD002431

### Title
Analytical framework for peptidomics applied to large scale neuropeptide identification

### Description
Endogenous peptides are extracted and seperated with nLC with HCD fragmentation on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Data analysis was done with Mascot and MaxQuant

### Sample Protocol
Samples are extracted with urea and filtered through cut-off filtered and seperated by reverse phase prior to MS analysis. Detailed methods are in the paper.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data are analyzed with MaxQuant and Mascot. Identifications are further grouped as described in detail in the paper.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale mass spectrometry-based peptidomics for drug discovery is relatively unexplored because of challenges in peptide degradation and identification following tissue extraction. Here we present a streamlined analytical pipeline for large-scale peptidomics. We developed an optimized sample preparation protocol to achieve fast, reproducible and effective extraction of endogenous peptides from sub-dissected organs such as the brain, while diminishing unspecific protease activity. Each peptidome sample was analysed by high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry and the resulting data set was integrated with publically available databases. We developed and applied an algorithm that reduces the peptide complexity for identification of biologically relevant peptides. The developed pipeline was applied to rat hypothalamus and identifies thousands of neuropeptides and their post-translational modifications, which is combined in a resource format for visualization, qualitative and quantitative analyses.

### Keywords
Neuropeptides, Bioinformatic framework, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Christian Kelstrup

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
NNF Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


