### Accession
PXD033744

### Title
Serum APOC1 levels are decreased in seroconverted children who progress to type 1 diabetes at a young age

### Description
Biomarkers are needed to accurately predict and monitor type 1 diabetes progression during the substantially heterogeneous presymptomatic period of the disease development. To address this concern, we studied temporal changes in the plasma and serum proteomes of < 5-year-old children with HLA-conferred risk for type 1 diabetes by analysing longitudinal sample series that were collected at regular intervals between birth and diagnosis. Using mass spectrometry-based discovery proteomics, longitudinal plasma sample series from multiple autoantibody positive children who had rapidly progressed to type 1 diabetes before 4 years of age were analysed and compared with similar measurements from age and gender matched children who were either single autoantibody positive or autoantibody negative. Following analysis of the data with an additive Gaussian process regression model (LonGP), targeted proteomics was used to verify 11 biomarker candidates in a larger independent yet similar cohort of children with more frequent sampling points. The data reiterated extensive age related trends for protein levels in young children. Further, by combining the utility of LonGP together with the targeted analysis in an extended cohort, these analyses demonstrated that the serum levels of two peptides unique for apolipoprotein C1 (APOC1) were decreased after the appearance of the first autoantibody and remained relatively less abundant in children who progressed to type 1 diabetes in comparison to autoantibody negative children.

### Sample Protocol
Immunodepletion of the top 12 most plasma proteins was first carried out for the plasma samples. Subsequently, the samples were digested with trypsin into peptides and then double desalted to remove contaminants. Prior to MS runs, retention time standard peptides (iRT, Biognosys) were spiked into each sample to support monitoring of retention time stability across LC-MS/MS runs. Each sample was analysed in triplicate with Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The data was processed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann 2008). The MS/MS data were searched against a combined SwissProt human and TrEMBL enterovirus protein sequence database with added iRT peptide sequences and a common contaminants database using the build-in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). Label-free quantification was selected with the LFQ min ratio count of 2. The database search parameters used were for trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. A false discovery rate of 1 % for protein and peptide levels was applied, which was automatically determined by searching the reversed database. The “match between runs” feature was used to transfer the peptide identifications between the raw files. Otherwise, MaxQuant default settings were used. The MaxQuant output data was pre-processed with Perseus software (Tyanova et al. 2016) using normalised LFQ intensities. An additive Gaussian process regression model (LonGP) (Cheng et al. 2019) was used to model the longitudinal changes in the data.

### Publication Abstract
Better understanding of the early events in the development of type 1 diabetes is needed to improve prediction and monitoring of the disease progression during the substantially heterogeneous presymptomatic period of the beta cell damaging process. To address this concern, we used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to analyse longitudinal pre-onset plasma sample series from children positive for multiple islet autoantibodies who had rapidly progressed to type 1 diabetes before 4&#xa0;years of age (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10) and compared these with similar measurements from matched children who were either positive for a single autoantibody (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10) or autoantibody negative (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10). Following statistical analysis of the longitudinal data, targeted serum proteomics was used to verify 11 proteins putatively associated with the disease development in a similar yet independent and larger cohort of children who progressed to the disease within 5&#xa0;years of age (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;31) and matched autoantibody negative children (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;31). These data reiterated extensive age-related trends for protein levels in young children. Further, these analyses demonstrated that the serum levels of two peptides unique for apolipoprotein C1 (APOC1) were decreased after the appearance of the first islet autoantibody and remained relatively less abundant in children who progressed to type 1 diabetes, in comparison to autoantibody negative children.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Type 1 diabetes, Lc-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Maria Karoliina Hirvonen

### Lab Head
Dr Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


