### Accession
PXD010430

### Title
Tetrahydrobiopterin modulates ubiquitin conjugation to UBC13/UBE2N and proteasome activity by S-nitrosation

### Description
Nitric Oxide (NO) is an intracellular signalling mediator, which affects many biological processes via the posttranslational modification of proteins through S-nitrosation. The availability of NO and NOS-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS) from enzymatic uncoupling are determined by the NO synthase cofactor Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). Here, using a global proteomics “biotin-switch” approach, we identified components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system to be altered via BH4-dependent NO signalling by protein S-nitrosation. We show S-nitrosation of ubiquitin conjugating E2 enzymes, in particular the catalytic residue C87 of UBC13/UBE2N, leading to impaired polyubiquitylation by interfering with the formation of UBC13~Ub thioester intermediates. In addition, proteasome cleavage activity in cells also seems to be altered by S-nitrosation, correlating with the modification of cysteine residues within the 19S regulatory particle and catalytic subunits of the 20S complex. Our results highlight the widespread impact of BH4 on downstream cellular signalling as evidenced by the effect of a perturbed BH4-dependent NO-Redox balance on critical processes within the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). These studies thereby uncover a novel aspect of NO associated modulation of cellular homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved in 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Dithiothreitol (10 mM) was added and samples were incubated at 60°C for 45 minutes. Samples were diluted 1:10 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added (1:50 w/w) for overnight digestion. PMSF (0.5 mM)stopped the reaction and samples were dried down in a vacuum concentrator (Speedvac,Thermo Scientific) and resuspended in acetonitrile (2%) and TFA (0.1%). Samples were desalted using ZipTipC18 pipette tips (Millipore), vacuum concentrated and reconstituted in acetonitrile (2%) and TFA (0.1%), before mass spectrometric analysis. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) was performed using an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, coupled with a Waters nanoAquity UPLC essentially as described previously (27). In brief, injected samples underwent online desalting using a Trap column Symmetry C18, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm particle, Waters). For separation, a BEH C18 column (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm particle, Waters) was used with a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 60 minutes and a gradient of 3%-40% acetonitrile 0.1% Formic acid. Survey scans were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at 400m/z between 300 and 2000 m/z for up to 100ms with an ion target of 1E6. Selected precursors were picked above a threshold of 5E2 counts for MS/MS and excluded for 30s after sampling. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap with a maximum accumulation time of 100ms and an ion target of 5E4 counts. CID fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 35. Experiments were conducted in biological triplicates and all sample analysed in a single sample batch.

### Data Protocol
For label free quantitation raw data were imported into Progenesis QI (Waters) with default settings. MS2 spectra were identified with Mascot v 2.4 (Matrix Science) by searching Uniprot/Swissprot (retrieved 07/09/2012) with taxonomy Mus musculus, using 10ppm and 0.6Da peptide mass/fragment mass tolerances. Allowance was made for 1 missed cleavage site. Biotin-HPDP (C), DeStreak (C), Deamidation (N/Q) and Oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. Data was exported for integration in Progenesis with a peptides false discovery rate of 1%. Furthermore, spectra with a peptide score <20 were discarded. Peptide abundances were mean normalised to identified features only. Biotinylated proteins in the Gch1 knockdown group were subtracted from those that appeared in the NS group, leaving our group of interest where the appearance of detectable nitrosation was dependent on Gch1 expression and the presence of BH4.

### Publication Abstract
Nitric Oxide (NO) is an intracellular signalling mediator, which affects many biological processes via the posttranslational modification of proteins through S-nitrosation. The availability of NO and NOS-derived reactive oxygen species (ROS) from enzymatic uncoupling are determined by the NO synthase cofactor Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). Here, using a global proteomics "biotin-switch" approach, we identified components of the ubiquitin-proteasome system to be altered via BH4-dependent NO signalling by protein S-nitrosation. We show S-nitrosation of ubiquitin conjugating E2 enzymes, in particular the catalytic residue C87 of UBC13/UBE2N, leading to impaired polyubiquitylation by interfering with the formation of UBC13~Ub thioester intermediates. In addition, proteasome cleavage activity in cells also seems to be altered by S-nitrosation, correlating with the modification of cysteine residues within the 19S regulatory particle and catalytic subunits of the 20S complex. Our results highlight the widespread impact of BH4 on downstream cellular signalling as evidenced by the effect of a perturbed BH4-dependent NO-Redox balance on critical processes within the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). These studies thereby uncover a novel aspect of NO associated modulation of cellular homeostasis.

### Keywords
S-nitrosylation, Biotin switch

### Affiliations
Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility, Oxford


