### Accession
PXD014390

### Title
EXoO-Tn: Tag-n-Map the Tn Antigen in the Human Proteome

### Description
Tn antigen (Tn), a single N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) monosaccharide attached to protein Ser and Thr residues, is found on most solid tumors yet rarely detected in adult tissues: featuring it one of the most distinctive signatures of cancers. Although it is prevalent in cancers, Tn-glycosylation sites are not entirely clear owing to the lack of suitable technology. Knowing the Tn-glycosylation sites will spur the development of the new vaccines, diagnostics, and therapeutics of cancers. Here, we report a novel technology named EXoO-Tn for large-scale mapping of Tn-glycosylation sites. EXoO-Tn utilizes glycosyltransferase C1GalT1 and isotopically-labeled UDP-Gal(13C6) to tag and convert Tn to Gal(13C6)-Tn. This exquisite Gal(13C6)-Tn structure is recognized by a human-gut-bacterial enzyme, called OpeRATOR, that specifically cleaves N-termini of the Gal(13C6)-Tn-occupied Ser and Thr residues to yield site-containing glycopeptides. The enzymes C1GalT1 and OpeRATOR could be used concurrently in one-pot. The effectiveness of EXoO-Tn was evaluated by analyzing Jurkat cells, where 947 Tn-glycosylation sites from 480 glycoproteins were mapped. Bioinformatic analysis of the identified site-specific Tn-glycoproteins revealed conserved motif, cellular localization, relative position in proteins, and mapped site-specific Tn-glycoproteome in different studies. Given the significance of Tn in cancers, EXoO-Tn is anticipated to have broad utilities in clinical study of cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Tagging of Tn and mapping its glycosylation site using synthetic Tn-glycopeptide Synthetic Tn-glycopeptide VPSTPPTPS(α-GalNAc)PSTPPTPSPSC-NH2 IgA1 hinge peptide was purchased from Susses Research. In the workflow with sequential enzymatic treatments, five µg of glycopeptide in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 was mixed with one µg recombinant human C1GalT1/C1GalT1C1 protein (R&D Systems, NM) in the presence of either 0.5 mM UDP-Gal (Sigma-Aldrich) or 0.5 mM UDP-Gal13C6 (Omicron Biochemicals, lnc., IN) at 37°C for 16 hours. After incubation, half of each sample was subjected to digestion using five units of OpeRATOR (Genovis Inc, Cambridge, MA) at 37°C for 16 hours. The glycopeptides were desalted using C18 ZipTip (Millipore Sigma), dried using speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. In the concurrent one-pot enzymatic treatment that was used in all experiments described below, enzymes including C1GalT1/C1GalT1C1, OpeRATOR, and substrate i.e. UDP-Gal or UDP-Gal13C6 were added at the same time using the amount as described in the above sequential enzymatic workflow and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours before C18 desalting and LC-MS/MS analysis.  Extraction of site-containing Tn-glycopeptides from Jurkat cells Jurkat Clone E6-1 (NIH AIDS Reagent Program) were cultured and expanded in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 units of penicillin, and 100 µg of streptomycin. The cells were collected, washed three times in the ice-cold PBS and lysed in 8 M urea/500 mM ammonia bicarbonate. The cell lyse was sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 g to remove particles. Protein concentration was determined using a protein BCA assay. Twenty milligrams of proteins were reduced in 5 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 hour and alkylated in 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT) for 40 min in the dark. The samples were then diluted five-fold using 100 mM ammonia bicarbonate buffer. Trypsin was added to the samples with an enzyme/protein ratio of 1/40 w/w. After incubation at 37°C for 16 hours, lysine residues were guanidination-modified, and peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA), as described in the previous study 21. The peptides were dried using speed-vac, resuspended in PBS with α2-3,6,8 neuraminidase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. Four-hundred microliters agarose bound Vicia Villosa Lectin (VVA) (50% slurry, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) were washed twice using water, added to peptides and incubated at RT for 16 hours with rotation. The VVA agarose was gently washed with 1X PBS for three times. Bound glycopeptides were eluted using 4 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4/400mM GalNAc (Sigma-Aldrich) at RT for 30 min with shaking. The eluted glycopeptides were desalted using C18 cartridge and conjugated to AminoLink resin (Pierce, Rockford, IL) as described previously 21. Briefly, the pH of C18 elute containing glycopeptides was neutralized to approximately pH 7 using two volume of 10X PBS. The solution was mixed with resin (100 µg peptide/100 µl resin, 50% slurry) and 50 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaCNBH3) at RT for a minimal of 4 hours or overnight with rotation. Unreacted groups on resin were blocked using 1M Tris-HCl buffer (pH7.4) with 50 mM NaCNBH3 at RT for 30 min with rotation. The resin was sequentially washed using 50% ACN, 1.5 M NaCl, and 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4). To tag and release Tn-glycopeptides, a solution (50 µl) containing 10 µg of C1GalT1/C1GalT1C1, 0.5 mM UDP-Gal13C6, and 2000 units of OpeRATOR was added to the resin and incubated at 37°C for 16 hours. The released glycopeptides in the solution were collected twice using 400 µl of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4). Glycopeptides in the collected solution were combined, desalted using C18 cartridge, dried using speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. The peptides were fractionated using HPLC and concatenated to eight fractions before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search of site-containing Tn-glycopeptides A UniProt human protein database (71,326 entries, downloaded October 19, 2017) was used to generate a peptide database with 26,067,074 non-redundant peptide entries using the method as described in the previous study 21. Briefly, a randomized decoy database using The Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) 22 was generated and concatenated with the target database. The concatenated database was digested with trypsin and then OpeRATOR in silico. Peptides with Ser or Thr residues and lengths from 6 to 46 amino acids were used. SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to search with variable modification: oxidation (M), Gal13C6(1)HexNAc(1) (S/T), Hex(1)HexNAc(1) (S/T) and HexNAc (S/T) and static modification: carbamidomethylation (C) and guanidination (K). FDR was set at 1% using Percolator. Only MS/MS scans with oxonium ion at 204, and two of the other oxonium ions were kept. Assignments with XCorr score below one were removed. MS/MS spectra were manually studied and inspected using spectral viewer in Proteome Discoverer to identify the spectral feature and ensure the confidence of identification.  Bioinformatics Software pLogo was used to reveal motif for Tn-glycosylation sites 23 surrounding by 15 amino acids in length with the central amino acids being the sites. The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) were used for Gene Ontology (GO) analysis 24. Python (version 2.7) is used to analyze the data and generate the figures, including the relative position of Tn-glycosylation sites in protein sequence, radar charts, unsupervised hierarchical clustering, and box plot.

### Publication Abstract
Tn-antigen (Tn), a single <i>N</i>-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) monosaccharide attached to protein Ser/Thr residues, is found on most cancer yet rarely detected in adult normal tissues as reported in previous studies, featuring it as one of the most distinctive signatures of cancer. Although it is important in cancer, Tn modified glycoproteins are not entirely clear owing to the lack of a suitable method. Knowing the Tn-glycosylated proteins and glycosylation sites are essential to the prevention, diagnosis, and therapy of cancer associated with the expression of Tn. Here, we introduce a method named EXoO-Tn for large-scale mapping of Tn-glycosylated proteins and glycosylation sites. EXoO-Tn utilizes solid-phase immobilization of proteolytic peptides of proteins, which modifies Tn by glycosyltransferase C1GalT1 with isotopically labeled UDP-Gal(<sup>13</sup>C<sub>6</sub>), to tag and convert Tn to Gal(<sup>13</sup>C<sub>6</sub>)-Tn, which gives rise to a unique glycan mass. The exquisite Gal(<sup>13</sup>C<sub>6</sub>) modified Tn are then recognized by a human-gut-bacterial enzyme, OpeRATOR, and released at the N-termini of the Gal(<sup>13</sup>C<sub>6</sub>)-Tn-occupied Ser/Thr residues from immobilized peptides to yield site-containing glycopeptides. The effectiveness of EXoO-Tn was benchmarked by analyzing Jurkat cells, where 947 Tn-glycosylation sites from 480 glycoproteins were mapped. The EXoO-Tn was further applied to the analysis of pancreatic cancer sera, where Tn-glycoproteins were identified. Given the significance of Tn in cancer, EXoO-Tn is anticipated to have broad translational and clinical utilities.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Tn antigen, Exoo-tn, O-galnac

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

### Submitter
Weiming Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.


