### Accession
PXD005303

### Title
In-depth proteome analysis of FFPE mammary secretory carcinoma specimens

### Description
Mammary secretory carcinoma (MSC) is one of the rarest types of breast cancer accounting for less than 0.15% of all breast cancers. Traditionally, MSC is considered that it belongs to the phenotypic spectrum of basal-like triple-negative breast carcinoma (BL-TNBC). Here, we present a study of MSC formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens using novel in-depth quantitative proteomic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
After deparaffinization of FFPE, protein was extracted using SDS buffer. Protein concentration was measured using BCA reducing compatible kit (Thermo). At least 100 ug of proteins extracted from FFPE slide was digested by FASP procedure as previously described with some modification. Tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling was performed according to manufacturer’s instruction with some modification. The desalted pooled peptides were fractionated using a Agilent 1260 bioinert HPLC (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) equipped with an analytical column (4.6 X 250mm, 5um particle).

### Data Protocol
MS analysis was performed using Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometers, Q-exactive plus (Thermo) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC systems (Dionex) via a nano electrospray source, as described with some modifications. MS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software based on SEQUEST-HT search engine against Human Uniprot database (December 2014, 88,657 entries) including forward and reverse proteins sequence and common contaminants. Database search was performed using a 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamido methylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and gluamine (0.98 Da) were set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Ffpe, Tmt, Secretory carcinoma

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Seoul National University Hospital


