### Accession
PXD032161

### Title
Cell type-specific biotin labeling in vivo resolves regional neuronal and astrocyte proteomic differences in mouse brain

### Description
Proteomic profiling of brain cell types using isolation-based strategies pose limitations in resolving cellular phenotypes representative of their native state. We generated a novel mouse line for cell type-specific expression of biotin ligase TurboID, leading to in vivo biotinylation of proteins. Using adenoviral and transgenic approaches to label neurons, we show striking protein biotinylation in neuronal soma and axons throughout the brain and quantified over 2,000 neuron-derived proteins spanning synaptic proteins, transporters, ion channels and disease-relevant druggable targets. Next, we compared Camk2a-neuron and Aldh1l1-astrocyte proteomes and resolved brain region-specific proteomic differences within both cell types, some of which may underlie selective vulnerability to neurological diseases. Leveraging the cellular specificity of proteomic labeling, we used an antibody-based approach to uncover differences in neuron and astrocyte-derived signaling phospho-proteins and cytokines. This approach will facilitate the characterization of cell-type specific proteomes in a diverse number of tissues under both physiological and pathological states.

### Sample Protocol
Dried peptides were resuspended in 15 μL of loading buffer (0.1% FA and 0.03% TFA in water), and 7-8 μL was loaded onto a self-packed 25 cm (100 μm internal diameter packed with 1.7 μm Water’s CSH beads) using an Easy-nLC 1200 or Dionex 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system. The liquid chromatography gradient started at 1% buffer B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA) and ramps to 5% in 10 seconds. This was followed by a 55 min linear gradient to 35% B and finally a 4 minute 50 second 99% B flush. For the AAV cohort (IP and total brain samples), an Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer with a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS Pro)69 interface was used to acquire all mass spectra at a compensation voltage of -45V. The spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Survey scans were collected in the Orbitrap with a 60,000 resolution, 400 to 1600 m/z range, 400,000 automatic gain control (AGC), 50 ms max injection time and rf lens at 30%. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra were collected in the ion trap with a collision energy of 35%, an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, AGC target of 10000, and a max injection time of 35 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass tolerance window.  For transgenic brain region samples (IP and total brain samples), an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer with a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS Pro)69 interface was used to acquire all mass spectra at a compensation voltage of -45V. The spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Survey scans were collected in the Orbitrap with a 120,000 resolution, 400 to 1600 m/z range, 400,000 automatic gain control (AGC), 50 ms max injection time and rf lens at 30%. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra were collected in the ion trap with a collision energy of 35%, an isolation width of 0.7 m/z, AGC target of 10000, and a max injection time of 35 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds with a 10 ppm mass tolerance window.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched using the search engine Andromeda, integrated into MaxQuant, against 2020 mouse Uniprot database (91,441 target sequences including peptide sequences for V5 and TurboID). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned as a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da). Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 missed cleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ±4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, 0.05 Da tolerance for orbitrap and 0.6 Da tolerance for ion trap MS/MS scans. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1 percent. Quantification settings were as follows: re-quantify with a second peak finding attempt after protein identification has completed; match MS1 peaks between runs; a 0.7 min retention time match window was used after an alignment function was found with a 20-minute RT search space. Quantitation of proteins was performed using summed peptide intensities given by MaxQuant. The quantitation method only considered razor plus unique peptides for protein level quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Srikant Rangaraju, MD MS  Associate Professor Department of Neurology Vascular Neurology Division Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Srikant Rangaraju
Srikant Rangaraju, MD MS  Associate Professor Department of Neurology Vascular Neurology Division Emory University


