### Accession
PXD040778

### Title
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of the ubiquitin variant UbKEKS reveals a role in regulating nucleolar structures and composition

### Description
Ubiquitination is a well-known post-translational modification responsible for one of the most powerful multi-layered communication and regulation system in the cell. Over the past decades, new ubiquitin variants and ubiquitin-like proteins arose to further enrich this mechanism. Among them, the recently discovered ubiquitin variant UbKEKS can specifically target many proteins and yet, functional consequences of this new modification remain unknown. The absence of UbKEKS induces accumulation of lamin A in the nucleoli, highlighting the need for deeper investigations about protein composition and functions regulation of this highly dynamic and membrane-less compartment. By using data independent acquisition mass spectrometry and microscopy, we show here that despite not impacting protein stability, UbKEKS is required for correct nucleolar organization. The absence of UbKEKS increases nucleoli’s size and accentuate their circularity while disrupting dense fibrillar component and fibrillar center structures. Moreover, depletion of UbKEKS leads to distinct changes in nucleolar composition. Notably, lack of UbKEKS favors nucleolar sequestration of known apoptotic regulators such as IFI16 or P14arf. Increase of apoptosis in UbKEKS knockout cells was later validated by flow cytometry and real-time cellular growth monitoring. In the end, this work identifies the first cellular functions of the UbKEKS variant and lay the foundation stone to establish UbKEKS as a new universal layer of regulation in the already complex ubiquitination system.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Once in the 8M urea, 10mM HEPES pH 8 buffer, samples were quantified by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific #23225). DTT (5mM final concentration) was added into 50µg of proteins and samples were boiled for 2 minutes. After a 30 minutes incubation at room temperature, chloroacetamide (7,5mM final concentration) was added to the mixture. Solutions were then incubated in the dark, at room temperature for 20 minutes. 50mM of NH4HCO3 was added to each tube to reduce the final concentration of urea to 2M. Peptide digestion was performed by adding 1µg of trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega Corporation, WI, USA) and incubating each sample overnight at 30°C. The next morning, samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.2% TFA. For samples derivated from isolated nucleoli, a fraction of the digested sample was collected, at this step, to create the DIA spectral library generation and was processed as described in the next paragraph. On the other hand, remaining samples were cleaned using ZipTips C18 column (EMD Millipore, Burlington, VT), lyophilized in speedvac and finally resuspended in formic acid 1%. Peptides were quantified using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) at a wavelenght of 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and keep at −20 °C until analysis by mass spectrometry. DIA spectral library generation Fractionation of digested samples. Peptides collected for the DIA spectral library were desalted with ZipTips C18 column (EMD Millipore, Burlington, VT), dried in speedvac and resuspended in 300µl of 0,1% TFA. Those peptides were divided into several fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer protocol. Briefly, each column was initially centrifuged at 5 000g for 2 minutes at room temperature to remove the liquid and pack the resin material, followed by 2 washes with 300μl of 100% ACN. The column was then conditioned with 2 washes of 0.1% TFA. Purified peptides were loaded on the column, centrifuged at 3 000g for 2 minutes at room temperature, followed by a wash with 300μl of MS-grade water. Peptides were then eluted in 8 fractions by successively loading 300μl of 8 different solutions containing 0.1% triethylamine and 5% up to 50% ACN. For each step, a centrifugation at 3 000g for 2 minutes at room temperature was performed, with a new low-binding microtube to collect the fraction. Peptides were then concentrated by speedvac at 60°C until complete drying and then resuspended in 50 μl of 1% FA buffer. Peptides were assayed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and absorbance was measured at 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −20 °C until analysis by mass spectrometry. DDA LC–MS analysis. 250 ng of peptides from each fraction were injected into an HPLC (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) and loaded onto a trap column with a constant flow of 4 µl/min (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation) then eluted onto an analytical C18 Column (1.9 µm beads size, 75 µm x 25 cm, PepSep). Peptides were eluted over a 2-hour gradient of ACN (5-37%) in 0.1% FA at 400 nL/min while being injected into a TimsTOF Pro ion mobility mass spectrometer equipped with a Captive Spray nano electrospray source (Bruker Daltonics). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a 100-1700 m/z mass range, with PASEF enabled with a number of PASEF scans set at 10 (1.17 seconds duty cycle) and a dynamic exclusion of 0.4 min, m/z dependent isolation window and collision energy of 42.0 eV. The target intensity was set to 20,000, with an intensity threshold of 2,500. DIA proteomics DIA LC–MS analysis. Parameters used for DIA processing were almost identical as DDA processing, except that data were acquired using diaPASEF mode. Briefly, for each single TIMS (100 ms) in diaPASEF mode, we used 1 mobility window consisting of 27 mass steps (m/z between 114 to 1414 with a mass width of 50 Da) per cycle (1.27 seconds duty cycle). These steps cover the diagonal scan line for +2 and +3 charged peptides in the m/z-ion mobility plane.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification by MaxQuant Analysis using TIMS DDA. The raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) and the Uniprot human proteome database (version from march 2020 containing 75,776 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis (with TIMS-DDA type in group-specific parameters) were: all of the raw files were assigned with the same cell type name as well as fraction set from 1 to 8; 1 miscleavage was allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was set as Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal. A mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used for both precursor and fragment ions. Identification values "PSM FDR", "Protein FDR" and "Site decoy fraction" were set to 0.05. Minimum peptide count was set to 1. Both the "Second peptides" and "Match between runs" options were also allowed. MaxQuant was run with a transfer q value of 0.3. The “peptides.txt”, “evidence.txt” and “msms.txt” files generated from this DDA analysis were subsequently used for DIA spectral library analysis. Library quality was validated by ensuring the location of identified proteins using the COMPARTMENTS resource in the Cytoscape software environment. For the nucleoli library, functional analysis of the 250 proteins with the highest intensity was also performed through the ShinyGO online tool (version 0.76). Protein Identification by MaxQuant Analysis with TIMS MaxDIA. Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) and the Uniprot human proteome database (version of the 21st march 2020; 75,776 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were almost identical as TIMS DDA analysis, except: TIMS MaxDIA type in group-specific parameters was selected, as well as MaxQuant as library type, followed by uploading the “peptides.txt”, “evidence.txt” and “msms.txt” files generated by MaxQuant from the specific library production. Classic LFQ normalization was also performed for every sample. Following the identification and normalization, proteins positives for at least either one of the "Reverse", "Only identified by site" or "Potential contaminant" categories were eliminated, as well as proteins identified from a single unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification responsible for one of the most complex multilayered communication and regulation systems in the cell. Over the past decades, new ubiquitin variants and ubiquitin-like proteins arose to further enrich this mechanism. Recently discovered ubiquitin variant UbKEKS can specifically target several proteins and yet, functional consequences of this new modification remain unknown. Depletion of UbKEKS induces accumulation of lamin A in the nucleoli, highlighting the need for deeper investigations about protein composition and functions regulation of this highly dynamic and membrane-less compartment. Using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry and microscopy, we show that despite not impacting protein stability, UbKEKS is required to maintain a normal nucleolar organization. The absence of UbKEKS increases nucleoli's size and accentuate their circularity while disrupting dense fibrillar component and fibrillar centre structures. Moreover, depletion of UbKEKS leads to distinct changes in nucleolar composition. Lack of UbKEKS favours nucleolar sequestration of known apoptotic regulators such as IFI16 or p14ARF, resulting in an increase of apoptosis observed by flow cytometry and real-time monitoring. Overall, these results identify the first cellular functions of the UbKEKS variant and lay the foundation stone to establish UbKEKS as a new universal layer of regulation in the ubiquitination system.

### Keywords
Protein sequestration, Nucleolus, Data-independent acquisition (dia), Ubkeks, Ubiquitin variant, Apoptosis, Post-translational modification (ptm)

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada


