### Accession
PXD042097

### Title
LPS Time Course stimulation of WT and Δ MARCKS Immortalrized mouse macrophages

### Description
WT immortorized mouse macrophages and CISPR CAS 9 mediated Myristoylated, Alanine-rich C-kinase Substrate knockout ΔMARCKS  were treated with LPS for 1h, 6h, 24h. No treatment both WT and ΔMARCKS were use as a control experiment. The label free quantification were prefromed using

### Sample Protocol
A Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Eclipse (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) coupled to a Thermo UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for LC-MS/MS experiments.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were sumited to the proteome discoverer 2.5 and all the out put file were provided in the database.

### Publication Abstract
MARCKS (myristoylated alanine-rich C-kinase substrate) is a membrane-associated protein expressed in many cell types, including macrophages. MARCKS is functionally implicated in cell adhesion, phagocytosis, and inflammation. LPS (lipopolysaccharide) triggers inflammation via TLR4 (toll-like receptor 4).The presence of MARCKS and the formation of phospho-MARCKS in various cell types have been described, but the role(s) of MARCKS in regulating macrophage functions remain unclear. We investigated the role of MARCKS in inflammation. Confocal microscopy revealed that MARCKS and phospho-MARCKS increased localization to endosomes and the Golgi apparatus upon LPS stimulation.CRISPR-CAS9 mediated knockout of MARCKS in macrophages downregulated the production of TNF and IL6, suggesting a role for MARCKS in inflammatory responses. Our comprehensive proteomics analysis together with real-time metabolic assays comparing LPS-stimulation of WT and MARCKS knock-out macrophages provided insights into the involvement of MARCKS in specific biological processes including innate immune response, inflammatory response, cytokine production, and molecular functions such as extracellularly ATP-gated cation channel activity, electron transfer activity and oxidoreductase activity, uncovering specific proteins involved in regulating MARCKS activity upon LPS stimulation. MARCKS appears to be a key regulator of inflammation whose inhibition might be beneficial for therapeutic intervention in inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
Marcks, Lps, Macrophage

### Affiliations
NIH, NIAID
NIAID

### Submitter
Aleksandra Nita-Lazar

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
NIH, NIAID


