### Accession
PXD007227

### Title
Breast Cancer Metastasis Organotropism

### Description
Mass-spectrum profiling of secretory proteins of breast cancer cells with varied capabilities of metastasis to lungs and bone.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to approximately 80% confluence in 10 cm culture dishes. After wash with serum-free medium at 37 C for 15 min twice and 60 min twice, the cells were incubated in serum-free medium at 37 C for 24 h. The cell death rate was controlled at below 3% (measured by trypan blue staining). The CM were collected, concentrated with the Ultra-15 centrifugal filter devices with the 3-kD cutoff (Millipore) and quantified by the Bradford method. In-gel digestion was conducted and the resultant peptides were used to perform nano LC-MS/MS experiments on the MDLC system (Michrom Bioresources Inc.) coupled with a Thermo Finnigan 2-D linear ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQXL, Thermo Inc.).

### Data Protocol
All data files were created by searching MS/MS spectra against the Human International Protein Index protein sequence database, using the TurboSEQUEST program in the BioWorks 3.3 software suite, with a precursor-ion mass tolerance of 2.0 amu and fragment-ions mass tolerance of 0.8 amu. Trypsin was set as the protease with two missed cleavage sites allowed. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02150 Da) was searched as a fixed modification on cysteine, representing alkylation with IAA, while oxidized methionine (+15.99492 Da) was searched as variable modifications. The searched peptides and proteins were validated by PeptideProphet1 and ProteinProphet2 in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v. 4.2) using default parameters. Proteins with ProteinProphet p-value greater than 0.9 and no less than three kinds of unique peptides were considered as true identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Metastatic cancer is a systemic disease, and metastasis determinants might elicit completely different effects in various target organs. Here we show that tumour-secreted DKK1 is a serological marker of breast cancer metastasis organotropism and inhibits lung metastasis. DKK1 suppresses PTGS2-induced macrophage and neutrophil recruitment in lung metastases by antagonizing cancer cell non-canonical WNT/PCP-RAC1-JNK signalling. In the lungs, DKK1 also inhibits WNT/Ca<sup>2+</sup>-CaMKII-NF-&#x3ba;B signalling and suppresses LTBP1-mediated TGF-&#x3b2; secretion of cancer cells. In contrast, DKK1 promotes breast-to-bone metastasis by regulating canonical WNT signalling of osteoblasts. Importantly, targeting canonical WNT may not be beneficial to treatment of metastatic cancer, while combinatory therapy against JNK and TGF-&#x3b2; signalling effectively prevents metastasis to both the lungs and bone. Thus, DKK1 represents a class of Janus-faced molecules with dichotomous roles in organotropic metastasis, and our data provide a rationale for new anti-metastasis approaches.

### Keywords
Bone metastasis, Lung metastasis, Secretome, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences

### Submitter
Guohong Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Guohong Hu
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences


