### Accession
PXD016143

### Title
NETOME: The Molecular Characterization of Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs)

### Description
Neutrophils are necessary in mamalian’s life and are the most abundant type of white blood cells in humans with biological roles relevant to inflammation and the entire host response. The release of neutrophil extracellular DNA in innate immune cells provides specific response to bacteria and fungi. Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs) act as antimicrobial agents and activators of immune response through release of the nuclear content into the extracellular space. Although great strides have been made in dissecting cellular and molecular pathways that control NET formation, the exact molecular composition of released NETs has not been elucidated. Here, we open the field of NETOMIC studies through isolation of NETs in combination with shotgun genomics and proteomics. This study reveals the molecular composition of  NETs and specific expression regions of NETs induced in a sterile inflammation system. The existence of an in vitro NET isolation model allowed for an unprecedented amount of replicability. Additional studies are needed to verify the specificity of these sequences in the context of human health and disease upon diverse neutrophil microbial challenges.

### Sample Protocol
After thawed from -80°C, NET solutions were added with a protease inhibitor and 1% Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma) and incubated at 37°C for 20 min to remove nucleic acids; proteins were digested using Suspension Trapping (STrap) method. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and Q Exactive mass spec (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation by MaxQuant (v1.6); downstream bioinformatics analyses were performed on Perseus software (v1.6).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nets, Netome, Genomics, Neutrophils, Proteomics, Extracellular dna

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute 4120 Capricorn Lane La Jolla, CA 92037

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Marcelo Freire
J. Craig Venter Institute 4120 Capricorn Lane La Jolla, CA 92037


