### Accession
PXD005709

### Title
Biomarkers discovery for Colorectal cancer liver metastasis

### Description
Identification of early diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers measurable in liquid biopsies remains a major challenge in oncology today.  OMICs technologies cannot be applied on clinically precious human material as this is required in its integrity for routine pathology investigation. Hence all OMICs discovery today is done on residual and not clinically relevant material. In the study, we present a novel, non-destructive, procedure named EXPEL, which uses rapid, pressure-assisted, interstitial fluid extrusion, allowing for full clinical pathology and OMICs analysis (proteins, metabolites, miRNA and DNA) on the same specimen. To demonstrate this we engage in a simultaneous biomarker discovery and routine diagnostic analysis of human colorectal cancer and liver metastases. Biomarkers discovered with EXPEL methodology can be readily detected in human sera, allowing for unprecedented translation to the clinic. EXPEL method enables for the first time both clinicians and scientist to explore identical, fresh, clinical material regardless of origin and size.

### Sample Protocol
A volume corresponding to 6 µg of proteins was lyophilized and re-suspended in 50 µL of RapiGest SF surfactant (Cat. Waters, Waters Corporation). The samples were incubated for 10 minutes at 90°C. Proteins were further reduced in 1,4-dithiothreitol (10 mM) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), for 30 minutes at 60°C and then alkylated using 2-chloroacetamide (22mM) (Cat.: # 30208220, Sigma-Aldrich), for 30 minutes at RT and in darkness. Proteins digestion was conducted overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio. Following the digestion, 1µL of PNGase enzyme (BioLabs, 240 County Road Ipswich) was added to each preparation and samples were incubated at 37°C for 1h. Peptides were acidified with TFA, at final concentration of 0.5 %, for 1h at 37°C. Samples were further centrifuged at 13000 g for 10 minutes. After collecting the supernatant, peptides were desalted using ZipTip (Merck Darmstadt, Germany) according with the manufacturers protocol. Three µg of peptides were injected onto the 2D-nanoAquity UPLC (Waters, Corp., Milford, USA) coupled online with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), operated in nano-electrospray positive ion mode. The 2D-nanoUPLC system consisted of a reversed phase operated at pH 10 and a reversed phase operated at pH 3. The samples were loaded at 2 μL/min (20 mM ammonium formate solution adjusted to pH 10) on the first column (X-Bridge BEH C18 5 μm (300 μm x 50 mm, Waters)) and subsequently eluted in three steps of acetonitrile gradient (13.3%, 19% and 65%). Each eluted fraction was desalted on the trap column (Symmetry C18 5μm (180 μm x 20 mm, Waters)) with previous 10X online dilution to pH 3. The individual fractions were subsequently separated on the analytical column (BEH C18 1.7 μm (75 μm x 250 mm, Waters)) operated at 250 nL/min. The gradient was composed of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) as follows: 0 min, 99% A; 5 min, 93% A; 140 min, 65% A. The total run time of each step was 180 min. The mass spectrometer method is a TopN-MSMS method where N was set to 12, meaning that the spectrometer acquires one Full MS spectrum, selects the 12 most intense peaks in this spectrum (singly charged precursors excluded) and makes a full MS2 spectrum of each of these 12 compounds. The parameters for MS spectrum acquisition were: mass range from 400 to 1750 m/z, resolution at 70000, AGC target of 1e6 or maximum injection time of 200 ms. The parameters for MS2 spectrum acquisition were: isolation window of 2.0 m/z, collision energy of 25, resolution of 17500, AGC target of 1e5 or maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant Software (version 1.4.1.2, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). MS/MS spectra were searched against Uniprot human database by the Andromeda search engine. Normalization of the data was done using LFQ algorithm. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and deglycosylation of Asn in Asp residues were used as variable modifications for all searches. Detection of minimum two peptides was required for protein identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 on the protein and on the peptide levels. The main search tolerance was set at 5 ppm (10 ppm for MS/MS).

### Publication Abstract
The identification of diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers from early lesions, measurable in liquid biopsies remains a major challenge, particularly in oncology. Fresh human material of high quality is required for biomarker discovery but is often not available when it is totally required for clinical pathology investigation. Hence, all OMICs studies are done on residual and less clinically relevant biological samples. Here after, we present an innovative, simple, and non-destructive, procedure named EXPEL that uses rapid, pressure-assisted, interstitial fluid extrusion, preserving the specimen for full routine clinical pathology investigation. In the meantime, the technique allows a comprehensive OMICs analysis (proteins, metabolites, miRNAs and DNA). As proof of concept, we have applied EXPEL on freshly collected human colorectal cancer and liver metastases tissues. We demonstrate that the procedure efficiently allows the extraction, within a few minutes, of a wide variety of biomolecules holding diagnostic and prognostic potential while keeping both tissue morphology and antigenicity unaltered. Our method enables, for the first time, both clinicians and scientists to explore identical clinical material regardless of its origin and size, which has a major positive impact on translation to the clinic.

### Keywords
Human, Colon cancer liver metastasis, Proteomic

### Affiliations
Metastases Research Laboratory, GIGA-CANCER, University of LIEGE, BELGIUM
University of Liege

### Submitter
Dominique Baiwir

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Castronovo
Metastases Research Laboratory, GIGA-CANCER, University of LIEGE, BELGIUM


