### Accession
PXD001463

### Title
Identification of RNA binding proteins that interact with AU-rich elements of Lif 3`UTR

### Description
Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is an important endogenous factor for photoreceptor protection. Lif is known to be upregulated both in induced and inherited disease models of photoreceptor degeneration only in a subset of Muller cells. Since Lif is induced in Muller cells in response to photoreceptor injury, we studied its regulation in Muller cells.  We have recently identified several AU-rich elements (AREs)  within the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) of Lif . We also showed that as a result of these elements Lif encodes a highly unstable mRNA.  mRNAs containing AREs in the 3`UTR undergo rapid ARE-mediated mRNA decay in the cytoplasm which is mediated by the RNA–binding  proteins. In order to identify the RNA-binding proteins that are involved in the regulation of Lif transcripts, we will use the biotin-labelled RNA. By using this methodology, we will isolate the related RNA binding proteins. We plan to analyze the isolated proteins by mass spectrometry, and compare the mass spectrometry results of different regions with or without AREs . Once we identify the specific proteins that bind only to AREs, we will do the functional characterization of these proteins by cotransfecting the constructs with AREs and the siRNA that inhibits the expression of related RNA binding protein.

### Sample Protocol
rMC-1 cells were cells were grown in SILAC DMEM (PAA) supplemented with 3 mM L-Glutamine (PAA), 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (PAA) and 0.55 mM lysine, 0.4 mM arginine. Light SILAC medium was supplemented with 12C6, 14N2 lysine and 12C6, 14N4 arginine. Heavy SILAC medium was supplemented with either 13C6 lysine and 13C6, 15N4 arginine or 13C6, 15N2 lysine and 13C6, 15N4 arginine. 0.5 mM proline was added to all SILAC media to prevent arginine to proline conversion2. All amino acids were purchased from Silantes.  25 µg of biotin-labelled RNA was bound to Strep-tactin beads (IBA) in RNA binding buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Hepes-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% NP40 (v/v), 10 mM MgCl2) and incubated on a rotation wheel at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with RNA wash buffer containing 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Hepes-HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% NP40 and 10 mM MgCl2 before incubation at 4°C for 30 min with 400 µg of cytoplasmic extract; 40 units RNase inhibitor (Fermentas) and 20 µg salomon sperm RNA. After incubation beads were washed another three times with RNA wash buffer and RNA was eluted from the beads with Strep elution buffer (IBA). The methanol-chloroform precipitated proteins were then subjected to in-gel tryptic cleavage as described elsewhere (Texier et al: PMID: 24563533.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate3000 nano RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were automatically injected and separated by a linear gradient from 5% to 40% of buffer B in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 90 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 40% to 100% buffer B in 5 minutes. The eluted peptides were analyzed by the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. From the high resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 300 to 1500, the ten most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the linear ion trap if they exceeded an intensity of at least 500 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for CID was set to a value of 35 and the resulting fragments were detected with normal resolution in the linear ion trap. The lock mass option was activated, the background signal with a mass of 445.12002 was used as lock mass 5. Every ion selected for fragmentation, was excluded for 20 seconds by dynamic exclusion.  All acquired spectra were processed and analyzed using the MaxQuant software 6 (version 1.3.0.5) and the human specific IPI database version 3.52 (http://www.maxquant.org/) in combination with Mascot ((Matrix Science, version 2.2). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. The peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%. Contaminants like keratins were removed. Proteins, identified and quantified by at least two unique peptides were considered for further analysis. The significance values were determined by Perseus tool (part of MaxQuant) using significance A.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap velos, Maxquant, Silac, Rna-pulldown

### Affiliations
Medical Proteome Center Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen
Medical Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Proteome Center Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen


