### Accession
PXD036822

### Title
High-quality and robust protein quantification in large clinical cohort of serum samples with IonStar

### Description
Robust, reliable quantification of large sample cohorts is often essential for meaningful clinical or pharmaceutical proteomics investigations, but it is technically challenging. When analyzing very large numbers of samples, isotope labeling approaches may suffer from substantial batch effects;  and even with label-free methods, it becomes evident that low-abundance proteins are not reliably measured due to missing data peaks. The MS1-based quantitative proteomics pipeline, IonStar, was designed to address these challenges. To demonstrate the capability of IonStar to achieve highly reproducible and robust proteomics quantification in large sample cohorts, we applied IonStar to proteomics investigation in serum samples collected from 60 human subjects with moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).

### Sample Protocol
The top 14 high-abundance proteins in the serum samples were depleted by Multiple Affinity Removal Column Human 14 (MARS14) using an optimized protocol. Depleted serum samples are processed with a surfactant cocktail-aided extraction/precipitation/on-pellet digestion (SEPOD) protocol and then analyzed using a high-reproducibility trapping-nano-LC/ultra-high-resolution Orbitrap MS strategy.

### Data Protocol
The data processing portion of IonStar was devised to achieve reproducible and in-depth protein quantification in large biological sample cohorts by accurately extracting the highly specific and sensitive UHR-MS1 signals of peptides, which is achieved by three unique steps: 1)an effective alignment of ion current peaks of the same peptide ion across many runs, using a correlation-optimized, time-warping algorithm based on ChromAlign that comprehensively analyzes representative peak features with precise retention time (RT) and m/z matching, thus enabling more comprehensive and unbiased match of the MS1 ion-current peaks of the same peptide among LC-MS runs; 2) a unique direct ion current extraction (DICE) strategy is used to precisely extract the peptide ion currents within dynamically-defined, extremely-narrow m/z windows without loss of target intensity (e.g., 5-ppm m/z windows when MS1 FWHM=240k@m/z=200); 3)to eliminate aberrant, low-quality quantitative features, a stringent post-feature generation quality control based on mean-and-variance modeling was devised, which significantly improved quantitative accuracy and precision in large-cohort analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Robust, reliable quantification of large sample cohorts is often essential for meaningful clinical or pharmaceutical proteomics investigations, but it is technically challenging. When analyzing very large numbers of samples, isotope labeling approaches may suffer from substantial batch effects, and even with label-free methods, it becomes evident that low-abundance proteins are not reliably measured owing to unsufficient reproducibility for quantification. The MS1-based quantitative proteomics pipeline IonStar was designed to address these challenges. IonStar is a label-free approach that takes advantage of the high sensitivity/selectivity attainable by ultrahigh-resolution (UHR)-MS1 acquisition (e.g., 120-240k full width at half maximum at m/z = 200) which is now widely available on ultrahigh-field Orbitrap instruments. By selectively and accurately procuring quantitative features of peptides within precisely defined, very narrow m/z windows corresponding to the UHR-MS1 resolution, the method minimizes co-eluted interferences and substantially enhances signal-to-noise ratio of low-abundance species by decreasing noise level. This feature results in high sensitivity, selectivity, accuracy and precision for quantification of low-abundance proteins, as well as fewer missing data and fewer false positives. This protocol also emphasizes the importance of well-controlled, robust experimental procedures to achieve high-quality quantification across a large cohort. It includes a surfactant cocktail-aided sample preparation procedure that achieves high/reproducible protein/peptide recoveries among many samples, and a trapping nano-liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry strategy for sensitive and reproducible acquisition of UHR-MS1 peptide signal robustly across a large cohort. Data processing and quality evaluation are illustrated using an example dataset ( http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org ), and example results from pharmaceutical project and one clinical project (patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome) are shown. The complete IonStar pipeline takes ~1-2 weeks for a sample cohort containing ~50-100 samples.

### Keywords
Large-cohort clinical study; quantitative proteomics; ionstar; liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry; high-resolution mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United States

### Submitter
Xiaoyu Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, United States


