### Accession
PXD022620

### Title
A commercial antibody to the human condensin II subunit NCAPH2 cross-reacts with a SWI-SNF complex component

### Description
Commercially available antibodies raised against condensin subunits have been widely used to characterise their cellular interactome. Here we have assessed the specificity of a polyclonal antibody (Bethyl A302-276A) that is commonly used as a probe for NCAPH2, the kleisin subunit of condensin II, in mammalian cells. We find that, in addition to its intended target, this antibody cross-reacts with one or more components of the SWI-SNF family of chromatin remodelling complexes in an NCAPH2-independent manner.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Immunoprecipitated proteins were digested on the beads as described in Hillier et al., Sci Reports 2019.   LC-MS/MS Analysis The LC-MS/MS analysis was done on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid or Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system.  All instrument and columns used were from Thermo Fisher.  The peptides were first loaded to a PepMap C18 trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µm) at 10 µl/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, and then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 4-32% ACN/0.1% FA in 90 min with the cycle at 120 min.  Briefly, the Orbitrap full MS survey scan was m/z 375 – 1500 with the resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with AGC (Automatic Gain Control) set at 40,000 and maximum injection time at 50 ms.  Multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 7) with intensity above 10,000 counts were fragmented in HCD (higher collision dissociation) cell at 30% collision energy, and the isolation window at 1.6 Th.  The fragment ions were detected in ion trap with AGC at 10,000 and 35 ms or 50 ms maximum injection time. The dynamic exclusion time was set at 45 s and 30 s with ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Raw mass spectrometry data files were analysed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Database searches were carried out using Mascot (version 2.2) against the Uniprot human or mouse reference databases (January 2018) appended with the cRAP database (www.thegpm.org/crap/) with the following parameters: Trypsin was set as digestion mode with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da. Acetylation at the N-terminus, oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were set at 1% FDR using Mascot Percolator. Protein identification required at least one peptide with a minimum score of 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ncaph2, Condensin, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


