### Accession
PXD009477

### Title
Phosphoroteomics analysis of ALK signaling in neuroblastoma cells

### Description
We used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to unravel anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) signaling in the ALK and MYCN amplified neuroblastoma cell line, NB1. We specifically measured the ALK phosphoproteome upon siRNA depletion of ALK and upon ALK inhibition using the ALK-targeting small-molecule inhibitor lorlatinib. For quantitative phosphoproteomics we used a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based approach. Conditions for the TMT 11-plex setup is specified below. For each siRNA depletion experiment, NB1 cells were treated with siRNA (80 nM; as specified below) for 48 hours prior to stimulation with 0.1% DMSO for 30 minutes. For inhibitor treatment, NB1 cells were treated for 30 minutes with either 10 microM or 10 nM lorlatinib.  The experimental treatment conditions and TMT11-plex labeling are specified below:  126: siControl replicate 1, 0.1% DMSO 127N: siControl replicate 2, 0.1% DMSO 127C: siControl replicate 3, 0.1% DMSO 128N: siALK sequence 1, 0.1% DMSO 128C: siALK sequence 2, 0.1% DMSO 129N: siALK mix of sequence 1 and 2, 0.1% DMSO 129C: 10 microM lorlatinib replicate 1  130N: 10 microM lorlatinib replicate 2 130C: 10 microM lorlatinib replicate 3 131N: 10 nM lorlatinib replicate 1 131C: 10 nM lorlatinib replicate 2

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed in PBS 48 hours post-transfection or 30 minute post-inhibitor treatment for each condition and lysed in 6 M guanidine-HCl, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA for 10 min at 99°C and whole cell extracts were sonicated. Cell lysates were digested by Lys-C (Wako) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 1 hour, followed by a dilution with 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, to 2 M guanidine-HCl and further digested overnight with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) 1:100 (w/w). Protease activity were quenched by acidification with TFA and the resulting peptide mixture was concentrated on C18 Sep-Pak (Waters). Peptides were eluted with 40% ACN, followed by 60% ACN. 300 microgram peptide from each sample was labeled with 30 ul of one of 11 different TMT-labels according to the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoScientific). After labeling, the 11 samples were combined and adjusted to 80% ACN, 6% TFA and phosphopeptides were further enriched by two sequential rounds of titansphere chromatography. The eluted phosphopeptides were concentrated in a SpeedVac and fractionated with high-pH-reversed-phase fractionation and the resulting 12 fractions of TMT11-plex labeled peptide mixture was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HFx orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.0.17 using the Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) is one of the few druggable targets in neuroblastoma, and therapy resistance to ALK-targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) comprises an inevitable clinical challenge. Therefore, a better understanding of the oncogenic signaling network rewiring driven by ALK is necessary to improve and guide future therapies. Here, we performed quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics on neuroblastoma cells treated with one of three clinically relevant ALK TKIs (crizotinib, LDK378, or lorlatinib) or an experimentally used ALK TKI (TAE684) to unravel aberrant ALK signaling pathways. Our integrated proximal proteomics (IPP) strategy included multiple signaling layers, such as the ALK interactome, phosphotyrosine interactome, phosphoproteome, and proteome. We identified the signaling adaptor protein IRS2 (insulin receptor substrate 2) as a major ALK target and an ALK TKI-sensitive signaling node in neuroblastoma cells driven by oncogenic ALK. TKI treatment decreased the recruitment of IRS2 to ALK and reduced the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS2. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated depletion of ALK or IRS2 decreased the phosphorylation of the survival-promoting kinase Akt and of a downstream target, the transcription factor FoxO3, and reduced the viability of three ALK-driven neuroblastoma cell lines. Collectively, our IPP analysis provides insight into the proximal architecture of oncogenic ALK signaling by revealing IRS2 as an adaptor protein that links ALK to neuroblastoma cell survival through the Akt-FoxO3 signaling axis.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Neuroblastoma, Alk signaling

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research, Proteomics Program, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


