### Accession
PXD012135

### Title
Intracellular bacteria engage a novel STING-TBK1-MVB12b pathway to enable paracrine cGAS-STING signaling

### Description
The innate immune system is crucial for eventual control of infections, but may also contribute to pathology. Listeria monocytogenes is an intracellular gram-positive bacteria and a major cause of food-borne disease. However, important knowledge on the interactions between L. monocytogenes and the immune system is still missing. Here we report that Listeria DNA is sorted into extracellular vesicles (EV)s in infected cells and delivered to bystander cells to stimulate the cGAS-STING pathway. This was also observed during infections with Francisella tularensis and Legionella pneumophila. We identify the multivesicular body protein MVB12b as a target for TBK1 phosphorylation, which is essential for sorting of DNA into EVs and stimulation of bystander cells. EVs from Listeria-infected cells inhibited T cell proliferation, and primed T cells for apoptosis. Collectively, we describe a novel pathway for EV-mediated delivery of foreign DNA to bystander cells, and suggest that intracellular bacteria exploit this pathway to impair anti-bacterial defense.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs were SILAC labeled and stimulated with dsDNA. Cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 10 mM Hepes, pH 8.0 for 15 min at room temperature with sonication. Proteins were reduced with 10 mm DTT for 30 min and then subjected to alkylation for 45 min with 55 mm iodoacetamide in the dark. To remove detergent, acetone (−20 °C) was added to a final concentration of 80% v/v, and proteins were precipitated for at least 2 h at −20 °C. The protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, 10 mM Hepes, pH 8.0. Digestion with LysC was carried out for 3 h at room temperature. Samples were diluted with 4 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and further digested with trypsin overnight at room temperature. Peptides of DNA stimulated and untreated cells with distinct isotopic labels were mixed 1:1. Samples were desalted with C18, and incubated with TiO2 beads (MZ-Analysentechnik) pre-incubated with dihydrobenzoic acid (Sigma). After incubation, beads were washed with 30% acetonitrile and 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water followed by a second wash with 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted from beads with 15% NH3 and desalted on C18 StageTips. We separated peptides on a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Columns (75-μm inner diameter, 50-cm length) were in-house packed with 1.9-μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and separated with a gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for 120 min at 250 nl/min. The column temperature was set to 50 °C. A quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (34) (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was directly coupled to the liquid chromatograph via a nano-electrospray source. The Q Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode. The survey scan range was set to 300 to 1,650 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the 10 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge of ≥2 were subjected to higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 25, an isolation window of 3 Th, and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. To limit repeated sequencing, dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 20 s. Thresholds for ion injection time and ion target value were set to 20 ms and 3 × 10E6 for the survey scans and to 120 ms and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
To process MS raw files, we employed MaxQuant software (v. 1.5.3.34) 54. We used the Andromeda search engine (10.1021/pr101065j) integrated in MaxQuant, to search MS/MS spectra against the UniProtKB FASTA database (version from May 2014). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline and up to two miscleavages. Peptides required a minimum length of seven amino acids for identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and acetylation (N terminus), methionine oxidation as well as serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide and protein levels. Initial precursor mass deviation of up to 4.5 ppm and fragment mass deviation up to 20 ppm were allowed.  Furthermore, identifications were filtered for common contaminants (247 proteins) and identifications solely  based on a modified site. Median SILAC ratios (of DNA treated versus untreated cells) for phosphopeptides were calculated from four individual experiments (two with label swap). Phosphopeptides, which were quantified in less than two experiments or those with a standard deviation >2 were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Sting, Cgas, Nucleic acid sensing, Intracellular bacteria

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.


