### Accession
PXD003589

### Title
Proteomic analysis of STnc470 deficient Salmonella Typhimurium cells

### Description
This project has the main goal of determine the impact of the small non-coding RNA STnc470 on protein abundance in Salmonella Typhimurium.

### Sample Protocol
Salmonella cells were lysed by mechanical disruption with silica beads, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested trypsin. Peptides were labeled with 4-plex iTRAQ (labels: WT 114, 115 and STnc 116, 117). Lebeled peptides were then fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography into 60 fraction and concatenated into 15 before analyzing by LC-MS/MS in a Ekspert nanoLC 400 system (Eksigent) connected to a TripleTOF mass spectrometer (5600, AB Sciex). The peptides were separated in a 90 min gradient and the top 20 most intense ions were submitted to fragmentation for 100 miliseconds using rolling collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Sequences: Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium SL1344 sequences (downloaded from UniProt on 11/11/2014)  Algorithm: Protein Pilot Parameters: Searches were considering tryptic digestion, iTRAQ labeling and post-translational modifications. Identification false-discovery rate (FDR) was 1.3%.

### Publication Abstract
Deep sequencing has revolutionized our understanding of the bacterial RNA world and has facilitated the identification of 280 small RNAs (sRNAs) in <i>Salmonella</i> Despite the suspicions that sRNAs may play important roles in <i>Salmonella</i> pathogenesis, the functions of most sRNAs remain unknown. To advance our understanding of RNA biology in <i>Salmonella</i> virulence, we searched for sRNAs required for bacterial invasion into nonphagocytic cells. After screening 75 sRNAs, we discovered that the ablation of InvS caused a significant decrease of <i>Salmonella</i> invasion into epithelial cells. A proteomic analysis showed that InvS modulated the levels of several type III secreted <i>Salmonella</i> proteins. The level of PrgH, a type III secretion apparatus protein, was significantly lower in the absence of InvS, consistent with the known roles of PrgH in effector secretion and bacterial invasion. We discovered that InvS modulates <i>fimZ</i> expression and hence flagellar gene expression and motility. We propose that InvS coordinates the increase of PrgH and decrease in FimZ that promote efficient <i>Salmonella</i> invasion into nonphagocytic cells.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Salmonellosis continues to be the most common foodborne infection reported by the CDC in the United States. Central to <i>Salmonella</i> pathogenesis is the ability to invade nonphagocytic cells and to replicate inside host cells. Invasion genes are known to be regulated by protein transcriptional networks, but little is known about the role played by small RNAs (sRNAs) in this process. We have identified a novel sRNA, InvS, that is involved in <i>Salmonella</i> invasion. Our result will likely provide an opportunity to better understand the fundamental question of how <i>Salmonella</i> regulates invasion gene expression and may inform strategies for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Small non coding rnas, Virulence, Effector secretion

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Daoguo Zhou
Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University


