### Accession
PXD027035

### Title
Splicing Factor SRSF1 Deficiency in the Liver Triggers NASH-like Pathology via R-Loop Induced DNA Damage and Cell Death

### Description
Regulation of RNA processing contributes profoundly to tissue development and physiology. The serine-arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) is essential for hepatocyte function and survival. Although SRSF1 is mainly known for its many roles in mRNA metabolism, it is also crucial for maintaining genome stability. We show that acute liver damage in the setting of targeted SRSF1 deletion in mice is primarily mediated by the excessive formation of deleterious RNA–DNA hybrids (R-loops), which induce DNA damage. Combining hepatocyte-specific transcriptome, proteome, and RNA binding analyses, we demonstrate that widespread genotoxic stress following SRSF1 depletion results in global inhibition of mRNA transcription and protein synthesis, leading to impaired metabolism and trafficking of lipids. Accumulation of lipids in SRSF1-deficient hepatocytes is quickly followed by necroptotic cell death, inflammation, and fibrosis, resulting in NASH-like liver pathology. This pathogenesis is recapitulated in SRSF1-depleted human liver cancer cells illustrating a conserved and fundamental role for SRSF1 in preserving genome integrity and tissue homeostasis. This data set contains a proteomic comparison of hepatocytes from wild type vs. acute knockout of SRSF1. The acute knockout was generated by injecting 8-week-old SRSF1 fl/fl mice with a viral vector expressing Cre under the control of the liver-specific thyroxine binding globulin (TBG) promoter (AAV8-TBG-iCre). Controls were generated by injecting AAV8-TBG-GFP viral vector. The hepatocytes were isolated 2 weeks post injection.

### Sample Protocol
Purified isolated hepatocytes were lysed using a nuclear and cytosolic fractionation protocol. The hepatocytes were homogenized with 15 strokes in a Dounce homogenizer in a hypotonic buffer. The nuclei were collected on a high sucrose cushion buffer, while the cytosolic fraction was saved. The nuclei were sonicated in a 1% SDS sonication buffer for 15 minutes. The nuclear and cytosolic fractions were digested using the FASP protocol. 100 μg of protein was digested on 30 kDa spin filters (Millipore). The eluted peptides were acidified and desalted using in-house made C18 pipette tips (10 μg capacity). Analysis was performed on an Easy nLC-1200 coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in a top 20 mode. The mobile phase was composed of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile). Peptides were separated using a PepMap RSLC C18 2 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm column and a PepMap 100 C18 3 μm, 75 μm x 2 cm precolumn with a 2-hour gradient of 5% to 40% Buffer B. Data were analyzed using MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software. Proteins were identified by searching the mouse (UP000000589) proteomes from UniProtKB (February 2019). Peptide spectral matches, and protein FDRs were set to 1%, and required a minimum of 1 unique peptide for identification. To increase the number of identified matches, “match between runs” was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes. Protein abundancies were calculated using the iBAQ algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of RNA processing contributes profoundly to tissue development and physiology. Here, we report that serine-arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) is essential for hepatocyte function and survival. Although SRSF1 is mainly known for its many roles in mRNA metabolism, it is also crucial for maintaining genome stability. We show that acute liver damage in the setting of targeted SRSF1 deletion in mice is associated with the excessive formation of deleterious RNA-DNA hybrids (R-loops), which induce DNA damage. Combining hepatocyte-specific transcriptome, proteome, and RNA binding analyses, we demonstrate that widespread genotoxic stress following SRSF1 depletion results in global inhibition of mRNA transcription and protein synthesis, leading to impaired metabolism and trafficking of lipids. Lipid accumulation in SRSF1-deficient hepatocytes is followed by necroptotic cell death, inflammation, and fibrosis, resulting in NASH-like liver pathology. Importantly, SRSF1-depleted human liver cancer cells recapitulate this pathogenesis, illustrating a conserved and fundamental role for SRSF1 in preserving genome integrity and tissue homeostasis. Thus, our study uncovers how the accumulation of detrimental R-loops impedes hepatocellular gene expression, triggering metabolic derangements and liver damage.

### Keywords
Hepatocyte, Splicing, Liver, Srsf1

### Affiliations
Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Michael Saikali

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Cummins
Leslie Dan Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto


