### Accession
PXD045135

### Title
Nitrate reduction to ammonia by Acididesulfobacillus acetoxydans, an acidophilic sulfate reducing bacterium

### Description
Acididesulfobacillus acetoxydans is an acidophilic sulfate reducer that can dissimilatory reduce nitrate to ammonia (DNRA). However, no known nitrite reductase is encoded. This study was performed to investigate how A. acetoxydans reduces nitrate to nitrite and elucidated a novel DNRA mechanism and potential nitrosative stress resistance mechanisms in acidophiles.

### Sample Protocol
Comparative proteomics was performed comparing A. acetoxydans grown under conditions conducive to sulfate or nitrate reduction. Basal medium was supplemented with 5 mM glycerol, 0.1 g/L yeast extract, 1.5 mM hydrogen sulfide as reducing agent and either 20 mM sodium nitrate or 20 mM sodium sulfate as electron acceptor. A 1% (v/v) inoculum was used and the experiments were performed in quadruplicate (4 biological replicates) at a final volume of 100 mL. Mid-exponential phase, 100 ml of the cells were pelleted, washed and re-suspended  in 1 ml 100 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0). Cells were lysed by sonication and the supernatant was used for further analysis. 50 ug protein was reduced (15 mM DTT), unfolded (6M urea) and alkylated (20 mM acrylamide). Protein aggregation capture (PAC) was used to capture and wash proteins. Obtained proteins were digested with trypsin and obtained supernatant was filtered through solid phase extraction disks. Trapped peptides were eluted and concentrated. Per sample, 0.5 µg of obtained peptides was analysed using an EASY nLC1000 – Exploris 480 MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acididesulfobacillus acetoxydans, Ammonification, Acidophilic sulfate reducing bacteria, Dnra, Acid mine drainage, Nitrate reduction

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


