### Accession
PXD001951

### Title
The haemolymph proteome of Mytilus edulis: insights into the circulatory system and innate immunity of marine mussels

### Description
Mussels are a group of sessile and filter-feeding invertebrates, and are key structural elements of many marine and freshwater ecosystems. The mussel haemolymph is the first defense line to pathogen infection and inflammation with an innate immune response. Despite the importance of this body fluid in determining the physiological condition of the animal, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the cellular and humoral responses. Proteomic characterization of this body fluid has been hampered by the scarce Mytilus sp genomic data available. To systematic characterize the marine mussel Mytilus edulis hemolymph proteome, we have applied a mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) strategy integrating genomics and transcriptomics data for proteins identification.  After sample analysis and first identification based on MS/MS data comparison, proteins with unknown functions were annotated with blast using public database (nrNCBI) information. Overall 654 haemolymph proteins were identified with high confidence. The gene ontology analysis revealed that the majority of haemolymph proteins participate in primary cellular metabolic processes: energy production and metabolism of biomolecules. Nevertheless it also revealed a protein complement whose functions could be related to oxidative stress defense, xenobiotic detoxification, drug metabolism and immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Hemocytes were separated from serum by centrifugation and processed independently. While hemocytes were lysed and proteins extracted with SDT buffer, Serum samples were ultracentrifuged to deplete hemocyanin and thereafter concentrated by centrifugal filtration. Hemocyte and serum proteins were digested with trypsin following filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Peptides were recovered, acidified with FA (10%, v/v), desalted and concentrated by reversed phase extraction. Before LC-MS/MS peptides were recovered in 0.1% FA and final concentration adjusted to 0.04-0.06 µg/µl. For LC-MS/MS analysis peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 20 mm×100 µm C18 pre column followed by a 100 mm×75 µm C18 column (particle size 5 µm, NanoSeparations, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands) using a linear gradient from 2% buffer B (ACN + FA, 0.1%, v/v) in buffer A (TFA, 0.1%, v/v in water) to 30 % B in 40 min and to 95% B (v/v) in 30 min, at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min (total elution time 70 min).  Peptides were analyzed by on-line nano-electrospray ionization (easy nano-ESI) (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro –ETD, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in positive mode. Full scans were performed at 30000 resolution with scan ranges of 200-2000 m/z and the top 20 most intense ions being isolated and fragmented. CID (Collision induced fragmentation) was used to fragment the precursor ions by applying a normalized collision energy of 35% value, an isolation width of 2.0, an activation time of 10 milliseconds and a Q-value of 0.25.  Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1322. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

### Data Protocol
LTQ raw data was searched against a customized database using SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). A second search was performed using X!Tandem algorithm in the Scaffold program (version Scaffold 4.3.4, Proteome Software, Portland, Oregon, USA). The following parameters were set: MS and MS/MS tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da; trypsin as protease; 1 missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethylation and oxidation as static and dynamic modifications respectively. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95,0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99,9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Technical duplicates were merged to produce a single output file (biosample). A custom database was generated for protein identification which comprehended sequences from public UniProt database, restricted to the taxonomic group of Mollusca (90847 sequences released 24102014), and sequences from the transcriptomes of M. galloprovinciallis (46791 sequences, unpublished data) and Bathymodiolus azoricus (33464 sequences) (Bettencourt et al., 2010).  Bettencourt R, Pinheiro M, Egas C, Gomes P, Afonso M, Shank T, Santos RS. 2010. High-throughput sequencing and analysis of the gill tissue transcriptome from the deep-sea hydrothermal vent mussel Bathymodiolus azoricus. BMC Genomics. 11:559.

### Publication Abstract
The marine mussel innate immunity provides protection to pathogen invasion and inflammation. In this regard, the mussel hemolymph takes a main role in the animal innate response. Despite the importance of this body fluid in determining the physiological condition of the animal, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the cellular and humoral responses. In this work, we have applied a MS (nano-LC-MS/MS) strategy integrating genomic and transcriptomic data with the aim to: (i) identify the main protein functional groups that characterize hemolymph and (ii) to map the elements of innate immunity in the marine mussel Mytilus edulis hemolymph proteome. After sample analysis and first protein identification based on MS/MS data comparison, proteins with unknown functions were annotated with blast using public database (nrNCBI) information. Overall 595 hemolymph proteins were identified with high confidence and annotated. These proteins encompass primary cellular metabolic processes: energy production and metabolism of biomolecules, as well as processes related to oxidative stress defence, xenobiotic detoxification, drug metabolism, and immune response. A group of proteins was identified with putative immune effector, receptor, and signaling functions in M. edulis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001951 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001951).

### Keywords
Haemolymph, Biomarker, Mytilus edulis, Innate immunity, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Cell biology, Faculty of Health Science Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden
Linkoping University

### Submitter
Alexandre Campos

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Cristobal
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Cell biology, Faculty of Health Science Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden


