### Accession
PXD021056

### Title
Mouse cerebellum LC-MSMS: effect of calorie restriction

### Description
The cerebellum harbors a circadian clock that can be shifted by scheduled mealtime and participates in behavioral anticipation of food access. To determine which cerebellar proteins are modified by time-of-day and/or feeding time, we determined day-night variations of proteome in the cerebellum of mice fed either ad libitum or only during daytime (from noon to lights off). Two-dimensional differences in gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) combined with two-way analyses of variance reveals that a majority of cerebellar proteins are significantly regulated by feeding conditions (food availability). Levels of few other cerebellar proteins were modulated exclusively by daily (or circadian) cues, independent of meal time, and others due to combined influence of meal time and time-of-day. Changes reflect behavioral anticipation of mealtime and/or feeding-induced shift in the circadian clock of the cerebellum.

### Sample Protocol
The cerebellum of mice either fed ad-libitum or food restricted was collected at 5AM and 17PM (N=4-6), immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, then stored at -80°C until analysis. Half of each frozen cerebellum was sliced thinly on ice and protein were incubated for 1h30 under agitation in a denaturing buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% Chaps, 1% DTT, 0,5% Triton X-100, 0,005% TLCK, protease inhibitors at 0.02 to 2 mM).  After sonication on ice (10-30 sec., 135 Watts), followed by centrifugation (5 min, 12000g, 4°C), proteins were TCA-precipitated and pelleted by centrifugation (15 min, 14000g, 4°C). Proteins were then vacuum-dried using a Speedvac (ThermoFisher Scientific; Rockford, IL, USA), dissolved in a solution composed of 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 30 mM Tris (pH 8.5) and 4% Chaps. Homogenization was afterwards completed by sonication on ice (10 sec, 135 watts). Protein concentrations were determined using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA).  Protein samples were labelled using a CyDye DIGE Fluor Minimal Dye Labeling Kit (GE HealthCare, Uppsala, Sweden). CyDyes were first reconstituted in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide, then 400 pmol of Cy3 and Cy5 were used to randomly label 50 μg of protein samples from the different groups, and 7.2 nmol of Cy2 were used to label a mixture of all the samples (equal amounts from each protein extracts) that was used as an internal standard. After incubation in the dark for 30 min on ice, protein labelling was quenched by addition of 10 mM lysine and incubation in the dark for 10 min on ice. The multiplexing of samples from the different groups was randomized to avoid any bias. Briefly, Cy2, Cy3 and Cy5-labelled protein samples were mixed and diluted with 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Chaps, 2% DTT, 2% ampholytes (SERVALYT Carrier Ampholytes 3-10, Serva, Heidelberg, Germany), and a trace of bromophenol blue to a total volume of 400 μL. After isoelectric focusing (24 cm pH3-10 non-linear IPG Ready strip, Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA), and SDS-Page (precast 2D HPE large gel NF 12.5% kits; HPE Flap Top Tower; Gel company, San Francisco, CA, USA), gel images were acquired using an Ettan DIGE Imager (GE HealthCare) at 100 μm resolution and analysed using the Progenesis Samespots analysis software (v4.5; Nonlinear Dynamics).  After excision of gel spots from gels, in-gel reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion, the extracted peptides were analyzed on a nanoUPLC (NanoAcquityUPLC, Waters, US) coupled to a hybrid mass spectrometer, either the MaXis Q-Tof (Bruker Daltonics) or Synapt HDMS G1 Q-Tof (Waters, Milford, MA) equipped with a Z-spray ion source and a lock mass system. The chromatographic solvent system consisted of 0.1% HCOOH in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Three µl of each sample  were concentrated/desalted on a trap column (C18, 180μm x 20mm, 5 µm; Waters) at 1% of B at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 min. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the separation column (BEH130 C18, 75 μm x 250 mm, 1.7 μm; Waters) maintained at 60°C using a 9 min gradient from 1-35% of B at a flow rate of 450 nL/min. Mass spectrometers were operated in positive mode, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. For the Maxis, external mass calibration of the Tof (MaXis) was achieved before each set of analyses using Tuning Mix (Agilent Technologies, Paolo Alto, USA) in the mass range of 322-2722m/z, and mass correction was achieved by recalibration of acquired spectra to the applied lock mass using hexakis (2,2,3,3,-tetrafluoropropoxy)phosphazine ([M+H]+ 922.0098m/z). Up to 5 most intense multiply charged precursors per MS scan were isolated, using an isolation window adapted to the isolated m/z (2-5m/z), then fragmented using energy collisional dissociation. This system was fully controlled by compass HyStar v3.2 and OtofControl v3.2 (Bruker Daltonics, GE). For the Synapt G1, the TOF was calibrated using Glu-fibrino-peptide B on the 50−2000 m/z range. Online correction of this calibration was performed with Glu-fibrinopeptide B as the lock-mass: the ion (M+2H)2+ at m/z 785.8426 was used to calibrate MS data and the ion (M+H)+ at m/z 684.3469 was used to calibrate MS/MS data. This was done via a lock spray interface, with a lock spray frequency set at 30 s. The three most abundant peptides (intensity threshold: 40 count·sec−1), preferably doubly and triply charged ions, were selected on each MS spectrum for further isolation. The system was fully controlled by the MassLynx software (v.4.1., Waters).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed using the MascotTM search engine (v2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. Spectra were searched against a target-decoy version of the Mus Musculus protein database downloaded from Swissprot (December 2017, 16872 target + decoy entries) to which common contaminants (e.g. trypsin and keratins) were automatically added using the MSDA software suite [31]. Mascot search parameters included MS and MS/MS tolerances of respectively 10 ppm and 0.05 Da (MaXis) or 25 ppm and 0.07 Da (Synapt). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues as variable modification.   Stringent filtering criteria were applied using Proline software (v1.5; http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) to obtain high confidence identifications (Mascot peptide ion score > 25; peptide FDR < 1% based on e-values, protein FDR < 1% base on PSM scores, minimum length of seven amino acids). Afterwards, single peptide-based identifications and the identification of common contaminants such as keratin and trypsin, were not considered.

### Publication Abstract
The cerebellum harbors a circadian clock that can be shifted by scheduled mealtime and participates in behavioral anticipation of food access. Large-scale two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) combined with mass spectrometry was used to identify day-night variations in the cerebellar proteome of mice fed either during daytime or nighttime. Experimental conditions led to modified expression of 89 cerebellar proteins contained in 63 protein spots. Five and 33 spots were changed respectively by time-of-day or feeding conditions. Strikingly, several proteins of the heat-shock protein family (i.e., Hsp90aa1, 90ab1, 90b1, and Hspa2, 4, 5, 8, 9) were down-regulated in the cerebellum of daytime food-restricted mice. This was also the case for brain fatty acid protein (Fabp7) and enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation (Ndufs1) or folate metabolism (Aldh1l1). In contrast, aldolase C (Aldoc or zebrin II) and pyruvate carboxylase (Pc), two enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism, and vesicle-fusing ATPase (Nsf) were up-regulated during daytime restricted feeding, possibly reflecting increased neuronal activity. Significant feeding &#xd7; time-of-day interactions were found for changes in the intensity of 20 spots. Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(o) subunit alpha (Gnao1) was more expressed in the cerebellum before food access. Neuronal calcium-sensor proteins [i.e., parvalbumin (Pvalb) and visinin-like protein 1 (Vsnl1)] were inversely regulated in daytime food-restricted mice, compared to control mice fed at night. Furthermore, expression of three enzymes modulating the circadian clockwork, namely heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (Hnrnpk), serine/threonine-protein phosphatases 1 (Ppp1cc and Ppp1cb subunits) and 5 (Ppp5), was differentially altered by daytime restricted feeding. Besides cerebellar proteins affected only by feeding conditions or daily cues, specific changes in in protein abundance before food access may be related to behavioral anticipation of food access and/or feeding-induced shift of the cerebellar clockwork.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Lc-msms, Mouse, Circadian rhythm

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, france

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, france


