### Accession
PXD027208

### Title
Phosphorylation of extracellular proteins in Acinetobacter baumannii in sessile mode of growth

### Description
Here, we have investigated, for the first time, the serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphoproteome in the extracellular medium of A. baumannii during biofilm mode of growth for two strains: the reference strain ATCC 17978 and the virulent multi-drug resistant strain AB0057, a clinical isolate from a bloodstream infection. Overall, a total of 109 and 146 phosphorylated proteins were identified for ATCC 17978 and AB0057, respectively. We also showed that one specific phosphorylation site was essential for the activity of the A. baumannii type VI secretion system. This provides the first global phosphosecretome profiling of A. baumannii. This analysis represents a promising starting point for further investigations on the biological role of phosphorylation in A. baumannii.

### Sample Protocol
After cell culture in biolfilm and planktonic modes of growth, proteins were extracted in presence of inhibitors. Proteins were digested with trypsin. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using TiO2. NanoLC-MS/MS was used to analyse the samples and bioinformatic tools were used to identify peptide sequences, modified serine/threonine/tyrosine and proteins.

### Data Protocol
Identifications were performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using MASCOT as search tool against A. baumannii ATCC17978 and AB0057 database (http://www.genoscope.cns.fr). Each predicted modified peptide was manually checked to ensure the peptide sequence and the modified site. Bioinformatic tools (KEGG, PDB, Moonprot...) were used to determine protein functions, 3D structures, domains...

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> is a problematic nosocomial pathogen owing to its increasing resistance to antibiotics and its great ability to survive in the hospital environment, which is linked to its capacity to form biofilms. Structural and functional investigations of post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylations, may lead to identification of candidates for therapeutic targets against this pathogen. Here, we present the first S/T/Y phosphosecretome of two <i>A. baumannii</i> strains, the reference strain ATCC 17978 and the virulent multi-drug resistant strain AB0057, cultured in two modes of growth (planktonic and biofilm) using TiO<sub>2</sub> chromatography followed by high resolution mass spectrometry. In ATCC 17978, we detected a total of 137 (97 phosphoproteins) and 52 (33 phosphoproteins) phosphosites in biofilm and planktonic modes of growth, respectively. Similarly, in AB0057, 155 (119 phosphoproteins) and 102 (74 phosphoproteins) phosphosites in biofilm and planktonic modes of growth were identified, respectively. Both strains in the biofilm mode of growth showed a higher number of phosphosites and phosphoproteins compared to planktonic growth. Several phosphorylated sites are localized in key regions of proteins involved in either drug resistance (&#x3b2;-lactamases), adhesion to host tissues (pilins), or protein secretion (Hcp). Site-directed mutagenesis of the Hcp protein, essential for type VI secretion system-mediated interbacterial competition, showed that four of the modified residues are essential for type VI secretion system activity.

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, Phosphorylation, Biofilm, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular proteins

### Affiliations
Université de Rouen - laboratoire PBS
Université de Rouen, Laboratoire PBS, France

### Submitter
Julie Hardouin

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Hardouin
Université de Rouen, Laboratoire PBS, France


