### Accession
PXD027965

### Title
Alterations of protein S-glutathionylation modification in macrophages under oxidative conditions

### Description
S-glutathionylation is an important regulatory posttranslational modification of protein cysteine (Cys) thiols, yet the role of specific cysteine residues as targets of modification is poorly understood. To identify the specific molecular targets and pathways of Grx1 that are susceptible to redox-dependent regulation, we applied a quantitative redox proteomics approach that permits site-specific profiling of S-glutathionylation at a proteome-wide scale in macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
BMDMs were harvested form 6 mice, respectively. After H2O2 exposure for 15 min, BMDMs were rinsed twice and harvested in lysis buffer (250 mM HEPES, 1% Triton X-100, and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 7.0) containing 100 mM N-ethylmaleimide. Each group used a pooled sample of six BMDM samples from different mice. The lysates were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the soluble protein fraction was retained. The alkylation reaction was carried out at 55°C in darkness for 30 min in the presence of 2% SDS. To obtain protein, 6 volumes of pre-cooled acetone were added and kept at –20°C for 4 h, then washed three times with pre-cooled acetone. Purified proteins were re-suspended in buffer (250 mM HEPES, 8 M urea, 0.1% SDS, pH 7.5) and replaced with buffer I (25 mM HEPES, 1 M urea, pH 7.5) three times in an ultrafiltration centrifugal tube (Merck, Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL, 10 KDa). The protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA).  For the reduction of SSG-modified proteins, 480 μg of the alkylated samples were prepared at a final concentration of 1 μg/μL in 25 mM HEPES containing 1 M urea (pH 7.5) followed by the addition of 2.5 μg/mL Grx1M (C14S mutant from Escherichia coli, Cayman, No. 11534), 0.25 mM GSSG, 1 mM NADPH, and 4 U/mL GR. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 10 min, immediately placed on ice, and transferred to a 0.5-mL Amicon Ultra 10 KDa filter. Excess reagents were removed by buffer exchange with 3× 8 M urea (pH 7.0) resulting in a final volume of 30-40 μL. The protein concentration of the deglutathionylated samples was measured by the BCA assay before enrichment.  Three hundred micrograms of reduced samples were taken for each enrichment and the final volume readjusted to ~120 μl of 25 mM HEPES buffer containing 0.2% SDS and loaded to Handee Mini-Spin columns containing 30 mg of preconditioned thiopropyl sepharose 6B resin. Enrichment was carried out in a thermomixer at room temperature with shaking at 850 rpm for 2 h.  The samples were processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the 6-plex iodoTMT kit (Thermo). The protein samples were further diluted and digested with trypsin (Promega) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After resin washing, tryptic digestion, IodoTMT-labeling, and DTT elution, the peptides were dissolved in a final volume of ~25 μL water and 20 mM DTT was added to prevent the oxidation of cysteines prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt mouse database (16839 entries) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set at 0.02 Da. Acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and iodo TMT-6plex var were variable modifications. Iodo TMT-6plex quantification was performed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to <1% and the minimum score for peptides was set at >40. IodoTMT-based proteomics and analysis was done by Jingjie PTM Biolab Co., Ltd.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc–ms/ms, Bmdm, S-glutathionylation

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yuxian Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Xue Zhang
Zhejiang University School of Medicine


