### Accession
PXD013172

### Title
Differential proteomics of the synaptosomal fraction from rat dentate gyrus identified the changes associated with aging-dependent cognitive decline

### Description
The study contained three groups of Sprague-Dawley male rats – two groups of aging animals (22-24 months) separated based on performance in spatial reference memory task; and the third, control group of young animals () not separated by behavioural testing. The synaptosome – enriched membrane fraction of the dentate gyrus was isolated from nine randomly chosen individuals per group and analysed by tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling and mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative proteomics. The proteomic experiment was performed in three TMT10plex sets, with each set containing samples from three biological replicates per group and one TMT 126 reference channel reserved to directly compare the protein intensities across the entire study. The peptides were analysed in two parallel MS runs representing two technical replicates per biological sample. The total number of 6513 protein entries was identified of which 471 showed a significantly changed level (p<0.05) in any of the three animal groups. The comparison between aged and young animals revealed 293 significantly changed proteins (p<0.05) in aged good performers vs young rats, and 310 significant proteins (p < 0.05) in aged bad performers vs young ones. The proteomic differences between aged good vs bad performers were represented by 78 significantly changed proteins (p < 0.05).

### Sample Protocol
All homogenization and centrifugation steps were carried out on ice and at 4°C, respectively. Brain tissues were homogenized in an ice-cold homogenization buffer (10mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 300 mM sucrose, protease inhibitors (Roche)) using a Dounce homogenizer; the homogenate was centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 min to remove cell debris and nuclei and the supernatant was collected. The pellet was resuspended again in the homogenization buffer and centrifuged at 1000 x g for 10 min. The pooled supernatants were then centrifuged at 15000 x g for 30 min to obtaine the total membrane fraction enriched in synaptosomes and mitochondria.  The resulting pellets were washed in 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, protease inhibitors (Roche) and solubilized in 50 mM TEAB buffer (Sigma-Aldrich), 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 100 mM DTT and protease inhibitors (Roche). The protein concentration was determined by Pierce™ 660nm Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific). Protein samples were digested 18 h with trypsin (Promega) using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) [Wisniewski et al. 2009] with 75µg of protein per one reaction. The tryptic peptides were desalted using reversed-phase C18 stage tips [Rappsilber et al. 2007] and reconstituted in 32µL of 100mM TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich, Hamburg, Germany) containing. The actual amount of peptides was determined by Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) and 30 µg of peptides were subsequently differentially labeled by TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The pooled labelled sample was separated using PierceTM High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) into 8 fractions and each fraction was reconstituted in 50 µl of 5% formic acid. The peptide fractions were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as described previously [Smidak et al. 2017] with two technical replicates per sample and 5 µl injection volume.   1. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, & Mann M (2009) Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 6(5):359-362.  2. Rappsilber J, Mann M, & Ishihama Y (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2(8):1896-1906.  3. Smidak R, et al. (2017) Reduced Levels of the Synaptic Functional Regulator FMRP in Dentate Gyrus of the Aging Sprague-Dawley Rat. Front Aging Neurosci 9:384.

### Data Protocol
Raw protein intensities were normalized based on total peptide intensities in the individual TMT channels and scaled according to TMT 126 reporter control channel to compare all samples across different TMT sets. The significance of changes across the groups was tested on individual protein levels by ANOVA (p<0.05) and two-sided t-test (p < 0.05) to evaluate differences between the corresponding groups using Perseus statistical package (version 1.5.2.6). Additional filtering was applied based on fold-change with the thresholds (log 2 (good/young protein ratio)) > |0.13| and (log 2 (old good/old bad protein ratio)) > |0.1| derived from standard deviations of the fold change values of significant proteins (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Similar to humans, the normal aged rat population is not homogeneous in terms of cognitive function. Two distinct subpopulations of aged Sprague-Dawley rats can be identified on the basis of spatial memory performance in the hole-board paradigm. It was the aim of the study to reveal protein changes relevant to aging and spatial memory performance. Aged impaired (AI) and unimpaired (AU) male rats, 22-24 months old were selected from a large cohort of 160 animals; young animals served as control. Enriched synaptosomal fractions from dentate gyrus from behaviorally characterized old animals were used for isobaric tags labeling based quantitative proteomic analysis. As differences in peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6) levels were a pronounced finding, PRDX6 levels were also quantified by immunoblotting. AI showed impaired spatial memory abilities while AU performed comparably to young animals. Our study demonstrates substantial quantitative alteration of proteins involved in energy metabolism, inflammation and synaptic plasticity during aging. Moreover, we identified protein changes specifically coupled to memory performance of aged rats. PRDX6 levels clearly differentiated AI from AU and levels in AU were comparable to those of young animals. In addition, it was observed that stochasticity in protein levels increased with age and discriminate between AI and AU groups. Moreover, there was a significantly higher variability of protein levels in AI. PRDX6 is a member of the PRDX family and well-defined as a cystein-1 PRDX that reduces and detoxifies hydroxyperoxides. It is well-known and documented that the aging brain shows increased active oxygen species but so far no study proposed a potential target with antioxidant activity that would discriminate between impaired and unimpaired memory performers. Current data, representing so far the largest proteomics data set in aging dentate gyrus (DG), provide the first evidence for a probable role of PRDX6 in memory performance.

### Keywords
Dentate gyrus, Quantitative proteomics, Spatial reference memory

### Affiliations
Paracelsus Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria
Paracelsus Private Medical University

### Submitter
Gert Lubec

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
Paracelsus Private Medical University, Salzburg, Austria


