### Accession
PXD043372

### Title
Zika virus remodelled ER membranes contain an array of proviral factors involved in redox pathways

### Description
Zika virus (ZIKV) has emerged as a global health issue, yet neither antiviral therapy nor vaccine are available. ZIKV is an enveloped RNA virus, replicating in the cytoplasm in close association with ER membranes with the help of host cell factors that are poorly characterized. Here, we isolated ER membranes from ZIKV-infected cells and determined their proteome.  46 host cell factors were enriched in ZIKV remodeled membranes, several of these proteins having a role in redox pathways. 4 proteins were characterized in detail. Thioredoxin Reductase 1 (TXNRD1) contributing to folding of disulfide bond containing proteins and modulating ZIKV secretion; aldo-keto reductase family 1 member C3 (AKR1C3), regulating capsid protein abundance and thus, ZIKV assembly; biliverdin reductase B (BLVRB) involved in ZIKV induced lipid peroxidation and promoting stability of non-structural proteins having transmembrane domains; Adenosylhomocysteinase (AHCY) promoting m6A methylation of ZIKV RNA and thus immune evasion. These results highlight the involvement of redox enzymes in ZIKV life cycle and their recruitment to virally remodeled ER membranes.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis eluted fractions were pooled and proteins were enriched using SP3 beads and proteins were digested with Trypsin/LysC following a published method 54. Peptide mixtures were loaded on a 50 cm reverse-phase analytical column (75 µm diameter, 60 °C; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin; Dr. Maisch), separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 system and directly analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray source (all of them from Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, the spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV, funnel RF level at 60, and heated capillary at 250 °C. Peptides were separated using a 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water, and buffer B 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water. More in detail: 5–30% (95 min), 30–95% (10 min), wash out at 95% for 5 min, readjustment to 5% in 5 min, and kept at 5% for 5 min.  Data-dependent acquisition included repeating cycles of one MS1 full scan (300–1 650 m/z, R = 60 000 at 200 m/z) at an ion target of 3 × 106 with injection time of 20 ms. For MS2 scans the top 15 intense isolated and fragmented peptide precursors (R = 15 000 at 200 m/z, ion target value of 1 × 105, and maximum injection time of 25 ms) were recorded. Dynamic exclusion, isolation window of the quadrupole, and HCD normalized collision energy were set to 20 s, 1.4 m/z, and 27 %, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.1.)  using the default settings for label-free quantification (LFQ) (LFQ min ratio count 2, normalization type classic) and intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ). Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome and ZIKV proteome by the built-in Andromeda search engine. The MaxQuant output files were imported into R with the in-house msimportr R package55 and analyzed with the msglm package56 as described before (Stukalov A, et al. Multilevel proteomics reveals host perturbations by SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV. Nature 594, 246-252 (2021).).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endoplasmatic reticulum, Redox pathway, Zika

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich
TUM

### Submitter
Quirin Emslander

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich


