### Accession
PXD014887

### Title
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells’ secretome exerts neuroprotective effects in a Parkinson’s disease rat model

### Description
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is characterized by a selective loss of dopamine (DA) neurons in the human midbrain causing motor dysfunctions. The exact mechanism behind dopaminergic cell death is still not completely understood and, so far, no cure or neuroprotective treatment for PD is available. Recent studies have brought attention to the wide array of bioactive molecules produced by mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), generally referred to as the secretome. Herein, we evaluated whether human MSCs-bone marrow derived (hBMSCs) secretome would be beneficial in a PD pre-clinical model, when compared directly with cell transplantation of hBMSCs alone. We used a 6-hydroxydpomanie (6-OHDA) rat PD model, and motor behavior was evaluated at different time points after treatments (1, 4 and 7 weeks). The impact of the treatments in the recovery of DA neurons was estimated by determining TH-positive neuronal densities in the substantia nigra and fibers in the striatum, respectively, at the end of the behavioral characterization. Furthermore, we determined the effect of the hBMSCs secretome on the neuronal survival of human neural progenitors in vitro, and characterized the secretome through proteomic-based approaches. This work demonstrates that the injection of hBMSCs secretome potentiated the histological recovery of DA neurons, when compared to transplantation of hBMSCs themselves, a fact that probably explains the improved behavioral performance of secretome-injected animals in the staircase test. Moreover, we observed that hBMSCs secretome induces higher levels of in vitro neuronal differentiation. Finally, the proteomic analysis revealed that hBMSCs secrete a variety of important exosome-related molecules such as those related with the ubiquitin-proteasome and histone systems. Overall, this work provided important insights on the potential use of hBMSCs secretome as a therapeutic tool for PD, and further confirms the importance of the secreted molecules rather than the transplantation of hBMSCs for the observed positive effects. These could be likely through normalization of defective processes in PD, namely proteostasis or altered gene transcription, which lately can lead to neuroprotective effects.

### Sample Protocol
hBMSCs (Lonza, Switzerland) were thawed and plated into T-75 gelatin (0.1%, Sigma, USA)-coated culture flasks with serum-free growth medium (PPRF-msc6). The formulation and preparation of PPRF-msc6 has previously been described in detail (Jung et al., 2010). The medium was renewed every 3 days and the culture maintained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Upon confluence, cells were enzymatically dissociated with 0.05% trypsin/EDTA (Invitrogen, USA) and replated at a density of 5000 cells/cm2. For all in vitro experiments hBMSCs from 3 different donors were used. The secretome of hBMSCs was collected under the form of conditioned medium after passage 5 (P5) according to protocols already established in our laboratory (Fraga et al., 2013; Teixeira et al., 2016). Briefly, cells were plated at a density of 5000 cells/cm2 for the in vivo experiments and 12000 cells/cm2 for proteomic analysis, and allowed to grow for 3 days. After this, flasks were washed with PBS without Ca2+/Mg2+ (Invitrogen), and Neurobasal-A medium (TermoFisher Scientific, USA) supplemented with 1% kanamycin (Life Technologies, USA) was added to the cells. After 24 h, the medium containing the factors secreted by hBMSCs was collected and centrifuged at 1200 rpm (Megafuge 1.0R, Heraeus, Germany) for 10 min to remove any cell debris. Then, hBMSCs secretome was concentrated (100×) by centrifugation using a 5 kDa cut-off concentrator (Vivaspin, GE Healthcare, UK), and frozen at -80 °C until used, as previsouly described (Mendes-Pinheiro et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
In order to characterize the hBMSCs secretome we performed a non-targeted proteomic analysis based on a combined mass spectrometry (MS) approach as previously described (Mendes-Pinheiro et al., 2018). Only proteins with at least two confidently identified peptides were considered as positive identifications. Peptide’s confidence was assessed by a False Discovery Analysis (FDR) and a minimum of 99% confidence (less than 1% FDR) was used to select the peptides. Three biological replicates of secretome were processed, and proteins that were just identified in a single biological replicate were not considered for analysis. The final list of proteins was used for gene ontology characterization (levels 2 and 3) using PANTHER (Mi et al., 2013), regarding molecular function, protein class and signaling pathways. A levels 4 and 5 gene ontology analysis was performed through an over-representation analysis using the ConsensusPathDB (Kamburov et al., 2013), for molecular function. Protein complex-based gene sets were determined using the same software, and assuming a minimum complex size of 2, minimum overlap with input list of 2, and p-value cutoff of 1%. The most represented protein complexes are shown, based on the p-value for association.

### Publication Abstract
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by a selective loss of dopamine (DA) neurons in the human midbrain causing motor dysfunctions. The exact mechanism behind dopaminergic cell death is still not completely understood and, so far, no cure or neuroprotective treatment for PD is available. Recent studies have brought attention to the variety of bioactive molecules produced by mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), generally referred to as the secretome. Herein, we evaluated whether human MSCs-bone marrow derived (hBMSCs) secretome would be beneficial in a PD pre-clinical model, when compared directly with cell transplantation of hBMSCs alone. We used a 6-hydroxydpomanie (6-OHDA) rat PD model, and motor behavior was evaluated at different time points after treatments (1, 4, and 7 weeks). The impact of the treatments in the recovery of DA neurons was estimated by determining TH-positive neuronal densities in the <i>substantia nigra</i> and fibers in the striatum, respectively, at the end of the behavioral characterization. Furthermore, we determined the effect of the hBMSCs secretome on the neuronal survival of human neural progenitors <i>in vitro</i>, and characterized the secretome through proteomic-based approaches. This work demonstrates that the injection of hBMSCs secretome led to the rescue of DA neurons, when compared to transplantation of hBMSCs themselves, which can explain the recovery of secretome-injected animals' behavioral performance in the staircase test. Moreover, we observed that hBMSCs secretome induces higher levels of <i>in vitro</i> neuronal differentiation. Finally, the proteomic analysis revealed that hBMSCs secrete important exosome-related molecules, such as those related with the ubiquitin-proteasome and histone systems. Overall, this work provided important insights on the potential use of hBMSCs secretome as a therapeutic tool for PD, and further confirms the importance of the secreted molecules rather than the transplantation of hBMSCs for the observed positive effects. These could be likely through normalization of defective processes in PD, namely proteostasis or altered gene transcription, which lately can lead to neuroprotective effects.

### Keywords
Neuroprotection, Secretome, Dopamine neurons, Mesenchymal stem cells, Parkinson's diasese

### Affiliations
​Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology – University of Coimbra
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal

### Submitter
Sandra Anjo

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Manadas
CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Biocant, Biotechnology Innovation Center, 3060-197 Cantanhede, Portugal


