### Accession
PXD030702

### Title
Differential gene expression of yeast colonies in response to lysine

### Description
Saccharomyces cerevisiae colonies were grown for 2 days on synthetic minimal media with 1% glucose, with and without 400uM lysine (5 colonies/biological replicates each). Whole colonies were then used for proteome profiling by SWATH-MS for differential gene expression analysis. A number of genes were identified that respond to lysine supplementation, most notably genes involved in lysine biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by mechanical lysis in denaturing urea buffer, followed by reduction-alkylation of cysteine residues (DTT and IAA), tryptic digestion, solid phase extraction and buffer exchange. 2ug of peptides were injected and separated using a 20 minute gradient with a flow rate of 5ul/min. Data was acquired on a Sciex QTOF 6600 using a SWATH method with 40 windows and 35 milliseconds accumulation time, covering a precursor range between 400 and 1250 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using DIA-NN v 1.8 using default settings, except that ‘Robust LC (high precision)’ was set for Quantification Strategy. An in-house spectral library was used, which had been previously prepared using deep scanning SWATH acquisition and gas phase fractionation of similar samples.

### Publication Abstract
Genetically identical cells are known to differ in many physiological parameters such as growth rate and drug tolerance. Metabolic specialization is believed to be a cause of such phenotypic heterogeneity, but detection of metabolically divergent subpopulations remains technically challenging. We developed a proteomics-based technology, termed differential isotope labelling by amino acids (DILAC), that can detect producer and consumer subpopulations of a particular amino acid within an isogenic cell population by monitoring peptides with multiple occurrences of the amino acid. We reveal that young, morphologically undifferentiated yeast colonies contain subpopulations of lysine producers and consumers that emerge due to nutrient gradients. Deconvoluting their proteomes using DILAC, we find evidence for in situ cross-feeding where rapidly growing cells ferment and provide the more slowly growing, respiring cells with ethanol. Finally, by combining DILAC with fluorescence-activated cell sorting, we show that the metabolic subpopulations diverge phenotypically, as exemplified by a different tolerance to the antifungal drug amphotericin&#x2009;B. Overall, DILAC captures previously unnoticed metabolic heterogeneity and provides experimental evidence for the role of metabolic specialization and cross-feeding interactions as a source of phenotypic heterogeneity in isogenic cell populations.

### Keywords
Lysine, Swath, Colony, Gene expression, Dia, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Stephan Kamrad

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Biochemistry


