### Accession
PXD018303

### Title
Study Samples Dendritic Cell MHC II presentation by LC-MSMS

### Description
MAPPs data was used to construct an artificial neural network (ANN) model for MHC class II antigen presentation. Using Infliximab and Rituximab, the model demonstrated an unprecedented performance for predicting MAPPs and CD4 T cell epitopes, complementing results from MAPPs assays and outperforming conventional prediction models trained on binding affinity data.

### Sample Protocol
MHC II Peptide Isolation Cell Lysis: Dendritic cell pellets (1-6 million cells) were lysed in non-ionic detergents (4% CHAPS and 4% Triton X-100) in the presence of protease inhibitors (EDTA-free Cat.# 11-873-580-001, Roche) and 590 units of nuclease (Cat.# M3800, US Biologicals) for 45 minutes at 4oC with rotation. The cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 112,000xg for 30 minutes at 4oC.   Immuno-isolation of MHC II complexes: An isotype IgG (Cat.# 0107.01, Southern Biotech) and the pan anti-MHC II class monoclonal antibody (L243) (Cat.# BE0306, BioXCell) were each coupled to individual HiTrap NHS-activated HP columns (Cat.# 17071601, GE Healthcare). The two columns were connected in series with the Isotype IgG column first for the immuno-isolation process. The cleared lysate was loaded on the immuno-isolation columns. The Isotype IgG column was removed and the MHC II complexes were washed with buffer and then eluted from the L243 column with 10% acetic acid. The MHC II peptides were desalted by solid phase extraction using an MCX plate (Cat.# 186001830BA, Waters)and then transferred to MS plates (Cat.# AB2800, Abgene) and vacuum evaporated.   Mass Spectrometry Analysis Peptide samples were resolubilized with  10 µL resolubilization buffer (96/4 (v/v) water/Acetornitrile (ACN) + 0.2% formic acid + 25 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine)). Seven (7) µL was injected on a Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system and peptide separation was achieved with a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm particle size) and a BEHC18 column (300 Å, 150 µm x 100 mm, 1.7 µm particle size) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were eluted with an ascending acetonitrile gradient over 105 minutes. MS spectra were acquired from 400-1800 Da.  The MS method consisted of a full MS scan followed by a dd-MS2 scan of the top 12 ions. The full MS scan was achieved with a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC value of 3e6 and a maximum IT level of 30 ms. The dd-MS2 scan was performed a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC value of 5e4 and a maximum IT level of 60 ms. Blank runs of resolubilization buffer were  injected between each sample. 

### Data Protocol
MS Data Processing and Peptide Identification A single custom database of protein sequences relevant to the experiment was created to include the Human proteome (Swissprot), common general and Caprion-specific laboratory contaminants and the Infliximab (Inflectra) sequence. Peak alignment and extraction of intensity values of peptide ions and corresponding MS/MS spectra were performed using Rosetta Elucidator™ (Rosetta Biosoftware, version 3.3). MS/MS spectra were then exported for peptide identification in PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions, version 7.5). Search parameters included the custom database described above, non-tryptic, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine as variable modifications, and an error tolerance of 15 ppm for precursor mass and 0.025 Da for fragment ions. Data was filtered using a 2% FDR at the peptide level for database search results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mhc-associated peptide proteomics (mapps), Mhc ii presentation, Lc-msms, Dendritic cells

### Affiliations
Caprion Biosciences Inc. 
Caprion Biosciences Inc.

### Submitter
Eustache Paramithiotis

### Lab Head
Dr Eustache Paramithiotis
Caprion Biosciences Inc.


