### Accession
PXD022217

### Title
Schwann cell plasticity regulates neuroblastic tumor cell differentiation - phosphoproteomics

### Description
The remarkable plasticity of Schwann cells (SCs) is essential for nerve regeneration but also contributes to neuropathies and cancer progression. It has not yet been investigated whether the adaptive potential of SCs is manifested in stromal, tumor associated SCs characteristically found within a benign subtype of neuroblastic tumors (NBTs). We here performed transcriptome profiling of human NBTs, rich and poor in SC stroma, as well as human injured nerves, rich in repair SCs, revealing that stromal SCs exhibit a repair SC characteristic gene expression signature. In turn, primary repair SCs had a pro-differentiating and anti-proliferative effect on NBT cell lines after direct and trans-well co-culture. Within the pool of secreted stromal/repair SC factors, we identified EGFL8, a matricellular protein with so far undescribed function, to induce neuronal differentiation of aggressive NBT cells. EGFL8 expression further correlated with favorable tumor stage and increased patient survival. Our findings suggest that stromal SCs exert nerve repair associated functions in the tumor-environment and underline the therapeutic value of SC-derived factors for aggressive, SC stroma-poor NBTs.

### Sample Protocol
STA-NB-6 and STA-NB-10 cell lines were cultivated in a MEMα complete medium (MEMα GlutaMAX, 1% Pen/Strep, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 25 mM HEPES and 10% FCS) at 37°C and 5% CO2. At 70% confluency, the medium was discarded and fresh medium with EGFL8 (Abnova, final concentration 100 ng/ml) was added to the cells and incubated for 15, 30 and 60 minutes at 37°C and 5% CO2. After incubation, the tissue flasks were put on ice, the medium was discarded and the cells were washed and scraped from the tissue flasks after adding 500 µl of a 4% SDC buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.5) to the cells. The lysate was collected and heat-treated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Control cells (without EGFL8) were lysed in the same way. Three biological replicates were performed for each cell line. Protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay. Phosphopeptide Enrichment Sample Preparation For the posphopeptide enrichment, a slightly modified protocol of the EasyPhos workflow was applied (Humphrey, 2018). Briefly, a total of 200µg protein was used for the enrichment procedure. Protein reduction using 100mM TCEP and alkylation using 400mM 2-CAM with subsequent enzymatic digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C mixture (1:100 Enzyme to Substrate ratio) at 37°C for 18 h was performed. The solution containing the peptides was mixed with enrichment buffer containing 48% TFA(vol/vol) and 8mM Potassium dihydrogen phosphate. Samples were incubated with 3mg TiO2 Titansphere beads for 5 minutes at 40°C with subsequent washing and elution from StageTips with 40% ACN and 5% Ammonium hydroxide solution. Samples were dried and reconstituted in 15µL MS loading buffer containing 97.7% H2O, 2% ACN and 0.3% TFA. Global Proteome Sample Preparation For optimal peptide recovery and purity of the samples, the digestion protocol with the S-trap technology was employed. In short, proteins were solubilized in buffer containing 5% SDS with subsequent reduction and alkylation using 64 mM DTT and 48 mM IAA, respectively. After addition of trapping buffer (90% vol/vol methanol, 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate) samples were loaded onto S-trap cartridges and digested with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix at 37°C for 2 h. Supernatants containing the collected peptides were dried. Dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10 fmol of 4 synthetic standard peptides each and diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA). LC‐MS Analysis LC‐MS/MS analyses were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC‐system coupled to a timsTOF pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). 10 and 5 µl of phosphopeptide enriched and global proteome samples, respectively, were loaded on a 2 cm x 100µm C18 Pepmap100 pre‐column (Thermo) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the pre‐column to a 25 cm x 75 µm 25cm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separation was achieved using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 90 min.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 (Tyanova, 2016) employing the Andromeda search engine was used for protein identification against the UniProt Database (version 12/2019 with 20 380 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 20ppm for MS spectra and 40ppm for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Schwann cell, Plasticity, Stroma, Neuroblastoma, Egfl8, Ganglioneuroma

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Department of Analytical Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility


