### Accession
PXD032370

### Title
Dual CBS and MPST gene knockdown induces inflammation and impairs adipogenesis in human adipocytes

### Description
Recents studies in mice and humans demonstrated the relevance of H2S-synthesising enzymes (such as CTH, CBS and MPST) in adipose tissue physiology and preadipocyte differentiation into adipocytes. Here, we aimed to investigate the combined role of CTH, CBS and MPST in the preservation of adipocyte protein persulfidation and adipogenesis. Joint CTH, CBS and MPST gene knockdown was achieved treating fully human adipocytes with siRNAs against these transcripts (siRNA_MIX). Adipocyte protein persulfidation was analyzed by a mass spectrometry label-free quantitative approach coupled with a dimedone-switch method for protein labeling and purification. The proteomic analysis quantified 216 proteins with statistically different persulfidation levels in KD cells compared to control adipocytes.  In fully differentiated adipocytes, CBS and MPST mRNA and protein levels were abundant, whereas CTH expression was very low. Of note, siRNA_MIX administration resulted in a significant decrease in CBS and MPST expression, without impacting on CTH. Dual CBS and MPST gene knockdown resulted in decreased expression of relevant genes for adipocyte biology, including adipogenesis, mitochondrial biogenesis and lipogenesis, but increased proinflammatory- and senescence-related genes, in parallel to a significant disruption in adipocyte protein persulfidation pattern.  While among less persulfidated proteins, we identified several relevant proteins for adipocyte adipogenesis and function, among the most persulfidated, key mediators of adipocyte inflammation and dysfunction, but also some proteins that might have a positive role of adipogenesis were found.  In conclusion, current study indicates that joint knockdown of CBS and MPST (but not CTH) in adipocytes impairs adipogenesis and promotes inflammation, possibly by disrupting the pattern of protein persulfidation in these cells, and suggesting that these enzymes were required for the functional maintenance of adipocytes.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 50 µg of proteins were trypsinized (GOLD, Promega) through Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (PMID 19377485). Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:20, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 ºC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% FA. Peptides were desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore). Samples were analyzed in a timsTOF Pro with PASEF (Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a Evosep ONE liquid chromatograph (Evosep). 200ng were directly loaded onto the Evosep ONE and resolved using the 30 samples-per-day protocol.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using PEAKS X software (Bioinformatics solutions). Searches were carried out against a database consisting of Homo sapiens (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further analysis.  Protein abundances inferred from PEAKS were loaded onto Perseus computational platform (PMID 27348712), log2 transformed and imputated. A t-test was used to address significant differences in protein abundances within each sample group under analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies in mice and humans demonstrated the relevance of H<sub>2</sub>S synthesising enzymes, such as CTH, CBS, and MPST, in the physiology of adipose tissue and the differentiation of preadipocyte into adipocytes. Here, our objective was to investigate the combined role of CTH, CBS, and MPST in the preservation of adipocyte protein persulfidation and adipogenesis. Combined partial <i>CTH</i>, <i>CBS</i>, and <i>MPST</i> gene knockdown was achieved treating fully human adipocytes with siRNAs against these transcripts (siRNA_MIX). Adipocyte protein persulfidation was analyzed using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry coupled with a dimedone-switch method for protein labeling and purification. Proteomic analysis quantified 216 proteins with statistically different levels of persulfidation in KD cells compared to control adipocytes. In fully differentiated adipocytes, <i>CBS</i> and <i>MPST</i> mRNA and protein levels were abundant, while <i>CTH</i> expression was very low. It is noteworthy that siRNA_MIX administration resulted in a significant decrease in <i>CBS</i> and <i>MPST</i> expression, without impacting on CTH. The combined partial knockdown of the <i>CBS</i> and <i>MPST</i> genes resulted in reduced cellular sulfide levels in parallel to decreased expression of relevant genes for adipocyte biology, including adipogenesis, mitochondrial biogenesis, and lipogenesis, but increased proinflammatory- and senescence-related genes. It should be noted that the combined partial knockdown of <i>CBS</i> and <i>MPST</i> genes also led to a significant disruption in the persulfidation pattern of the adipocyte proteins. Although among the less persulfidated proteins, we identified several relevant proteins for adipocyte adipogenesis and function, among the most persulfidated, key mediators of adipocyte inflammation and dysfunction as well as some proteins that might play a positive role in adipogenesis were found. In conclusion, the current study indicates that the combined partial elimination of CBS and MPST (but not CTH) in adipocytes affects the expression of genes related to the maintenance of adipocyte function and promotes inflammation, possibly by altering the pattern of protein persulfidation in these cells, suggesting that these enzymes were required for the functional maintenance of adipocytes.

### Keywords
Inflammation, Protein persulfidation., Human adipocytes, Adipogenesis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 Derio 48160 Spain


