### Accession
PXD029352

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondria to study organismic consequences of aging in Podospora anserina

### Description
Podospora anserina is an established aging model with a strong mitochondrial etiology of aging. Here we performed a complexome analysis of isolated mitochondria to study age-related changes of assembled mitochondrial protein complexes. The analysis revealed prominent age-related alterations in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and the induction of non-mitochondrial salvage pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) were essential done as described in (Wittig et al., 2006). In brief, 150 µg isolated mitochondria (mitochondria from two independent isolations were pooled) were solubilized and separated by BN-PAGE as described above in the BN-PAGE section. After native electrophoresis, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Afterwards, each lane of the gel was cut from the bottom to the top into 48 almost equal fractions. Fractions were collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) separated using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 30 %  eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min and an additional gradient to 60% for 5 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v2.0.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008 ] using default settings. Proteins were identified using P. anserina proteome database UniProtKB with 10657 entries, released in 8/2021. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded.  Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
The accumulation of functionally impaired mitochondria is a key event in aging. Previous works with the fungal aging model <i>Podospora anserina</i> demonstrated pronounced age-dependent changes of mitochondrial morphology and ultrastructure, as well as alterations of transcript and protein levels, including individual proteins of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). The identified protein changes do not reflect the level of the whole protein complexes as they function in-vivo. In the present study, we investigated in detail the age-dependent changes of assembled mitochondrial protein complexes, using complexome profiling. We observed pronounced age-depen-dent alterations of the OXPHOS complexes, including the loss of mitochondrial respiratory supercomplexes (mtRSCs) and a reduction in the abundance of complex I and complex IV. Additionally, we identified a switch from the standard complex IV-dependent respiration to an alternative respiration during the aging of the <i>P. anserina</i> wild type. Interestingly, we identified proteasome components, as well as endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteins, for which the recruitment to mitochondria appeared to be increased in the mitochondria of older cultures. Overall, our data demonstrate pronounced age-dependent alterations of the protein complexes involved in energy transduction and suggest the induction of different non-mitochondrial salvage pathways, to counteract the age-dependent mitochondrial impairments which occur during aging.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Podospora anserina, Oxidative phosphorylation system, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Aging

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Biosciences, Goethe-University; Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Heinz D. Osiewacz
Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Biosciences, Goethe-University; Frankfurt am Main, Germany


