### Accession
PXD045395

### Title
Protistan metabolism across the western North Atlantic Ocean revealed through autonomous underwater profiling

### Description
An Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV) and large volume underwater pumps were used to collect microbial biomass from offshore waters of the Sargasso Sea, from surface waters and into the deep ocean. Seawater collection was performed along a transect in the western North Atlantic Ocean beginning near Bermuda and ending off the coast of Massachusetts, capturing metabolic signatures from oligotrophic, continental margin, and productive coastal ecosystems.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted in 1% SDS detergent in 50 mM HEPES at pH 8.5, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and purified using polyacrylamide electrophoresis. Trypsin was added to the protein-bead mixture in a 1:20 trypsin:protein ratio. Peptides were purified using C18 tips and diluted to 0.1 μg μL−1. 2-5 µg purified peptides were injected onto a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system with a RSLCnano pump, run in online 2D active modulation mode with a Thermo Fusion mass spectrometer. MS1 scans were acquired from 380 to 1,580 m/z at 240K resolution. MS2 were collected in data dependent mode with a cycle time of 2 seconds between scans and acquisition of charge states 2 to 10. MS2 scans had 1.6 m/z isolation window, 50 ms maximum injection time and 5 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The corresponding metatranscriptomes, collected along with each metaproteome sample, were used as a combined protein sequence database, and peptide-spectrum matches were performed using Sequest algorithm within IseNode Proteome Discoverer with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da, and 0 max missed cleavage. Identification criteria consisted of a peptide threshold of 98% (FDR = 0.1%) and protein threshold of 99% (FDR = 1.5%) in Scaffold 5.1.2 (Proteome Software)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Plankton, Ocean, Metaproteome, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Woods Hole Oceanographic Inst.
Marine Chemistry Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

### Submitter
Matthew McIlvin

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Marine Chemistry Geochemistry Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution


