### Accession
PXD015027

### Title
Selective autophagy regulates heat stress memory by NBR1-mediated targeting of HSP90 and ROF1

### Description
In nature, plants are constantly exposed to many transient, but recurring, stresses. Thus, to complete their life cycles they require a dynamic balance between capacities to recover following cessation of stress and maintenance of stress memory. Recently, we uncovered a new functional role of autophagy in regulating recovery from heat stress (HS) and resetting cellular memory of HS in Arabidopsis thaliana. Here, we demonstrate that NBR1 (Next-to-BRCA1) plays a crucial role as an adaptor receptor for selective autophagy during recovery from HS. Immunoblot analysis and confocal microscopy revealed that levels of NBR1 protein, NBR1-labeled puncta and NBR1 activities were all higher during the HS recovery phase than before and after this phase. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis of proteins interacting with NBR1 and comparative proteomic analysis of a nbr1 knockout mutant and wild-type plants identified 58 proteins as potential novel targets of NBR1. Cellular, biochemical and functional genetic studies confirmed that NBR1 targets Heat Shock Protein 90 (HSP90) and ROF1, a member of the FKBP family, and mediates their degradation by autophagy, which represses the expression of HSPs regulated by HsfA2 transcription factor and the response to HS. Accordingly, loss-of-function mutation of NBR1 resulted in a stronger HS memory phenotype. Together our results provide new insights into the mechanistic principles by which autophagy regulates plant response to recurrent HS.

### Sample Protocol
Five-day-old Col-0 and NBR1-deficient (nbr1-2) Arabidopsis seedlings were harvested during the HS recovery phase (2 days after priming). Controls with no heat priming treatment were harvested at the same time point. The samples were ground in liquid nitrogen then subjected to phase separation and total protein extraction as described by Salem et al. (2016).To extract proteins, 100 mg portions of ground tissue were suspended in MTBE buffer, then the suspensions were incubated at 4°C for 15 min, sonicated, and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm and 4°C. Proteins in the resulting pellet were dissolved in buffer consisting of 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 15 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors, then the suspension was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 5 min. Concentrations of solubilized proteins in the supernatant were quantified by Bradford analysis. For proteomic analysis, portions of extracts containing 50 µg of protein were digested either in-solution or by FASP column digestion (Rappsilber et al., 2007) using a Trypsin/Lys-C mixture (Mass Spec Grade, Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested peptide samples were desalted using C18 stage tips as previously described (Rappsilber et al., 2007), then analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive HF high-resolution mass spectrometer connected to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software v.1.6.0.16 for protein identification and quantification (Cox & Mann, 2008). The protein annotation was obtained using A. thaliana TAIR10 protein sequences (35 386 entries) by Andromeda. The common contaminant database was also included in the search. The settings used for the search were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; 0.8 Da MS/MS tolerance; maximum of two missed cleavages allowed; threshold for validation of peptides set to 0.01 using a decoy database; carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine set as a variable modification. The ‘label‐free quantification’ and ‘match between runs’ options were selected. The minimum peptide length of six amino acids was used. Contaminants and decoy hits were removed from each dataset. Furthermore, at least two unique peptides were required per protein group. Label‐free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used in all analysis performed in this manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
In nature, plants are constantly exposed to many transient, but recurring, stresses. Thus, to complete their life cycles, plants require a dynamic balance between capacities to recover following cessation of stress and maintenance of stress memory. Recently, we uncovered a new functional role for macroautophagy/autophagy in regulating recovery from heat stress (HS) and resetting cellular memory of HS in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. Here, we demonstrated that NBR1 (next to BRCA1 gene 1) plays a crucial role as a receptor for selective autophagy during recovery from HS. Immunoblot analysis and confocal microscopy revealed that levels of the NBR1 protein, NBR1-labeled puncta, and NBR1 activity are all higher during the HS recovery phase than before. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis of proteins interacting with NBR1 and comparative proteomic analysis of an <i>nbr1</i>-null mutant and wild-type plants identified 58 proteins as potential novel targets of NBR1. Cellular, biochemical and functional genetic studies confirmed that NBR1 interacts with HSP90.1 (heat shock protein 90.1) and ROF1 (rotamase FKBP 1), a member of the FKBP family, and mediates their degradation by autophagy, which represses the response to HS by attenuating the expression of <i>HSP</i> genes regulated by the HSFA2 transcription factor. Accordingly, loss-of-function mutation of <i>NBR1</i> resulted in a stronger HS memory phenotype. Together, our results provide new insights into the mechanistic principles by which autophagy regulates plant response to recurrent HS.<b>Abbreviations:</b> AIM: Atg8-interacting motif; ATG: autophagy-related; BiFC: bimolecular fluorescence complementation; ConA: concanamycinA; CoIP: co-immunoprecipitation; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide; FKBP: FK506-binding protein; FBPASE: fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase; GFP: green fluorescent protein; HS: heat stress; HSF: heat shock factor; HSFA2: heat shock factor A2; HSP: heat shock protein; HSP90: heat shock protein 90; LC-MS/MS: Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry; 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; NBR1: next-to-BRCA1; PQC: protein quality control; RFP: red fluorescent protein; ROF1: rotamase FKBP1; TF: transcription factor; TUB: tubulin; UBA: ubiquitin-associated; YFP: yellow fluorescent protein.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Heat stress memory, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Salma Balazadeh
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie Wissenschaftspark Golm Am Mühlenberg 1 14476 Potsdam, Germany


