### Accession
PXD007859

### Title
Integrative Personal Omics Profiles During Periods of Weight Gain and Loss

### Description
A longitudinal study of PBMCs from patients during periods of weight gain and loss in humans was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Ethanol precipitated protein pellets from PBMC samples were resuspended in 110 uL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 0.1% Octyl β-D-glucopyranoside (OG) and subjected to a sonicator probe for efficient resuspension. The Thermo Scientific Pierce Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit was then used to quantify protein levels. 1 mg of each resuspended protein sample then underwent denaturation in 900 uL of 8M Urea, 100mM ABC and 0.1% OG. The samples were once again sonicated with a sonicator probe. Each sample then underwent chemical reduction with 10 uL of 1M dithiolthreitol (DTT) and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours. 20 uL of 1M iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added in each sample for the alkylation step. The alkylation reactions were left to incubate in the dark at room temperature for 1 hour. After fractionation, the unbound fraction from each sample was concentrated and buffer exchanged into 100 uL of 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) using the Amicon Ultra-15 followed by the Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filter unit. Each sample was digested with 40 ng of Promega Sequencing Grade Trypsin in 100 mM TEAB solution. Samples were then labeled with 10-plex Thermo Scientific™ Tandem Mass Tag™ (TMT) Reagents, using instructions provided by the manufacturer. All the samples were divided into groups of nine and pooled together with a master reference sample to create 10-plexed samples.  Each TMT 10-plex sample underwent shotgun liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with the LTQ Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer coupled with a Dionex RSLC 3000 Nano-HPLC. 15 µL of each sample was loaded onto a C18 trap column at 5 µL/min for 10 minutes.  Peptides were then separated by a 25 cm C18 analytical column (Picofrit 75 µm ID, New Objective, packed in-house with MagicC18 AQ resin). Tryptic peptides were separated using a multi-step gradient at a flow rate of 0.6 µL/minute in which Buffer B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) was increased from 0% (100% Buffer A, 0.1% FA in water) to 85% over 120 minutes. The column was re-equilibrated for 20 minutes at 98% Buffer A.  Blank runs were performed between each sample.  Samples were then ionized by electrospray ionization set to 2.25 kV with a capillary temperature of 200 °C. An initial MS1 scan over an m/z range of 400-1800 was performed, followed by 10 data-dependent higher energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (35 eV) events on the 10 most intense +2 or +3 ions from the MS1 spectrum over an acquisition time of 140 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was converted and searched from the .raw files into peptide spectral matches (PSMs) using the Proteome Discoverer™ Software against the 2015 Human Reference Proteome and known contaminants from UniProt. The identifiers from Proteome Discoverer were mapped to Official Gene Symbols. Non-unique and modified peptides were filtered out before selection of top intensity unique PSMs in the reference channel for each 10-plex run. Ratios were then obtained by dividing the 9 sample channels with the reference channel and median centered. The intensities were then log2 transformed and then rolled into protein groups by taking the median log2 ratio of unique peptide groups in each run.

### Publication Abstract
Advances in omics technologies now allow an unprecedented level of phenotyping for human diseases, including obesity, in which individual responses to excess weight are heterogeneous and unpredictable. To aid the development of better understanding of these phenotypes, we performed a controlled longitudinal weight perturbation study combining multiple omics strategies (genomics, transcriptomics, multiple proteomics assays, metabolomics, and microbiomics) during periods of weight gain and loss in humans. Results demonstrated that: (1) weight gain is associated with the activation of strong inflammatory and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy signatures in blood; (2) although weight loss reverses some changes, a number of signatures persist, indicative of long-term physiologic changes; (3) we observed omics signatures associated with insulin resistance that may serve as novel diagnostics; (4) specific biomolecules were highly individualized and stable in response to perturbations, potentially representing stable personalized markers. Most data are available open access and serve as a valuable resource for the community.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Pbmc

### Affiliations
Stanford University

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Stanford University


