### Accession
PXD002987

### Title
xIP-MS: topological analysis of chromatin-associated protein complexes using single affinity purification

### Description
In recent years, cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) has proven to be a robust and effective method of interrogating macromolecular protein complex topologies at peptide resolution. Traditionally, XL-MS workflows have utilized homogenous complexes obtained through time-limiting reconstitution, tandem affinity purification, and conventional chromatography workflows. Here, we present cross-linking immunoprecipitation-MS (xIP-MS), a simple, rapid, and efficient method for structurally probing chromatin-associated protein complexes using small volumes of mammalian whole cell lysates, single affinity purification, and on-bead cross-linking followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. We first benchmarked xIP-MS using the structurally well-characterized phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase (PRPP) complex. We then applied xIP-MS to the chromatin-associated cohesin (SMC1A/3), XRCC5/6 (Ku70/86), and MCM complexes, and we provide novel structural and biological insights into their architectures and molecular function. Of note, we use xIP-MS to perform topological studies under cell cycle perturbations, showing that the xIP-MS protocol is sufficiently straightforward and efficient to allow comparative cross-linking experiments. This work, therefore, demonstrates that xIP-MS is a robust, flexible, and widely applicable methodology for interrogating chromatin-associated protein complex architectures.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were collected from stably transgenic HeLa Kyoto cells expressing near-endogenous levels of GFP-tagged bait protein from a recombineered BAC transgene system. After GFP purification using ChromoTek beads, samples were cross-linked on-bead using BS3 and subjected to reduction, alkylation, and digestion. Samples were analyzed using MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap QExactive.

### Data Protocol
LFQ samples were measured using MaxQuant (FDR 0.01) and cross-linked samples were measured using pLink (0.05 FDR plus additional filtering) using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
In recent years, cross-linking mass spectrometry has proven to be a robust and effective method of interrogating macromolecular protein complex topologies at peptide resolution. Traditionally, cross-linking mass spectrometry workflows have utilized homogenous complexes obtained through time-limiting reconstitution, tandem affinity purification, and conventional chromatography workflows. Here, we present cross-linking immunoprecipitation-MS (xIP-MS), a simple, rapid, and efficient method for structurally probing chromatin-associated protein complexes using small volumes of mammalian whole cell lysates, single affinity purification, and on-bead cross-linking followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. We first benchmarked xIP-MS using the structurally well-characterized phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase complex. We then applied xIP-MS to the chromatin-associated cohesin (SMC1A/3), XRCC5/6 (Ku70/86), and MCM complexes, and we provide novel structural and biological insights into their architectures and molecular function. Of note, we use xIP-MS to perform topological studies under cell cycle perturbations, showing that the xIP-MS protocol is sufficiently straightforward and efficient to allow comparative cross-linking experiments. This work, therefore, demonstrates that xIP-MS is a robust, flexible, and widely applicable methodology for interrogating chromatin-associated protein complex architectures.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Chemical cross-linking mass-spectrometry, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Geert Grooteplein 28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Matthew Makowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Geert Grooteplein 28, 6525 GA Nijmegen, the Netherlands


