### Accession
PXD034022

### Title
SimPLIT: Simplified sample preparation for large-scale isobaric tagging proteomics

### Description
Large scale proteomic profiling of cell lines can yield valuable insights into the molecular signatures attributed to variable genotypes or induced perturbations. Specifically, the ability to perform deep and rapid proteome analysis of pharmacologically modulated cells could generate drug-protein associations for large libraries of compounds that predict mechanism of action and enable rational drug design. Although isobaric labelling has greatly increased the throughput of proteomic analysis at deep coverage, the commonly used sample preparation workflows often require complex time-consuming steps and/or costly consumables, limiting their suitability for large scale studies. Here, we present a simplified and cost effective one-pot reaction sample preparation workflow in a 96-well plate format with manual parallel processing (SimPLIT), that minimizes processing steps and reduces technical variability. The workflow is based on a sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer and a single detergent clean-up step after peptide labeling, followed by quick off-line fractionation and MS2 analysis. The simplified workflow demonstrates high reproducibility and provides improved proteome representation compared to alternative approaches. We showcase the large-scale applicability of the workflow by investigating proteomic heterogeneity in a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines and by performing target discovery for a set of molecular glue degraders in different cell lines, in a 96-sample assay. Using this workflow, we report a subset of frequently dysregulated proteins in colorectal cancer cells and uncover cell-dependent protein degradation profiles of seven cereblon E3 ligase modulators (CRL4CRBN). Overall, SimPLIT is a robust method that can be easily implemented in most proteomics laboratories for medium-to-large scale TMT-based studies involving deep profiling of cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
High pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation for SimPLIT. Offline peptide fractionation was based on high pH Reversed-Phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. Mobile phase A was 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide, and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide. Pooled TMT-peptides were resuspended in 200 μL of buffer A, centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 5 min and the supernatant was injected for fractionation with the following gradient: isocratic for 5 min at 5% phase B, gradient for 40 min to 35% phase B, gradient to 80% phase B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 min, and re-equilibrated to 5% phase B. For the SimPLIT experiments, twelve retention time-based fractions were collected into a deep 96-well plate (WatersTM, cat#186009184) and speedVac dried. The peptides were then resuspended in the well plate with 0.1% formic acid and finally pooled into eight fractions by combining the first and the last four fractions. All six TMT-16plex sets were fractionated, evaporated, resuspended and injected for LC-MS using the same deep 96-well plate. LC-MS analysis for SimPLIT. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the LTQ Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were analyzed with the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) at 50°C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient separation method was as follows: 150 min gradient up to 38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 10 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. Precursors between 375 and 1,500 m/z were selected with a mass resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control (AGC) of 4 × 105, and IT (injection time) of 50 ms, with the top speed mode in 3 s for high collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th (Thomson unit). The collision energy was set at 35%, with AGC at 1 × 105 and IT at 86 ms. The HCD MS2 spectra were acquired with a fixed first mass at 100 m/z and a resolution of 50,000. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 s with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein quantification for the SimPLIT method. The SEQUEST-HT search engine was used to analyze the acquired mass spectra in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 mis-cleavages. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.9848 Da) were set as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptides were filtered at q-value<0.01 based on a decoy database search. All spectra were searched against UniProt-SwissProt proteomes of reviewed Homo sapiens protein entries (version 12-June-2020) appended with contaminants and FBS proteins (22). The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMTpro quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and an integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS2 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, with protein groups considered for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with an average reporter signal-to-noise ratio of >3 were used for protein quantification. Correction for the isotopic impurity of reporter quantification values was applied. For each protein, TMTpro signal-to-noise values were summed to create protein quantification values. To correct experimental bias, normalisation using total peptide intensities was used. This was calculated from the total sum of the abundance values for each channel overall peptides identified per file. After normalisation, the data were scaled per protein such that the average of all the samples is 100. Protein ratios were directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances. No imputation for missing values was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Large scale proteomic profiling of cell lines can reveal molecular signatures attributed to variable genotypes or induced perturbations, enabling proteogenomic associations and elucidation of pharmacological mechanisms of action. Although isobaric labeling has increased the throughput of proteomic analysis, the commonly used sample preparation workflows often require time-consuming steps and costly consumables, limiting their suitability for large scale studies. Here, we present a simplified and cost-effective one-pot reaction workflow in a 96-well plate format (SimPLIT) that minimizes processing steps and demonstrates improved reproducibility compared to alternative approaches. The workflow is based on a sodium deoxycholate lysis buffer and a single detergent cleanup step after peptide labeling, followed by quick off-line fractionation and MS2 analysis. We showcase the applicability of the workflow in a panel of colorectal cancer cell lines and by performing target discovery for a set of molecular glue degraders in different cell lines, in a 96-sample assay. Using this workflow, we report frequently dysregulated proteins in colorectal cancer cells and uncover cell-dependent protein degradation profiles of seven cereblon E3 ligase modulators (CRL4<sup>CRBN</sup>). Overall, SimPLIT is a robust method that can be easily implemented in any proteomics laboratory for medium-to-large scale TMT-based studies for deep profiling of cell lines.

### Keywords
Imids, Targeted protein degradation, Isobaric labeling, Celmods, Cancer cell lines, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti S. Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London


