### Accession
PXD004125

### Title
Mass spectrometry based quantitative proteome analyses for the import mutants ppi2 and tic56-1 as well as for spectinomycin treated Arabidopsis thalian plants

### Description
We acquired quantitative proteomics data from eight week old ppi2 and tic56-1 mutants as well as from wild type treated with 60 µg/ml spectinomycin and related them to their respective wildtype reference. Protein identification and quantification was performed by data-independent MSE acquisition on a Synapt G2S mass spectrometer (Waters). Quantification was based on the Hi3 method (Silva et al., 2006).  Silva, J.C., Gorenstein, M.V., Li, G.Z., Vissers, J.P., and Geromanos, S.J. (2006). Absolute quantification of proteins by LCMSE: a virtue of parallel MS acquisition. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 5, 144-156.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomes for the import mutants ppi2 and tic56-1 as well as those for spectinomycin treated plants (Spec) and the according wildtype controls were analyzed in three biological replicates and several technical replicates (tic56-1: 19, wt [tic56-1]: 18/ ppi2: 9, wt [ppi2]: 9/ Spec: 10, wt [Spec]: 11). Therefor total protein was extracted from plant material cultivated on ½ MS-medium containing 1% agar and 0.8% sucrose, for spectinomycin-treatment the medium contains additionally 60 µg/ml spectinomycin. The plant material was cultivated under short day conditions (8 h light/ 16 h dark). For extraction of total protein, plant material was frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed with a pestle. The material was incubated with extraction buffer (100mM sodium chloride, 50 mM Tris, pH7.5, 4% [w/v] SDS, 0.1% [v/v] plant protease inhibitor cocktail [Sigma-Aldrich], and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride) at 70°C for 10 min under shaking. The extract was clarified by centrifugation at maximum speed in a tabletop centrifuge for 10 min at room temperature. For mass spectrometry 100 µg of total protein were digested in the presents of 0.005% (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters) with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, protein:trypsin ratio 50:1) and prepared for mass spectrometry as described by Helm et al. (2014). Before mass spectrometry measurements samples were spiked with 10 fmol rabbit glycogen phosphorylase B (P00489). LC separation and HD-MSE data acquisition was performed as previously described (Helm et al., 2014) using 1 μl from each of the in solution digested samples on a nanoACQUITY UPLC System coupled to a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). MS acquisition was set to 50–5000 Da.  Helm, S., Dobritzsch, D., Rodiger, A., Agne, B., and Baginsky, S. (2014). Protein identification and quantification by data-independent acquisition and multi-parallel collision-induced dissociation mass spectrometry (MS(E)) in the chloroplast stroma proteome. Journal of proteomics 98, 79-89.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out by ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 3.0.1, Apex3D algorithm v. 2.128.5.0, 64 bit, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) with automated determination of chromatographic peak width as well as MS TOF resolution. Lock mass value for charge state 2 was defined as 785.8426 Da/e and the lock mass window was set to 0.25 Da. Low/high energy threshold was set to 180/15 counts, respectively. Elution start time was 5 min, intensity threshold was set to 750 counts. Databank search query (PLGS workflow) was carried out as follows: Peptide and fragment tolerances was set to automatic, two fragment ion matches per peptide, five fragment ions for protein identification, and two peptides per protein. Maximum protein mass was set to 250 kDa. Primary digest reagent was trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed. According to the digestion protocol fixed (carbamidomethyl on Cys) as well as variable (oxidation on Met) modifications were set. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 4% at the protein level. MSE data were searched against the modified A. thaliana database (TAIR10, ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org) containing common contaminants such as keratin (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) and glycogen phosphorylase B from rabbit (Uniprot ID: P00489). Quantification was performed based on the intensity of the three most abundant proteotypic peptides (Silva et al., 2006).   Silva, J.C., Gorenstein, M.V., Li, G.Z., Vissers, J.P., and Geromanos, S.J. (2006). Absolute quantification of proteins by LCMSE: a virtue of parallel MS acquisition. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 5, 144-156.

### Publication Abstract
Toc159-containing complexes at the outer chloroplast envelope membrane form stable supercomplexes with a 1-MD translocon at the inner chloroplast envelope membrane of which Tic56 is one essential subunit. While the single mutants tic56-1 and ppi2 (toc159) have an albino phenotype and are able to grow heterotrophically, we find the double mutant to be embryo lethal. Comprehensive quantitative proteome profiling with both single mutants in combination with GeneChip analyses identified a posttranscriptional defect in the accumulation of plastid ribosomal proteins and diminished expression of plastid encoded proteins. In the tic56-1 mutant, the assembly of functional ribosomes is furthermore hampered by a processing defect of the plastid 23S rRNA. Spectinomycin-treatment of wild-type plants phenocopies the molecular phenotype of plastid proteome accumulation in tic56-1 and to a smaller degree also ppi2 plastids, suggesting that a defect in plastid translation is largely responsible for the phenotype of both import mutants. Import experiments with the tic56-3 mutant revealed no significant defect in the import of small ribosomal protein 16 in the absence of full-length Tic56, suggesting that the defect in ribosome assembly in tic56-1 may be independent of a function of Tic56 in protein import. Our data establish a previously unknown link between plastid protein import, the processing of plastid rRNAs, and the assembly of plastid ribosomes and provide further knowledge on the function of the translocon components and the molecular basis for their albino phenotype.

### Keywords
Hi3 quantification, Plastidic translation, Hdmse, Tic56-1, Toc-tic-import machinery, Spectinomycin, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Plastid, Shotgun proteomics, Ppi2

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Weinbergweg 22, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Sacha Baginsky
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Weinbergweg 22, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


