### Accession
PXD031138

### Title
Ethylene treated Arabidopsis roots

### Description
Flooded plants experience impaired gas diffusion underwater, leading to oxygen deprivation (hypoxia) stress. The volatile plant hormone ethylene is rapidly trapped in submerged plant cells and is instrumental for enhanced metabolic hypoxia acclimation. However, the precise mechanisms underpinning ethylene-enhanced hypoxia survival remain unclear. We studied the effect of ethylene pre-treatment on hypoxia survival of primary Arabidopsis thaliana root tips.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth material and conditions: Seedlings grown for proteomics harvests (Arabidopsis thaliana seeds of ecotype Col-0) were sown in 3 rows at high density (~15-20 seeds/cm) on sterile square petri dishes containing 40 ml autoclaved and solidified ¼ MS, 1% plant agar without additional sucrose, using a pipette after wet surface seed sterilization (incubation in 50% EtOH, 5% Bleach for 10 minutes, followed by 7 washing rounds with Autoclaved MQ water). The plates were left to dry for 30 minutes after sowing. Petri dishes were sealed with gas-permeable tape (Leukopor, Duchefa) and stratified at 4ºC in the dark for 4 days. Seedlings were grown vertically on the agar plates under short day conditions (9:00 – 17:00, T= 20ºC, Photon Flux Density = ~120 μmol m-2s-1, RH= 70%) for 5 days. For ethylene treatments, seedlings grown on square plates with lids removed were placed vertically inside closed glass desiccators injected with specific ethylene concentrations (light intensity within desiccators: ~5 μmol·m-2·s-1, room temperature). Seedlings placed in glass desiccators without ethylene were used as control. Commercially purchased gaseous ethylene was diluted to desired concentrations and injected into glass desiccators. After 30 minutes, gas samples were taken from the desiccators to confirm the ethylene concentration by gas chromatography (Syntech Spectras GC955). Samples were harvested over 5 independent experiments; 10 plates were pooled per biological replicate. Sample preparation, TMT labelling and data analysis:  Protein extraction, quantification, reduction and alkalization was done as described previously (Zhang et al., 2015). Extraction buffer contained 8M urea, pH 8.5 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1X Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 1X PhosSTOP Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford’s reagent and input aliquots (250µg in 100µl) were reduced with 5 µL  200mM Tris[2-carboxylethyl] phosphine (TCEP) in 50mM TEAB to final concertation 10mM at 55 degree for 1 hour, alkylated with 5 µL  375mM iodoacetamide (IAA) to final 17mM for 30 minutes in the darkness and then diluted to total volume 800µl 50mM TEAB to obtain a final urea concentration of <1M. Protein precipitation was done by the methanol/chloroform method described by (Zhang et al., 2018). Sequential trypsin digestion was done according to (Zhang et al., 2015). Pellets were resuspended in 100µl 50mM TEAB and digested with 2µg trypsin (T8658-1VL, from bovine pancreas, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37oC for 700 rpm for 4 hours (Thermomixer Comfort, 5355 000.011, Eppendorf). An additional 2µg trypsin was added, and reaction incubated overnight. Following quality control protein gel analysis, peptide concentration was determined using a PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (23275, Thermo Scientific to ensure equal peptide labelling per sample. 100µg peptide aliquots were labelled using TMT10plexTM (90110, Thermo Scientific). 5 biological replicates were performed: Air-treated samples were labelled with TMT10 -126, -127N, -127C, -128N, -128C and ethylene-treated samples were labelled with -129 N, -129C, -130N, -130C, -131. Peptides were mixed equally and an aliquot corresponding to half of peptides was separated by high pH reverse-phase chromatography using a Waters reverse-phase Nano column as described in (Zhang et al., 2015). All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed as previously (Zhang et al. 2018) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the TAIR10 database using MASCOT v.2.4 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and PROTEOME DISCOVERERTM v.1.4.1.14 as described previously (Zhang et al., 2015), employing Top 10 peaks filter node and percolator nodes and reporter ions quantifier with Trypsin enzyme specificity with a maximum of one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine and TMT isobaric labelling (+229.162 Da) of lysine and N-termini were set as static modifications while the methionine oxidation (+15.996) were considered dynamic. Mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS. For quantification, TMT 10plex method was used and integration tolerance was set to 2mmu, Integration Method was set as centroid sum. Purity correction factor were set according the TMT10plex (90110) product sheet (Lot number: SA239883). Each reporting ion was divided by the sum of total ions and normalized by medians of each sample. Log transformation ensured a homogeneity and normal distribution of the variances. Statistical differences between air and ethylene samples were obtained using two-sample t-test of log2 transformed data, considering variation of quantification as a weighting factor. Only proteins represented by two or more peptides were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Flooded plants experience impaired gas diffusion underwater, leading to oxygen deprivation (hypoxia). The volatile plant hormone ethylene is rapidly trapped in submerged plant cells and is instrumental for enhanced hypoxia acclimation. However, the precise mechanisms underpinning ethylene-enhanced hypoxia survival remain unclear. We studied the effect of ethylene pretreatment on hypoxia survival of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) primary root tips. Both hypoxia itself and re-oxygenation following hypoxia are highly damaging to root tip cells, and ethylene pretreatments reduced this damage. Ethylene pretreatment alone altered the abundance of transcripts and proteins involved in hypoxia responses, root growth, translation, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis. Through imaging and manipulating ROS abundance in planta, we demonstrated that ethylene limited excessive ROS formation during hypoxia and subsequent re-oxygenation and improved oxidative stress survival in a PHYTOGLOBIN1-dependent manner. In addition, we showed that root growth cessation via ethylene and auxin occurred rapidly and that this quiescence behavior contributed to enhanced hypoxia tolerance. Collectively, our results show that the early flooding signal ethylene modulates a variety of processes that all contribute to hypoxia survival.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis root ethylene tmt10

### Affiliations
Plant Sciences Department, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK
Plant Sciences and the Bioeconomy, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK

### Submitter
Hongtao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hongtao Zhang
Plant Sciences Department, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, AL5 2JQ, UK


