### Accession
PXD043909

### Title
Analysis of the GFP-labelled β-dystroglycan interactome in Hek-293 transfected cells reveals novel  intracellular networks

### Description
So far very little is known about the fine regulation of some of these intracellular interactions of β-DG and how they are perturbed in diseases. To start filling this gap, HEK-293 cells were transiently transfected with a plasmid carrying the β-DG subunit with GFP fused at its C-terminus. Immunoprecipitation by anti-GFP antibodies followed by shotgun proteomic analysis to investigate the proteins exclusively matching for β-DG binding, applying the following filters to MS identification data: high confidence, peptide rank 1, peptide length minimum 9 amino acid residues and selecting 2 peptides per protein. A series of already known β-DG interactors have been found, whilst significant new matches, which include potential novel β-DG interactors and their related networks, were identified in diverse subcellular compartments.

### Sample Protocol
HEK-293 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% (v/v) neonatal calf serum, 25 U/mL penicillin and 25 ug/mL streptomycin. The cells at 80% of confluence were transiently transfected with 10µg of the following plasmid: β-DG-EGFP, which allows the expression of murine DG or also pEGFP, which allows the cytosolic expression of GFP alone. For co-immunoprecipitation and protein digestion, cell pellets were lysed, centrifuged and the resulting protein extracts (1 mg of total protein content) were immunoprecipitated with GFP-Trap beads coupled with anti-GFP antibody. Eluted proteins were subjected to reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion, dried and stored at -80°C until LC-MS analysis. Before LC-MS proteomic analysis, the samples were thawed and reconstituted in 100 uL of water/acetonitrile solution (98:2, v/v) containing the 0.2% of formic acid and gently vortexed to allow sample dissolution.Liquid Chromatography analysis was performed at a thermostated temperature of 40°C in gradient elution mode using a 0.1% FA water solution as eluent A and an ACN/Water/FA solution (99.9:0.1, v/v) as eluent B and a C18 (2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) stationary phase chromatographic column. NanoESI-Orbitrap Elite MS operated in positive ionization mode and CID tandem MS fragmentation in top 20 Data Dependent Scan (DDS) mode. MS/MS spectra acquisition was performed in the linear ion trap at normal scan rate.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were elaborated by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on SEQUEST HT cluster as search engine against the Homo Sapiens UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase (released in February 2022). The signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set to 1.5. The set enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites; minimum and maximum peptide length was 6 and 144 residues, respectively. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da and 0.02 Da; use average precursor mass False; use average fragment mass False. Methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) and N-Terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02 Da) was set as static modification. Protein and peptide identification was validated by the Percolator node, with the strict target value of False Discovery Rate (FDR) set at 0.01 and the relaxed value at 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dystroglycan, Lamina-associated polypeptide-1b (lap1b), Nuclear envelopathies, Mass spectrometry proteomics, Torsin 1a interacting protein 1., Muscular dystrophy

### Affiliations
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche (SCITEC) "Giulio Natta"
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche (SCITEC) "Giulio Natta"

### Submitter
Claudia Desiderio

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Desiderio, Andrea Brancaccio, Francesca Sciandra
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche (SCITEC) "Giulio Natta"


