### Accession
PXD028568

### Title
Biomarkers in a socially exchanged fluid reflect colony maturity, behavior and distributed metabolism

### Description
Study of the protein composition of the trophallactic fluid of the carpenter ant Camponotus floridanus. Samples were analyzed from ants with different functions (Nurse, Forager) coming from colonies with different ages (mature, young) either kept in lab or grown under natural conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were mixed with Laemmli sample buffer and pH was adjusted with 1 M Tris-Cl, pH 7. After reduction with 1 mM DTT for 10 min at 75°C and alkylation using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature protein samples were separated on 4-12% gradient gels. Each gel lane was cut into small pieces, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and the resulting peptide mixtures were processed on STAGE tips. LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a QExactive plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EasyLC 1000 nanoflow-HPLC. HPLC-column tips (fused silica) with 75 µm inner diameter were self-packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm to a length of 20 cm. A gradient of A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile in water) with increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (loading of sample with 0% B; separation ramp: from 5-30% B within 85 min). The flow rate was 250 nl/min and for sample application 650 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode and switched automatically between MS (max. of 1x106 ions) and MS/MS. Each MS scan was followed by a maximum of ten MS/MS scans using normalized collision energy of 25% and a target value of 1000. Parent ions with a charge state form z = 1 and unassigned charge states were excluded from fragmentation. The mass range for MS was m/z = 370-1750. The resolution for MS was set to 70,000 and for MS/MS to 17,500. MS parameters were as follows: spray voltage 2.3 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; ion-transfer tube temperature 250°C.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were uploaded into MaxQuant software, version 1.6.2.10, for peak detection, generation of peak lists of mass error corrected peptides, and for database searches. MaxQuant was set up to search both the UniProt (RRID:SCR_002380, www.uniprot.org) and NCBI (RRID:SCR_003496, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) databases restricted to C. floridanus (UniProt, February 2020 version; NCBI RefSeq, version 7.5), along with common contaminants, such as keratins and enzymes used for digestion. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modifica-tion and protein amino-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Three missed cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm. The average mass precision of identified peptides was in general less than 1 ppm after recalibration. Peptide lists were further used by MaxQuant to iden-tify and relatively quantify proteins using the following parameters: peptide and protein false discovery rates, based on a forward-reverse database, were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, minimum number of peptides for identification and quantitation of proteins was set to one which must be unique. The ‘match-between-run’ option (0.7 min) was used, which helps improve the protein identifications especially for our single-individual samples. All proteins la-belled as contaminants, reverse or only identified by site were excluded and proteins with scores less than 70 were removed. After the filtering, the dataset contained 519 proteins. Quantitative analysis was performed using iBAQ values. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) is the quotient of sum of all identified peptides and the number of theoretically observable peptides of a protein.

### Publication Abstract
In cooperative systems exhibiting division of labor, such as microbial communities, multicellular organisms, and social insect colonies, individual units share costs and benefits through both task specialization and exchanged materials. Socially exchanged fluids, like seminal fluid and milk, allow individuals to molecularly influence conspecifics. Many social insects have a social circulatory system, where food and endogenously produced molecules are transferred mouth-to-mouth (stomodeal trophallaxis), connecting all the individuals in the society. To understand how these endogenous molecules relate to colony life, we used quantitative proteomics to investigate the trophallactic fluid within colonies of the carpenter ant <i>Camponotus floridanus</i>. We show that different stages of the colony life cycle circulate different types of proteins: young colonies prioritize direct carbohydrate processing; mature colonies prioritize accumulation and transmission of stored resources. Further, colonies circulate proteins implicated in oxidative stress, ageing, and social insect caste determination, potentially acting as superorganismal hormones. Brood-caring individuals that are also closer to the queen in the social network (nurses) showed higher abundance of oxidative stress-related proteins. Thus, trophallaxis behavior could provide a mechanism for distributed metabolism in social insect societies. The ability to thoroughly analyze the materials exchanged between cooperative units makes social insect colonies useful models to understand the evolution and consequences of metabolic division of labor at other scales.

### Keywords
Carpenter ant camponotus floridanus, Trophallactic fluid

### Affiliations
Department of Biology,
University of Fribourg
Department of Biology University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Michael Stumpe

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Kressler
Department of Biology University of Fribourg


