### Accession
PXD008231

### Title
Paraquat mediated oxidative stress in Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes is regulated by an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response

### Description
A deeper understanding of malaria parasite development inside the Anopheles mosquito may lead to the identification of processes that can be targeted by transmission-blocking interventions. Paraquat (1,1'-dimethyl-4,4'-bipyridylium dichloride) is a potent superoxide-inducing agent that impacts Plasmodium ookinete development, especially at higher concentrations. Compounds like Paraquat can potentially induce an oxidative imbalance in the mosquito midgut during ookinete maturation, essentially super-stressing the parasite leading to the arrested development of ookinetes, the only stage that can invade through a mosquito midgut cell to establish an oocyst infection in the mosquito. The mosquito midgut has evolved to handle the natural production of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS, respectively) as a result of feeding on blood. The addition of Paraquat to a bloodmeal is expected to induce a cognate response in the midgut to handle the excess ROS/RNS, and high concentrations of this compound can potentially overwhelm the midgut response leading to mosquito death. While several studies have explored the effect of Paraquat on malaria parasites, a fundamental understanding of the mosquito response to this compound remains unknown. Here, we quantified the mosquito midgut proteomic response to a Paraquat-laced sugar meal to understand the intrinsic midgut response (in the absence of a bloodmeal). We then carried out transcriptomic analysis of the mosquito midgut for several antioxidants of the Trx and GSH pathways to compare concordance or discordance between protein and its transcripts during different oxidative stress conditions. Finally, we determined whether the same Trx and GSH pathways are upregulated following infection with either P. falciparum or P. berghei at 24 hrs post-blood feeding, coinciding with the time point for maximal ookinete traversal of the midgut. We discuss the potential selective action of Paraquat on the parasite and the intrinsic tolerance of the mosquito midgut to Paraquat-mediated oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, experimental groups (50 midguts/samples) were processed for proteins. Total protein lysate was prepared by lysing the midgut samples with 45 μL of SDST-lysis buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 100 mM Tris/HCl, 0.1 M DTT pH 7.6) and boiled at 95oC for 5 minutes. 30 μL of the protein lysates was taken for protein digestion according to the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) using a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (Tao et al., 2014a; Tweedell et al., 2015) (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). Acidified tryptic peptides from FASP approaches were desalted using an HPLC C18 column on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA)(Tao et al., 2014a; Tweedell et al., 2015). Concentration of the peptides following FASP approaches was estimated using protein digest standards whose concentrations, as determined by BCA, were known (Tao et al., 2014a; Tweedell et al., 2015) Peptide products desalted and digested by the FASP protocol were dissolved in loading buffer (97.9% water, 2% CAN, and 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and ~ 20 μg was injected to our previously constructed online 2D HPLC-MS/MS system, using the exact method as described previously and briefly detailed below (Tao et al., 2014a, 2014b; Tweedell et al., 2015).  The online 2D HPLC-MS-MS system was constructed by integrating one SCX column (150 μm i.d. x 2 cm length PolySULFOETHYL ATM, 5 μm 300 Å, PolyLC INC) into an Agilent LC-MS system comprised of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6520 QTOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. For the online SCX fractionation, in the first dimension peptides were loaded into the SCX column at 1.8 μl/min and the peptides were eluted using the autosampler by injecting 6 μl of each increasing salt concentration (0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, 160, and 300mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA) followed by one injection of 500 mM NaCl in 2% ACN/0.1% FA to wash the column. The salt elution was captured by a C18 enrichment column integrated into the Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip (360 nL, 180 Å C18 trap with a 75 μm i.d., 150 mm length, 180 Å C18 analytical column). In the second dimension, with the valve switched and the RPLC gradient started, the peptides were eluted from the enrichment column and separated by a C18 analytical column. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a gradient starting at 97% A (A: 99.9% water, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was 3–10% B (B: 90% ACN, 9.9% water, 0.1% FA) for 4 min, 10–35% B for 56 min, 35–99% B for 2 min, and maintained at 99% B for 6 min, followed by re-equilibration of column with 3% B for 10 min. Data dependent (autoMS2) MS acquisition was performed by an Agilent 6520 QTOF at 2 GHz. Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1700, and the top four peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1700 at a scan rate of 1.5 spectra per second. A medium isolation width (~4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.6 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied with precursors excluded for 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectra were acquired.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic format (.mgf) by Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.04.00. The data acquired was used to search the VectorBase Anopheles gambiae protein FASTA sequence database (VectorBase, http://www.vectorbase.org, Anopheles gambiae PEST, AgamP4.2.) for peptide sequence alignments. The search engine used for the search was MASCOT version 2.5 with the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine residues set as fixed and variable modifications respectively. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints, and up to two internal cleavage sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. The MASCOT search results were exported as .DAT format and then imported into the Scaffold software (version 4.4.5, Proteome Software) for curation, label-free quantification, analysis, and visualization. Overall, protein false discovery rates of less than 1% and peptide false discovery rates of less than 1% were obtained with Scaffold filters, and each protein had ≥ 2 unique peptides. Identified proteins were clustered to remove redundancy. Proteins were clustered together if there was a peptide identification shared between them, because this indicates substantial sequence similarity, and the protein with the greatest number of peptides identified was considered the unique protein identification from that group.

### Publication Abstract
Paraquat is a potent superoxide (O&#x2082;<sup>-</sup>)-inducing agent that is capable of inducing an oxidative imbalance in the mosquito midgut. This oxidative imbalance can super-stress the malaria parasite, leading to arrested development in the mosquito midgut and reduced transmission. While several studies have explored the effect of paraquat on malaria parasites, a fundamental understanding of the mosquito response to this compound remains unknown. Here, we quantified the mosquito midgut proteomic response to a paraquat-laced sugar meal, and found that <i>An. gambiae</i> midguts were enriched in proteins that are indicative of cells under endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We also carried out qRT-PCR analyses for nine prominent thioredoxin (Trx) and glutathione (GSH)-dependent genes in mosquito midguts post <i>P. falciparum</i> blood meal ingestion to evaluate the concordance between transcripts and proteins under different oxidative stress conditions. Our data revealed an absence of significant upregulation in the Trx and GSH-dependent genes following infected blood meal ingestion. These data suggest that the intrinsic tolerance of the mosquito midgut to paraquat-mediated oxidative stress is through an ER stress response. These data indicate that mosquitoes have at least two divergent pathways of managing the oxidative stress that is induced by exogenous compounds, and outline the potential application of paraquat-like drugs to act selectively against malaria parasite development in mosquito midguts, thereby blocking mosquito-to-human transmission.

### Keywords
Malaria; anopheles gambiae; oxidative stress; endoplasmic reticulum stress; paraquat; transmission-blocking.

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida

### Submitter
Chun Hin Law

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Rhoel Dinglasan
Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida


