### Accession
PXD017803

### Title
A Triple KnockOut Isobaric-labelling Quality Control Platform in an Integrated On-line Database Search

### Description
Sample multiplexing using isobaric tagging is a powerful strategy for proteome-wide protein quantification. One major caveat of isobaric tagging is ratio compression that results from the isolation, fragmentation, and quantification of co-eluting, near-isobaric peptides, a phenomenon typically referred to as “ion interference.”  A robust platform to ensure quality control, optimize parameters, and enable comparisons across samples is essential as new instrumentation and analytical methods evolve. Here, we introduce TKO-iQC, an integrated platform consisting of the Triple Knock-Out (TKO) yeast digest standard and an automated web-based database search and protein profile visualization application. We highlight two new TKO standards based on the TMTpro reagent (TKOpro9 and TKOpro16), as well as an updated TKO Viewing Tool, TVT2.0. TKO-iQC greatly facilitates the comparison of instrument performance with a straightforward and streamlined workflow.

### Sample Protocol
Sanples were processed using the SL-TMT protocol. Navarrete-Perea, J.;  Yu, Q.;  Gygi, S. P.; Paulo, J. A., Streamlined Tandem Mass Tag (SL-TMT) Protocol: An Efficient Strategy for Quantitative (Phospho)proteome Profiling Using Tandem Mass Tag-Synchronous Precursor Selection-MS3. J Proteome Res 2018, 17 (6), 2226-2236.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based (Comet) software pipeline. Database searching included all entries from the yeast SGD (Saccharomyces Genome Database) (March 20, 2015). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da for SPS-MS3 and RTS-MS3 data, but with 0.03Da for hrMS2 data. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da for TMT or +304.207 for TMTpro) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Peptide intensities were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs so as to give greater weight to more intense ions. PSMs with poor quality, spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise measurements that were less than 200, or with no MS3 spectra (for MS3-based methods) were excluded from quantitation. Isolation specificity of ≥ 0.8 (i.e., peptide purity >80%) was required.

### Publication Abstract
Sample multiplexing using isobaric tagging is a powerful strategy for proteome-wide protein quantification. One major caveat of isobaric tagging is ratio compression that results from the isolation, fragmentation, and quantification of coeluting, near-isobaric peptides, a phenomenon typically referred to as "ion interference". A robust platform to ensure quality control, optimize parameters, and enable comparisons across samples is essential as new instrumentation and analytical methods evolve. Here, we introduce TKO-iQC, an integrated platform consisting of the Triple Knockout (TKO) yeast digest standard and an automated web-based database search and protein profile visualization application. We highlight two new TKO standards based on the TMTpro reagent (TKOpro9 and TKOpro16) as well as an updated TKO Viewing Tool, TVT2.0. TKO-iQC greatly facilitates the comparison of instrument performance with a straightforward and streamlined workflow.

### Keywords
Tko standard; ion interference; tmt; itraq; sps-ms3; tvt; shiny application

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115


