### Accession
PXD003249

### Title
Outer membrane vesicle and outer membrane of Haemophilus influenzae Rd KW20, Rd ∆yrbE and Rd ∆vacJ

### Description
Bacterial outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) have important biological roles in pathogenesis and intercellular interactions, but a general mechanism of OMV formation is lacking. Here we show that the VacJ/Yrb ABC transport system, a proposed phospholipid (PL) transporter, is involved in OMV formation. Deletion or repression of VacJ/Yrb increases OMV production in two distantly related Gram-negative bacteria, Haemophilus influenzae and Vibrio cholerae. Within our studies we also analyzed the proteome of the OMV and outer membrane (OM) and found no massive alteration in Haemophilus influenzae Rd KW20, Rd ∆yrbE and Rd ∆vacJ. Lipidome analyses demonstrate that OMVs from VacJ/Yrb-defective mutants in H. influenzae are enriched in PLs and certain fatty acids. Furthermore, we demonstrate that OMV production and regulation of the VacJ/Yrb ABC transport system respond to iron starvation. Our results suggest a new general mechanism of OMV biogenesis based on PL accumulation in the outer leaflet of the outer membrane. This mechanism is highly conserved among Gram-negative bacteria, provides a means for regulation, can account for OMV formation under all growth conditions, and might have important pathophysiological roles in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry was used to identify proteins from OM and OMV preparations.  Therefore, 0.7 mg (protein equivalent) of each preparation was lyophilized and resuspended in 1 ml 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Lipids were removed according to Pessione et al. (Pessione et al., 2009).  For in-solution digestion of proteins, samples were lyophilized after lipid removal and resuspended in 0.1 ml 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Disulfides were reduced by adding 5 µl of 200 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, boiling for 10 min, and incubating at RT for 1 h.  Samples were alkylated by adding 4 µl of 1 M iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at RT in darkness for 1 h and neutralized by adding 20 µl of 200 mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with subsequent incubation at RT for 1 h.  Samples were then lyophilized and resuspended in 40 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Proteins were digested by adding 2 µg sequencing grade modified trypsin in 20 µl trypsin resuspension buffer (Promega) and incubating at 37°C for 19 h.  After lyophilization and resuspension in 10 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, samples were desalted using ZipTip C18 microcolumns (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s manual and resupended in 8 µl 0.1% formic acid.  Finally, samples were analyzed using a hybrid quadrupole orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer (Waters) equipped with a nanoACQUITY ultra performance liquid chromatography system (Waters).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra were used for the identification of proteins by the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) using the NCBInr database with the bacteria (eubacteria) taxonomy selected.  Searches were carried out with the fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C), the enzyme selected as trypsin allowing up to 1 missed cleavages, a peptide tolerance of 1.2 Da, a MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da, a peptide charge of 1+, 2+ and 3+, monoisotopic mass values, and the instrument setting selected as ESI-QUAD-TOF. All data were searched with the significance threshold set to a P value of <0.05 resulting in an identity ion score threshold between 58 and 61. Only results with ion scores greater than or equal to the identity threshold were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) have important biological roles in pathogenesis and intercellular interactions, but a general mechanism of OMV formation is lacking. Here we show that the VacJ/Yrb ABC (ATP-binding cassette) transport system, a proposed phospholipid transporter, is involved in OMV formation. Deletion or repression of VacJ/Yrb increases OMV production in two distantly related Gram-negative bacteria, Haemophilus influenzae and Vibrio cholerae. Lipidome analyses demonstrate that OMVs from VacJ/Yrb-defective mutants in H. influenzae are enriched in phospholipids and certain fatty acids. Furthermore, we demonstrate that OMV production and regulation of the VacJ/Yrb ABC transport system respond to iron starvation. Our results suggest a new general mechanism of OMV biogenesis based on phospholipid accumulation in the outer leaflet of the outer membrane. This mechanism is highly conserved among Gram-negative bacteria, provides a means for regulation, can account for OMV formation under all growth conditions, and might have important pathophysiological roles in vivo.

### Keywords
Mla pathway, Retrograde lipid trafficking system, Omv, Haemophilus influenzae, Om

### Affiliations
University of Graz, Austria
University of Graz

### Submitter
Stefan Schild

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Schild
University of Graz, Austria


