### Accession
PXD013767

### Title
Mass spectrometry of excretory/secretory products (ectosomes, exosomes, and soluble proteins) secreted by Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites isolated from an infected murine model.

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite that infects all nucleated cells; to date, this organism is considered as one of the most successful parasites in the world. During infection, internalization, and proliferation the parasite excretes/secretes a high number of proteins, several of them with identified roles, including  MIC proteins, ROP proteins and GRA proteins involved in adhesion, invasion and intracellular proliferation respectively. The characterization of the secretome of Toxoplasma gondii opens the possibility to find new molecules for the design of future anti-parasitic strategies. The complete secretome and proteome of the parasite isolated from the murine model as well as their quantification by MS analysis are now available in the present report.

### Sample Protocol
Ten micrograms of an enriched fraction of excretion/secretion products (ESPs), ectosomes, exosomes or vesicle supernatant were loaded in 10% SDS-PAGE and then left to advance for about 1 cm within the gel. Bands containing all the proteins were cut and enzymatically digested. For protein quantification, a tryptic digested fraction of alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1, Waters, Milford, MA) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (UniProt accession: P00330) was added as an internal standard resulting in a concentration of 25 fmol µL-1f. Subsequently, to analyze the same amount of tryptic peptides by mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si (Waters), peptides were injected in a UPLC ACQUITY M-Class and then analyzed in a multiplexed MS/MS (MSE) mode to calculate the area under the curve of the chromatograms for each condition. The MS  was operated in High Definition-MSE (HDMSE) mode. Chromatography and spectrometry conditions of the HDMSE mode were described in detail in Ramírez-Flores, et al 2019. The three most reliable peptides per protein (Hi3) were used for the absolute quantitation according to the method described by Silva et al 2006. ESPs were analyzed and quantified identically. Generated raw files containing MS and MS/MS spectra were deconvoluted and compared using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) v3.0.3 software (Waters) against T. gondii GT1 database (downloaded from ToxoDB; Release 40, 15 October 2018).

### Data Protocol
The MS and MS/MS intensities contained in the generated *.raw files were normalized, aligned, compared and absolutely quantified using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) v3.0.3 software (Waters) against a reversed Toxoplasma gondii database. The parameters used for protein identification were: trypsin as cut enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) or phosphoryl (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. For absolute quantification, the average MS signal response for the three most intense tryptic peptides correlates with the protein concentration.

### Publication Abstract
After the cell invasion, the parasite Toxoplasma gondii locates within a parasitophorous vacuole to proliferate. It continuously modifies the composition of the parasitophorous vacuole by the secretion of GRA and ROP proteins, some of which become inserted into the vacuole membrane, remain as soluble proteins or involved in the intravacuolar network. In this report, we analyze the excretion/secretion products and the vesicles released by extracellular tachyzoites, this structures were morphologically analyzed by electron microscopy and characterized by mass spectrometry. The structural analysis showed parasites secreting in vitro individual vesicles with similarities to ectosomes and exosomes and which characterized to self-assembly in vitro forming vesicle-tubular structures morphologically similar to the intravacuolar network from infected cells. The vesicle-tubular structures were recognized with antibodies against ROP2 and GRA2. In addition, analysis by Western blot evidenced proteins from the secretory organelles. A detailed proteomic analysis of exosomes, ectosomes and soluble proteins released in vitro is here reported. Presence of GRA proteins in secretions from resting extracellular parasites indicates that these molecules are not exclusively secreted within the parasitophorous vacuole of the infected cell as reported but they are constitutively excreted/secreted even in an extracellular condition. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013767. SIGNIFICANCE: Extracellular tachyzoites constitutively secrete components that previously were considered be secreted only within the parasitophorous vacuole, suggesting that in the infected host these molecules are in direct interaction with cells and molecules of the host cell including those of the immune response.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii., Quantification, Excretory/secretory products, Exosomes, Mass spectrometry, Ectosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Cinvestav-IPN.
Cinvestav-IPN

### Submitter
Emmanuel Rios-Castro

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Mondragón-Flores
Department of Biochemistry, Cinvestav-IPN.


