### Accession
PXD025939

### Title
Unravelling subcellular and ultrastructural changes during vitrification of human spermatozoa: effect of mitochondria-targeted antioxidant and permeable cryoprotectant

### Description
The aims of the study were to improve sperm vitrification by using mitochondria-targeted antioxidants (Mito Q), reveal ultrastructural changes in spermatozoa due to the use of permeable cryoprotectants, and report alteration of functional proteins during the sperm vitrification process. For this, each of 20 swim-up-prepared ejaculates was divided into four groups : control, treatment 1, 2 and 3. We performed label-free quantitative proteomics and identified 1759 proteins, of which 68, 60, 90, and 81 proteins were altered in Treatment 1 (0.02µM Mito Q), Treatment 2 (1 % glycerol), and Treatment 3 (Mito-Glycerol groups) respectively compared to control (Fresh sperm). In particular, actin proteins were not affected during sperm vitrification but few actin-associated proteins were altered during the vitrification process. Interestingly, tubulins and outer dense fiber proteins were not affected during the vitrification process. Some of the identified ubiquitinating enzymes were affected during sperm vitrification but deubiquitinating enzymes were not affected during the vitrification process. Several proteins were identified for phosphorylation and dephosphorylation but only a few are altered during the sperm vitrification process. Interestingly, twenty-seven heat shock proteins were identified but only one is altered in the control. Similarly, several candidate proteins involved in sperm-egg fusion and fertilization (IZUMO1, Tektin, etc) were identified but not affected during the vitrification process. In conclusion, we demonstrated that MitoQ attenuates vitrification-induced ultrastructural changes and alteration in key proteins involved in sperm functions and fertilization.

### Sample Protocol
Ejaculates were collected from 20 healthy men by masturbation, after a minimum of 48 h of sexual abstinence. After liquefaction, each ejaculate was a prepared swim-up method and divided into four groups and vitrified  Control: Fresh sperm Treatment 1 (BM): Basal medium ( Basic culture medium and sucrose (0.25M))  Treatment 2 (0.02 µM Mito Q): Basal medium supplemented with 0.02 µM Mito Q Treatment 3 (Mito-Gly): Basal medium supplemented with 0.02 µM Mito Q and 1 % Glycerol All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1 min, 5-30% solvent B within 121 min, 30-40% solvent B within 19 min and 40-95% solvent B within 1 min followed by washing the column with 95% for 10 min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 20ms. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.2.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Swissprot human fasta  database containing 20428 canonical sequence entries (downloaded 08.13.2019). The MaxQuant default list of common contaminants was included in the search. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. Student´s T-tests were calculated in Perseus (version 1.6.1.1) after removal of decoys and potential contaminants. Data were filtered for at least 3 out of 3 valid values in at least one condition. Remaining missing values were imputed with random values from the left end of the intensity distribution using Perseus defaults.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Vitrification, Proteomics, Mito q, Electron microscopy

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical Faculty, Cologne University, 50931, Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Isachenko
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical Faculty, Cologne University, 50931, Cologne, Germany


