### Accession
PXD016042

### Title
Zinc limitation in Klebsiella pnuemoniae

### Description
Nutrient adaptation is key in limiting environments for the promotion of microbial growth and survival. In microbial systems, zinc is an important component for many cellular processes and bioavailability varies greatly among different conditions. In the bacterium, Klebsiella pneumoniae, the impact of zinc limitation has not been explored at the protein level. Here, we apply a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics strategy to profile the global impact of zinc limitation on the cellular proteome and extracellular environment (secretome) of K. pneumoniae. Our data defines the impact of zinc on proteins involved in transcriptional regulation and emphasizes the modulation of a vast array of proteins associated with zinc acquisition, transport, and binding. We also identify proteins in the extracellular environment associated with conventional and nonconventional modes of secretion. In particular, we focus on the impact of zinc on an uncharacterized cation transporter and the role of the ChaB transporter in influencing bacterial growth, capsule production, nad virulence. Moreover, we validate our results through transcriptional profiling of genes reprsessed under high abudnance of a histidine repression operon, hutC. Overall, we provide evidence of novel connections between zinc availability and capsule production in a bacterial system and define new roles for a transporter.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultrues were grown in biological quadruplicate in the absence or presence of 10 uM zinc. Cellular proteome samples were subjected to a total proteome extraction protocol. Briefly, samples were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. Using a probe sonicator (ThermoFisher Scientific), samples were lysed in an ice bath for 3 cycles (30% power, 30 s on/30 s off), and 2% (final) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added, followed by incubation at 95°C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm. The samples were cooled and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added followed by incubated at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. Next, 100% ice cold acetone (final concentration of 80%) was added prior to storage at -20°C overnight. Samples were collected by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, washed twice with 80% acetone, and air dried. Pellets were resolubilized in 8M urea/40 mM HEPES and a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay determined protein concentrations. Samples were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with a mixture of LysC and trypsin proteases (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1). Digestion was stopped with 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 50 µg of the acidified peptides were loaded onto STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (consisting of three layers of C18) to desalt and purify according to the standard protocol.   Secretome samples were processed in quadruplicate per condition and subjected to an in-solution digestion as previously described. Culture supernatant was filtered through 0.22 µm syringe filters to remove any cellular debris prior to processing. Briefly, 1/3 sample volume of 8 M urea/40 mM HEPES was added to filtered supernatant followed by vortexing. Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM IAA, followed by enzymatic digestion and STAGE-tip purification as described above.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed together using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26.). The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reference Klebsiella pneumoniae subsp. pneumoniae ATCC 700721 proteome (August 2018; 5,127 sequences) from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A minimum of two peptides required for protein identification and peptide spectral matches and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of one.  Further analysis of the MaxQuant-processed data (‘proteingroups.txt’ file) was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.2). Hits to the reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified with modified peptides were eliminated. LFQ intensities were converted to a log scale (log2), and only those proteins present in triplicate within at least one sample set were used for further statistical processing (valid-value filter of 3 in at least one group). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). A Student’s t-test identified proteins with significant changes in abundance (p-value ≤0.05) with multiple hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cutoff at 0.05. A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed, as well as a Pearson correlation with hierarchical clustering by Euclidean distance to determine replicate reproducibility, and a Student’s t-test for 1D annotation enrichment (FDR = 0.05) allowed for visualization of enrichment by gene ontology and keywords within the RStudio platform (http://www.R-project.org/). The STRING: functional protein association networks provided visualization of protein networks (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Klebsiella, Quantiative proteomics, Virulence, Proteome, Secretome, Transport, Zinc

### Affiliations
University of Guelph, Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
University of Guelph, Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada


