### Accession
PXD003602

### Title
Protein expression in tomato tissues as a function of Al3+ stress (Suping_Exp2)

### Description
The goal of this experiment is to identify the changes in protein expression induced by Al treatment with a view towards developing a molecular level understanding of Al tolerance in an important crop species.  In this particular experiment the focus was on protein expression in leaf tissue. Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum ‘Micro-Tom’) plants were treated in Magnavaca’s solution (pH 4.5) supplemented with 50 µM AlK(SO4)2·12H2O providing 7.5 µM Al3+ activity over a four-month period beginning at the emergence of the first flower buds and ending when a few leaves started to turn yellow.  Proteins from root, leaf, embryo and seed-coat tissues were identified using a 8-plex iTRAQ labeling strategy followed by a two-dimensional (high- and low-pH) chromatographic separation, and final generation of MS/MS spectra of tryptic peptides on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite-mass spectrometer

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissues were ground into fine powder under liquid nitrogen, followed by sequential washes in 10% TCA/acetone, 80% methanol/0.1 M ammonium acetate, and 80% acetone with centrifugation at 13,000x g for 10 min at 4°C, between each wash step.  After air-drying, the pellets were used to extract proteins employing a phenol (pH 8.0) and dense sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer [30% sucrose, 2% SDS, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 5% beta-mercaptoethanol (v/w)]. Proteins were precipitated in 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. Proteins were dissolved in a buffer of 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 2 M urea, 0.1% SDS, and a proteinase inhibitor cocktail for plant tissue (100 × dilution in the extraction buffer) (Sigma, USA). Protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay kit (Bio-Rad, USA). For iTRAQ labeling, 100 µg of protein from each sample was digested with trypsin and then labeled following the instructions of the 8-plex iTRAQ® labeling kit (AB SCIEX, USA). The treated samples were labeled with tags 114, 116,118,121, and the control samples with 113, 115, 117, and 119.  Equal amounts of the eight labeled samples from each experiment were combined. Unbound tags and SDS were removed through solid phase extraction using a strong cation exchange cartridge (AB SCIEX). Excess salt was removed using a second step of reverse-phase solid-phase extraction procedure involving 1-cm3, 50-mg cartridges following the manufacturer’s instructions (Sep-Pak C18; Waters, USA). Peptides were eluted in 500 µL 50% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA and dried under vacuum.  These peptide samples were subjected to a first dimension of high pH (10.0) Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) separation using an Acquity UPLC System (Waters) coupled with a robotic fraction collector (Probot; Dionex, USA).  One hundred micrograms of the multiplexed sample was injected and fractionated into 48 fractions in a 96-well plate. The 48 fractions were concatenated to yield 16 samples by pooling every 16th sample. These samples were dried at reduced pressure using a CentriVac Concentrator (LabConco, USA). For the low pH 2nd dimension, reverse-phase (RP) chromatography was employed. Dried samples were reconstituted with 15 µL of 2% acetonitrile with 0.5% formic acid and separated in the second dimension with an UliMate 3000 MDLC system (Dionex, USA).  Each reconstituted fraction was injected onto a PepMap C18 trapping column (5 μm, 300 μm × 5 mm, Dionex) at a 20 μL/min flow rate for loading, and then separated on a PepMap C18 RP nanocolumn (3 μm, 75 μm × 15 cm), utilizing a 60 min gradient from 5 to 38% ACN in 0.1% FA at 300 nL/min.  . The eluent from the analytical column was delivered to the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) via a “Plug and Play” nano ion source (CorSolutions LLC, USA).  The mass spectrometer was externally calibrated across the m/z range from 375–1,800 Da with Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer, and individual runs were internally calibrated with the background polysiloxane ion at m/z 445.120025 as a lock mass.  The Orbitrap Elite was operated in the positive ion mode with the nano source voltage set at 1.7 kV and source temperature at 250 °C. A parallel data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used to obtain one mass spectrum (MS) survey scan with the Fourier Transform (FT) mass analyzer, followed by isolation and fragmentation of the 15 or 20 most abundant, multiply-charged precursor ions with a threshold ion count greater than 30,000 in both the LTQ mass analyzer and the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)-based FT mass analyzer at a resolution of 15,000 (fwhm m/z 400). MS survey scans were acquired with resolution set at 60,000 across the survey scan range (m/z 375–1800). Dynamic exclusion was utilized with repeat count set to 1 with a 40 s repeat duration; exclusion list size was set to 500, 20–30 s exclusion duration, and low and high exclusion mass widths set to 1.5. Fragmentation parameters were set with isolation width at 1.5 m/z, normalized collision energy at 37%, activation Q at 0.25. Activation time for HCD analysis was 0.1 min. All data were acquired using XCalibur 2.1 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Data processing, database searching and iTRAQ quantitation. Proteome Discoverer v 1.4 was used to convert raw spectral data files for each iTRAQ experiment into a merged peak list (.mgf format) containing all 2nd dimension fractions for each tomato experiment for subsequent database searching. Mascot Daemon v. 2.3.2 was used to query .mgf files against the  iTAG 2.4 tomato protein database. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with 1 missed cleavage allowed. Methylthiolation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. Peptide charge was set to 2+, 3+, and 4+. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm, while fragment tolerance was set to 100 mmu. The instrument type selected was ESI-FTICR. The iTRAQ quantitation method utilized intensity weighting, featured outlier removal (where appropriate), and required a minimum of 2 peptides for protein quantitation. Summed intensity normalization was utilized and a correction was then made to adjust ratios to unity.  For the iTRAQ 8-plex labeling, N-terminal and lysine modification with iTRAQ were set as fixed modifications, and tyrosine labeling was set as a variable modification. Upon completion of the search, each report was opened and results were exported after setting the ion score filter to 0.05, thereby exporting results with an expectation value ≤ 0.05, specifying high confidence peptides only. Thus, the highest scoring matches to a particular peptide sequence, listed under the highest scoring protein containing that match, were considered.   False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated by searching the results against a decoy database in Mascot.  The 8 FDR varied between 1.23% and 2.25%.

### Publication Abstract
This study aimed to identify the aluminum (Al)-induced proteomes in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum, "Micro-Tom") after long-term exposure to the stress factor. Plants were treated in Magnavaca's solution (pH 4.5) supplemented with 7.5 &#x3bc;M Al(3+) ion activity over a 4 month period beginning at the emergence of flower buds and ending when the lower mature leaves started to turn yellow. Proteomes were identified using a 8-plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling strategy followed by a two-dimensional (high- and low-pH) chromatographic separation and final generation of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra of tryptic peptides on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Principal component analysis revealed that the Al-treatment had induced systemic alterations in the proteomes from roots and leaves but not seed tissues. The significantly changed root proteins were shown to have putative functions in Al(3+) ion uptake and transportation, root development, and a multitude of other cellular processes. Changes in the leaf proteome indicate that the light reaction centers of photosynthetic machinery are the primary targets of Al-induced stress. Embryo and seed-coat tissues derived from Al-treated plants were enriched with stress proteins. The biological processes involving these Al-induced proteins concur with the physiological and morphological changes, such as the disturbance of mineral homeostasis (higher contents of Al, P, and Fe and reduced contents of S, Zn, and Mn in Al-treated compared to nontreated plants) in roots and smaller sizes of roots and the whole plants. More importantly, the identified significant proteins might represent a molecular mechanism for plants to develop toward establishing the Al tolerance and adaptation mechanism over a long period of stress treatment.

### Keywords
Leaves, Embryo, Roots, Seed coat, Tomato, Itraq

### Affiliations
Robert W. Holley Center United States Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Ted Thannhauser
Robert W. Holley Center United States Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service


