### Accession
PXD025474

### Title
In vivo Analysis Reveals that ATP-hydrolysis Couples Remodeling  to SWI/SNF Release from Chromatin.

### Description
ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers control the accessibility of genomic DNA through  nucleosome mobilization. However, the dynamics of genome exploration by remodelers,  and the role of ATP hydrolysis in this process remain unclear. We used live-cell imaging  of Drosophila polytene nuclei to monitor Brahma (BRM) remodeler interactions with its  chromosomal targets. In parallel, we measured local chromatin condensation and its  effect on BRM association. Surprisingly, only a small portion of BRM is bound to  chromatin at any given time. BRM binds decondensed chromatin but is excluded from  condensed chromatin, limiting its genomic search space. BRM-chromatin interactions  are highly dynamic, whereas histone-exchange is limited and much slower. Intriguingly,  loss of ATP hydrolysis enhanced chromatin retention and clustering of BRM, which was  associated with reduced histone turnover. Thus, ATP hydrolysis couples nucleosome  remodeling to remodeler release, driving a continuous transient probing of the genome.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation assays, the equivalent of ~300 dissected salivary glands was  incubated with 100 µg of anti-MOR antibodies cross-linked to Protein A-Sepharose beads (or  control beads coated with pre-immune serum) for 2-3 hours at 40 C. Beads were washed  sequentially with 2x HEMG/500/0.1% NP40 and 1x HEMG/100/0.01% NP40; all buffers  contained protease inhibitors. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling for 1 min in SDS-loading  buffer. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting. Each lane on the  IP-Western analysis represents the equivalent of ~30 animals. ass spectrometric analysis For mass spectrometric analysis, proteins were on-bead subjected to reduction with  dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade;  Promega). Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was  performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer  (Thermo), operating in positive mode. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversedphase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in  0.1% formic acid) during 90 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. The elution was directly sprayed into  the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in  continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by 30 HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software suite (Cox et  al., 2009; version 1.6.7.0) with the additional options ‘LFQ’ and ‘iBAQ’ selected. A false  discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids  were set. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the  Uniprot database (taxonomy: Drosophila melanogaster, release January 2019) concatenated  with the reversed versions of all sequences. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.  The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for  HCD spectra. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while STY phosphorylation was set as a variable modification.  Both the PSM and protein FDR were set to 0.01. In case the identified peptides of two proteins  were the same or the identified peptides of one protein included all peptides of another protein,  these proteins were combined by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. Before further  statistical analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed. To determine the  relative abundances of proteins within a sample, the iBAQ intensities were compared

### Publication Abstract
ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers control the accessibility of genomic DNA through nucleosome mobilization. However, the dynamics of genome exploration by remodelers, and the role of ATP hydrolysis in this process remain unclear. We used live-cell imaging of <i>Drosophila</i> polytene nuclei to monitor Brahma (BRM) remodeler interactions with its chromosomal targets. In parallel, we measured local chromatin condensation and its effect on BRM association. Surprisingly, only a small portion of BRM is bound to chromatin at any given time. BRM binds decondensed chromatin but is excluded from condensed chromatin, limiting its genomic search space. BRM-chromatin interactions are highly dynamic, whereas histone-exchange is limited and much slower. Intriguingly, loss of ATP hydrolysis enhanced chromatin retention and clustering of BRM, which was associated with reduced histone turnover. Thus, ATP hydrolysis couples nucleosome remodeling to remodeler release, driving a continuous transient probing of the genome.

### Keywords
Swi/snf, Brahma, Live-cell imaging, Ecdysone  receptor, Polytene chromosomes, Atp-dependent chromatin remodeling

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam


