### Accession
PXD008380

### Title
Labelling and identifying cell-specific proteomes in the mouse brain

### Description
Defining the in vivo proteomes of specific cell-types in the central nervous system of mammals, without ex vivo manipulation, is an important and outstanding challange. Here we demonstrate that stochastic orthogonal recoding of translation (SORT) can be used to tag the proteomes of specific cell types in brains of live mice. We tag neuronal proteomes from the striatum and perform enrichment before identifing neuronal proteins by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue was lysed in 8 M Urea and tagged proteins were enriched by the SORT-E pull down procedure. Protein elutes from this procedure were loaded on SDS-PAGE gels and in-gel digested. The samples were run on a Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
The proteomes were quantified by LFQ with MaxQuant 1.5. Standard settings were applied expect for allowing only one peptide for quantification. The FASTA search file was a complete reviewed proteome obtained from uniprot. The FASTA file is availeble in the repository.

### Publication Abstract
We develop an approach to tag proteomes synthesized by specific cell types in dissociated cortex, brain slices, and the brains of live mice. By viral-mediated expression of an orthogonal pyrrolysyl-tRNA synthetase-tRNAXXX pair in a cell type of interest and providing a non-canonical amino acid with a chemical handle, we selectively label neuronal or glial proteomes. The method enables the identification of proteins from spatially and genetically defined regions of the brain.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Neuron, Mouse, Unnatrual amino acid, In-vivo, Labelling

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology,Cambridge,UK.

### Submitter
Toke Hansen

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Chin
MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology,Cambridge,UK.


