### Accession
PXD046276

### Title
A quality control factor for chromatin complexes is synthetic lethal in SMARCB1-mutant cancers

### Description
While oncogenes can potentially be inhibited with small molecules, the loss of tumor suppressors is more common and is problematic because the tumor suppressor proteins are no longer present to be targeted. Notable examples include SMARCB1-mutant cancers, which are highly lethal malignancies driven by the inactivation of a subunit of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes.  To generate mechanistic insight into the consequences of SMARCB1 mutation and to identify vulnerabilities, we contributed 14 SMARCB1-mutant cell lines to a near genome-wide CRISPR screen as part of the Cancer Dependency Map Project1-3.  Here, we report that the little-studied gene DDB1-CUL4 Associated Factor 5 (DCAF5) is required for the survival of SMARCB1-mutant cancers. We show that DCAF5 serves a quality control function for SWI/SNF complexes and promotes degradation of incompletely assembled SWI/SNF complexes in the absence of SMARCB1. Upon depletion of DCAF5, SMARCB1-deficient SWI/SNF complexes re-accumulate, bind to target loci, and restore SWI/SNF-mediated gene expression to levels sufficient to reverse the cancer state, including in vivo. Consequently, cancer results not from the loss of SMARCB1 function per se but rather from DCAF5-mediated degradation of SWI/SNF complexes.  These data indicate that therapeutic targeting of ubiquitin-mediated quality control factors may effectively reverse the malignant state of some cancers driven by disruption of tumor suppressor complexes.

### Sample Protocol
G401 cells or HEK293T cells were resuspended in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 2 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), 1 mM PMSF, 0.1% NP40, and 1 tablet/500 mL protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich). Cells were lysed by sonication [Hong, add details – how, what sonicator] followed by centrifugation at [how many xg?] for 30 minutes. The soluble fraction was then mixed with recombinant purified Strep-DDB1db-DDA1-DCAF5 protein complex and passed magnetic Strep “type 3” XT affinity resin. The magnetic beads were incubated with the cell lysate for recombinant protein with end-over-end rotation at 4ºC for 1 hour and then were subsequently separated from the cell lysate using a magnet and washed four times with cold wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM TCEP). The enriched proteins were eluted from the magnetic beads with two 5 minute incubations with 40 µL of 0.5 M NaOH and immediately adjusted to pH 8.5 using 1 M Tris buffer. The IP eluates were reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 30 minutes at room temperature, and then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Alkylation was quenched by the addition of 10 mM DTT for 15 minutes in the dark. Proteins were isolated using methanol-chloroform precipitation and pellets resuspended in 50 µL 200 mM EPPS pH8. The resuspended protein samples were digested with 2 µg LysC overnight at room temperature followed by the addition of 0.5 µg trypsin for 6 hours at 37 ºC. Protein digests were dried, resuspended in 100 µL 1% fomic acid, and desalted using C18 solid phase extraction plates (SOLA, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (January 2021) with both the forward and reverse sequences as well as known contaminants such as human keratins. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da) and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). Peptides were quantified using the MS1 Intensity, and peptide abundance values were summed to yield the protein abundance values. Resulting data filtered to only include a minimum of two abundance counts in at least two runs. Abundances were normalized and scaled using in-house scripts in the R framework. Missing values in the dataset were imputed by random selection from a gaussian distribution centered around the mean of the existing data and with the mean relative standard deviation of the dataset. Significant changes comparing the relative protein abundance between samples were assessed by moderated t-test as implemented in the limma package within the R framework.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Protein degradation, Chromatin, E3 ligase, Swi/snf, Smarcb1, Dcaf5

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA

### Submitter
Eric Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Fischer
Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA., Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


