### Accession
PXD037723

### Title
Alcohol-sourced acetate impairs T cell function by promoting cortactin acetylation

### Description
Alcohol is among the most widely consumed dietary substances. While excessive alcohol consumption damages the liver, heart and brain, clinical observations also suggest that alcohol has strong immunoregulatory properties. However, little is known about the mechanistic effects of alcohol on the immune system. T cell functions such as migration, immune synapse formation and activation depend on the reorganization of the cytoskeleton. In this study, we show that acetate, the metabolite of alcohol, effectively inhibits the migratory capacity of T cells through increased tissue acetate levels that lead to acetylation of cortactin, a protein that binds filamentous actin and facilitates branching. Current knowledge of cortactin’s role in T cells is limited. Here we demonstrate and confirm that primary mouse and human T cells express cortactin and acetylation of cortactin inhibits actin filament binding leading to reduced filament branching, lamellipodia formation and T cell migration. Mutated acetylation-resistant cortactin rescued the acetate-induced inhibition of T cell migration. Primary mouse cortactin knock-out T cells exhibited severely reduced T cell migration. Furthermore, acetate-induced cytoskeletal changes effectively inhibited activation, proliferation, and immune synapse formation in T cells exposed to acetate at tissue concentrations reached by alcohol consumption. In summary, these data show that acetate, the key metabolite of alcohol, is inhibiting T cell mediated immune responses by modulating the biomechanics of T cells through their cytoskeletal function.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic samples containing about 2 mg of total protein Jurkat T cells were treated either with 5mM acetate in R10 medium or without acetate as the control. Cells were washed three times with ice cold PBS, lysed with sonication, and cleared by Ultracentrifugation. Mass spectrometry (ESI/LC/MS/MS) was performed as described 53. In short, peptides for a topdown proteomic approach were prepared applying filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) 54. After reduction and alkylation on a 10kDa membrane filter a total of 1.5 μg of protein of each sample was digested with 1μg trypsin for 18h at 37ºC. Resulting peptides were extracted by centrifugation and desalted on C18 stage tips. Prior to MS analysis, tryptic peptides were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 15μl of 10% formic acid (FA). MS analysis was carried out as described 53. In short, resulting peptides (approx. 1 μg) were loaded on a nanoflow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) for separation on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; C18 with 2 μm particle size, 50 cm × 75 μm), with a flow rate of 200 nL/min by increasing acetonitrile concentrations over 120 min. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the previously described MS/MS settings 53. ESI spray voltage was 2.0 kV, scan range 300–2000 (m/z), with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 400 k for the first stage of mass analysis (MS1). The most intense ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation with a collision energy of 35%, a maximum injection time of 250 ms, and an AGC target of 100 for the second stage of mass analysis (MS2).

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada; 55) and searches were performed against the Homo sapiens uniprot database downloaded in July 2019. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of lysin were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as static modification, Parent mass tolerance was set to 10.0 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da for tryptic peptides allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Alcohol is among the most widely consumed dietary substances. Excessive alcohol consumption damages the liver, heart, and brain. Alcohol also has strong immunoregulatory properties. Here, we report how alcohol impairs T&#xa0;cell function via acetylation of cortactin, a protein that binds filamentous actin and facilitates branching. Upon alcohol consumption, acetate, the metabolite of alcohol, accumulates in lymphoid organs. T&#xa0;cells exposed to acetate, exhibit increased acetylation of cortactin. Acetylation of cortactin inhibits filamentous actin binding and hence reduces T&#xa0;cell migration, immune synapse formation and activation. While mutated, acetylation-resistant cortactin rescues the acetate-induced inhibition of T&#xa0;cell migration, primary mouse cortactin knockout T&#xa0;cells exhibited impaired migration. Acetate-induced cytoskeletal changes effectively inhibited activation, proliferation, and immune synapse formation in T&#xa0;cells <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> in an influenza infection model in mice. Together these findings reveal cortactin as a possible target for mitigation of T&#xa0;cell driven autoimmune diseases.

### Keywords
Cell trafficking, Cell biomechanics, Cytoskeleton, Alcohol, Acetate, Filamentous actin

### Affiliations
1Department of Internal Medicine 3, Rheumatology and Immunology, Friedrich-Alexander- University Erlangen-Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum Erlangen; Erlangen, Germany
FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg

### Submitter
Joerg Hofmann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Mario Zaiss
1Department of Internal Medicine 3, Rheumatology and Immunology, Friedrich-Alexander- University Erlangen-Nürnberg and Universitätsklinikum Erlangen; Erlangen, Germany


