### Accession
PXD023042

### Title
Role of prorenin receptor (P)RR in endometrial cancer cell growth

### Description
Endometrial cancer is the most commonly diagnosed gynecologic malignancy in women after breast, lung and colorectal cancer. Despite numerous scientific advances, the incidence and mortality rate of endometrial cancer is on the rise. Considerable research effort has therefore been placed on understanding the pathogenesis of this disease to combat this growing issue. There is now emerging evidence to suggest a putative role for dysregulation of the renin angiotensin system (RAS) and in particular the (pro)renin receptor ((P)RR), in the ontogenesis of endometrial cancer. Support for this notion arises from previous literature implicating (P)RR in cancer pathophysiology (e.g., breast cancer and pancreatic carcinoma) by virtue of its role in proliferation, angiogenesis, fibrosis, migration and invasion. In view of these data, we aimed to investigate the functional role of (P)RR in human endometrial cancer progression and development. To this end, we employed an siRNA-mediated knock down approach to abrogate (P)RR expression in the immortalized endometrial epithelial cell lines; Ishikawa, AN3CA and HEC-1A to explore the role of (P)RR in cellular proliferation and cellular viability. To further extend these analyses we also carried out a sophisticated proteomic screen, that investigated the potential pathways via which (P)RR is acting in endometrial cancer physiology. These data confirmed that (P)RR is critical for endometrial cell cancer development, contributing to both its proliferative capacity and in the maintenance cell viability. This is likely mediated through proteins such as MGA, SLC4A7, SLC7A11 or DHRS2, which were reduced following (P)RR knockdown. These putative protein interactions/pathways, which rely on the presence of (P)RR, are likely to contribute to endometrial cancer progression and could therefore, represent several novel therapeutic targets in the treatment of this cancer. Finally we contend that (P)RR, in its soluble form (s(P)RR) in blood, may have substantial potential as a novel biomarker for cancer diagnosis and prognosis prediction going forward.

### Sample Protocol
The Ishikawa endometrial epithelial cancer cell line was acquired from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, VA, USA) and transfected with an ATP6AP2 siRNA (HSS115475; catalog number: 1299001; Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) using Lipofectamine® 2000 Transfection Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) to knock down prorenin ((P)RR) gene and protein expression according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.  Cell pellets were prepared in a solution of ice-cold 0.1M Na2CO3 containing protease and complete EDTA free phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Holding AG, Basel, Switzerland) and sonicated (3 x 10s cycles, 100% output power) to disrupt the cellular membranes and release the  cell contents into the buffer. Next, a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was carried out to determine the protein concentration after which the protein solutions were then diluted 1:1 in a solution containing 12M urea and 4M thiourea. These solutions were then sequentially reduced and alkylated using 10mM dithiothreitol and 20mM iodoacetamide and digested 1:50 with Lys-C/Trypsin Mix (Promega Madison, Wisconsin, USA). Lipids were then precipitated out of the solution using 2% formic acid, and the final peptide populations purified using desalting columns (Oasis, Waters Limited, Mississauga, Ontario).  The purified peptides (100μg) were then labelled using tandem mass tags (TMT; Thermo Fisher Scientific) to facilitate the comparative and quantitative analyses of the biological triplicates (TMT 10 plex labels; negative control rep 1 = 127N, negative control rep 2 = 127C, negative control rep 3 = 128N, (P)RR siRNA rep 1 = 128C, (P)RR siRNA rep 2 = 129N, (P)RR siRNA rep 3 = 129C) Digestion and TMT labeling efficiency was then determined by LC-MS/MS, after which the tags were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and a modified multi-dimensional strategy used to enrich for the proteome The solution was again desalted using modified StageTip microcolumns Finally, the enriched proteome was subjected to offline hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC), and then analyzed using high resolution nano liquid chromatography tandem MS (nLC-MS/MS). Reverse phase nLC-MS/MS was performed on 12 HILIC enriched fractions using a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap MS coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 75 μm x 20 mm trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for pre-concentration and online de-salting. Separation was achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75 μm x 500 mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), employing a linear gradient of acetonitrile (5-40%, 300 nl/min, 115 min). A Q-Exactive Plus MS System was operated in full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode (data-dependent acquisition). The Orbitrap mass analyzer was used at a resolution of 70,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 380–2000, incorporating a target automatic gain control value of 1x106 and maximum fill times of 50ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a normalized collisional energy of 32. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 35,000 using an automatic gain control target of 5x105 and maximum fill times of 120ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of all raw files was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEQUEST HT was used to search against the UniPprot Human database (42,307 sequences, downloaded 12th November 2019). Database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02Da were used, and trypsin was designated as the digestion enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification while dynamic modifications included acetylation (N-Terminus), oxidation (M), phospho (S/T and Y) and TMT6plex (K, N-Terminus). Interrogation of the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate of peptide identification using Percolator on the basis of q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. To filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches, a fixed false discovery rate of 1% was set at the peptide level.  The list of proteins was further refined to only include those with a quantitative value in all three replicates, and a minimum of two unique peptides, resulting in the identification of 5,241 proteins. Using Perseus, version 1.6.10.43, scatter plots of normalized abundances and a heatmap of significant changes (were generated. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA®, Qiagen) was used to analyze the refined proteomic list as previously described. Canonical pathway, disease and function analyses were assessed using the returned P-values; an enrichment measurement based on the number of proteins which map to a particular pathway, function or regulator, and Z-score; a prediction scoring system for activation or inhibition determined based upon statistically significant patterns in the dataset and prior biological knowledge manually curated in the Ingenuity Knowledge Base). In addition, a STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) analysis (https://string-db.org/; accessed 13.07.20) was conducted to examine putative protein-protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
Endometrial cancer is the most diagnosed gynecological malignancy. Despite numerous scientific advances, the incidence and mortality rate of endometrial cancer continues to rise. Emerging evidence suggests a putative role of the (pro)renin receptor ((P)RR), in the ontogenesis of endometrial cancer. The (P)RR is implicated in breast cancer and pancreatic carcinoma pathophysiology by virtue of its role in proliferation, angiogenesis, fibrosis, migration and invasion. Thus, we aimed to investigate the functional role of the (P)RR in human endometrial cancer. We employed an siRNA-mediated knockdown approach to abrogate (P)RR expression in the endometrial epithelial cell lines; Ishikawa, AN3CA and HEC-1-A and examined cellular proliferation and viability. We also carried out a sophisticated proteomic screen to explore potential pathways via which the (P)RR is acting in endometrial cancer physiology. These data confirmed that the (P)RR is critical for endometrial cancer development, contributing to both its proliferative capacity and in the maintenance of cell viability. This is likely mediated through proteins such as MGA, SLC4A7, SLC7A11 or DHRS2, which were reduced following (P)RR knockdown. These putative protein interactions/pathways, which rely on the presence of the (P)RR, are likely to contribute to endometrial cancer progression and could therefore, represent several novel therapeutic targets for endometrial cancer.

### Keywords
Atp6ap2, Quantitative proteomics, An3ca and hec-1a, Cellular proliferation, (p)rr, Tandem mass tags, Endometrial epithelial cancer cell, Ishikawa, Cellular viability

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, Mothers and Babies Research Centre, Hunter Medical Research Institute, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Kirsty Pringle
School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, Mothers and Babies Research Centre, Hunter Medical Research Institute, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia


