### Accession
PXD025862

### Title
Ppr10 and Mpa1 copurify with a subset of mitoribosomal proteins

### Description
This study aims to investigate the additional proteins assocatied with Ppr10 which function to mediate mitochondrial translation initiationin.The study performed tandem affinity purification (TAP) using extracts from strains expressing untagged Ppr10 or TAP-tagged Ppr10 under the control of its own promoter and analysis of Ppr10-copurified proteins by Mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing untagged Ppr10 or TAP-tagged Ppr10 were grown in 1 l YES medium to an OD600 of 2.0 and harvested. Cell pellets were washed and resuspended in 4 ml lysis buffer(6 mM Na2HPO4, 300 mM NaCl, 4 mM NaH2PO4,1%Igepal CA-630, 50 mM NaF, 4g/ml leupeptin, 4g/mlpepstatin A, 0.1 mM Na3VO4and 1 mM PMSF) and broken in a bead beater (FastPrep-24; MP Biomedical). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation for 30 min at 12 000g.Ppr10-TAP was sequentially affinity-purified using rabbit IgG agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) and calmodulin affinityresin (Agilent Technologies) columns according to the reference (Gould, Kathleen L et al，2004).Proteins were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were  separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Gel pieces were cut from SDS PAGE, destained with 30% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 until the gels  were destained. The gels were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The ingel proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 ) for 30 min at 56° C, then alkylated with iodoacetamide (200 mM IAA/100 mM NH4HCO3) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Gel pieces were briefly rinsed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN, respectively. Gel pieces were digested overnight in 12.5 ng/μl trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The peptides were extracted three times with 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. The extracts were pooled and dried completely by a vacuum centrifuge. resulting peptides were analyzed by the MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) against a nonredundant International Protein Index arabidopsis sequence database v3.85 (releasedat September 2011; 39679 sequences) from the European Bioinformatics Institute (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/). For protein identification, the following options were used. Peptide mass tolerance=20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance=0.1 Da, Enzyme=Trypsin, Missed cleavage=2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification：Oxidation(M)

### Publication Abstract
Pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins are a large family of proteins that act primarily at different posttranscriptional steps of organellar gene expression. We have previously found that the Schizosaccharomyces pombe PPR protein mpal10 interacts with mitochondrial translational activator Mpa1, and both are essential for mitochondrial protein synthesis. However, it is unclear how these two proteins function in mitochondrial protein synthesis in S.&#xa0;pombe. In this study, we further investigated the role of Ppr10 and Mpa1 in mitochondrial protein synthesis. Mitochondrial translational initiation requires two initiation factors, Mti2 and Mti3, which bind to the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome (mt-SSU) during the formation of the mitochondrial translational initiation complex. Using sucrose gradient sedimentation analysis, we found that disruption of ppr10, mpa1, or the PPR motifs in Ppr10 impairs the association of Mti2 and Mti3 with the mt-SSU, suggesting that both Ppr10 and Mpa1 may be required for the interaction of Mti2 and Mti3 with the mt-SSU during the assembly of mitochondrial translational initiation complex. Loss of Ppr10 perturbs the association of mitochondrially encoded cytochrome b (cob1) and cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (cox1) mRNAs with assembled mitochondrial ribosomes. Proteomic analysis revealed that a fraction of Ppr10 and Mpa1 copurified with a subset of mitoribosomal proteins. The PPR motifs of Ppr10 are necessary for its interaction with Mpa1 and that disruption of these PPR motifs impairs mitochondrial protein synthesis. Our results suggest that Ppr10 and Mpa1 function together to mediate mitochondrial translational initiation.

### Keywords
Mpa1, Mitochondrial ribosome, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Ppr10

### Affiliations
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Genomics, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, 1 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Genomics, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University

### Submitter
Yirong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Huang
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Genomics, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, 1 Wenyuan Road, Nanjing 210023, China


