### Accession
PXD022325

### Title
Proteomic analysis to examine the functional consequences of intratumor heterogeneity

### Description
To examine the functional consequences of intratumor heterogeneity, subclonal populations (SCPs) were derived from the MDA-MB-468 triple-negative breast cancer cell line. Characterization of these SCPs revealed considerable variation in SCP tumor forming capacity with SCP #32 (SCP32) having an exceptional high tumor forming capacity. To investigate the proteomic differences between tumors of SCP32 and other SCPs, in TMT1, isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling combined with LC-MS/MS (TMT-MS) was performed on tumors of SCP03, SCP29 and SCP32 (n = 3 each) collected at 2 months post transplantation. In TMT2, isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling combined with LC-MS/MS (TMT-MS) was performed on tumors of the parental MDA-MB-468 cell line (n = 2), and both barcoded and non-barcoded versions SCP29 and SCP32 (two each) collected at 2 months post transplantation.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were homogenized in 8 M Urea, 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5, with protease inhibitor, and lysed by passing through a 21-gauge needle with syringe. After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm at 4°C for 10min, supernatant were used for further analysis. BCA assay was performed to determine protein concentration of each sample. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP for 15min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15min, and quenched with 15 mM DTT for 15min. One hundred µg protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and re-suspended in 100 µL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Protein was digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio overnight at room temperature with gentle shaking. Trypsin was used for further digestion for 6 hours at 37°C at the same ratio with Lys-C. After digestion, 30 µL acetonitrile (ACN) was added into each sample to 30% final volume. Two hundred µg TMT reagent (TMT1: 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C. TMT2: 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131N) in 10 µL ACN was added to each sample. After 1 hour of labeling, 2 µL of each sample was combined, desalted, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. Total intensities were determined in each channel to calculate normalization factors. After quenching using 0.3% hydroxylamine, eleven samples were combined in 1:1 ratio of peptides based on normalization factors. The mixture was desalted by solid-phase extraction and fractionated with basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), collected onto a 96 six well plate and combined for 24 fractions in total. Twelve fractions were desalted and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the Human UniProt database (downloaded: 2014-02-04). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described previously, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%, which resulted in a final peptide level FDR of <0.1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than ten TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise of less than 100 or having no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all channels.

### Publication Abstract
Intratumoral heterogeneity has been described for various tumor types and models of human cancer, and can have profound effects on tumor progression and drug resistance. This study describes an in-depth analysis of molecular and functional heterogeneity among subclonal populations (SCPs) derived from a single triple-negative breast cancer cell line, including copy number analysis, whole-exome and RNA sequencing, proteome analysis, and barcode analysis of clonal dynamics, as well as functional assays. The SCPs were found to have multiple unique genetic alterations and displayed significant variation in anchorage independent growth and tumor forming ability. Analyses of clonal dynamics in SCP mixtures using DNA barcode technology revealed selection for distinct clonal populations in different in vitro and in vivo environmental contexts, demonstrating that in vitro propagation of cancer cell lines using different culture conditions can contribute to the establishment of unique strains. These analyses also revealed strong enrichment of a single SCP during the development of xenograft tumors in immune-compromised mice. This SCP displayed attenuated interferon signaling in vivo and reduced sensitivity to the antiproliferative effects of type I interferons. Reduction in interferon signaling was found to provide a selective advantage within the xenograft microenvironment specifically. In concordance with the previously described role of interferon signaling as tumor suppressor, these findings suggest that similar selective pressures may be operative in human cancer and patient-derived xenograft models.

### Keywords
Intratumor heterogeneityr, Subclonal population (scps), Mda-mb-468, Human breast cancer cell line, Proteomics, Tmt, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


