### Accession
PXD018015

### Title
A unique cell wall synthetic response evoked by glucosamine determines pathogenicity-associated fungal cellular differentiation

### Description
The yeast-to-hypha transition is tightly associated with pathogenicity in many human pathogenic fungi, such as the model fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans, which is responsible for approximately 180,000 deaths annually. In this pathogen, the yeast-to-hypha transition can be initiated by distinct stimuli: mating stimulation or glucosamine (GlcN), the monomer of cell wall chitosan. However, it remains poorly understood how the signal specificity for Cryptococcus morphological transition by disparate stimuli is ensured. Here, by integrating temporal expression signature analysis and phenome-based clustering evaluation, we demonstrate that GlcN specifically triggers a unique cellular response, which acts as a critical determinant underlying the activation of GlcN-induced filamentation (GIF). This cellular response is defined by an unusually hyperactive cell wall synthesis that is highly ATP-consuming. A novel cell surface protein Gis1 was identified as the indicator molecule for the GlcN-induced cell wall response. The Mpk1-directed cell wall pathway critically bridges global cell wall gene induction and intracellular ATP supply, ensuring the Gis1-dependent cell wall response and the stimulus specificity of GIF. We further reveal that the ability of Mpk1 to coordinate the cell wall response and GIF activation is conserved in different Cryptococcus pathogens. Phosphoproteomics-based profiling together with genetic and phenotypic analysis revealed that the Mpk1 kinase mediates the regulatory specificity of GIF through a coordinated downstream regulatory network centered on Skn7 and Crz1. Overall, our findings discover an unprecedented and conserved cell wall biosynthesis-dependent fungal differentiation commitment mechanism, which enables the signal specificity of pathogenicity-related dimorphism induced by GlcN in Cryptococcus pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomics sample processing, TMT labeling, phosphopeptide enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis are fully detailed as follows: (i) Protein extraction. Cells of the wild-type and mpk1Δ mutant strains were collected after incubation on YPGlcN medium for 6 hrs at 30°C. Cell pellets were washed three times with ice-cold water and ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was collected and added to 4 mL of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), followed by sonication on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Finally, the supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. (ii) Trypsin digestion. Protein in the supernatant was reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56℃ for 30 min and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the darkness for 15 min. The protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to a urea concentration less than 2 M and then digested overnight with a 1:50 trypsin-to-total protein mass ratio. (iii) TMT labeling. The resulting peptides were desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and dried by vacuum. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed using a TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). (iv) HPLC fractionation. The TMT-labeled sample mixture was solubilized and fractionated into fractions using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Different HPLC fractions were separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH = 9.0) and vacuum-dried. (v) Affinity enrichment. Peptide mixtures were incubated with IMAC microsphere suspensions with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). Phosphopeptides enriched by IMAC microspheres were collected by centrifugation and the supernatant was removed. The IMAC microspheres were sequentially washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres were then collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. (vi) LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm ID). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 4% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) in 38 min and 22% to 32% in 14 min, climbing to 80% in 4 min and then holding at 80% for 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were then subjected to the NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online with the UPLC system. The electrospray voltage was set at 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was set between 350 and 1600 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1E5. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant v.1.5.2.8 against UniProt Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/?query=taxonomy:178876) database (n = 7430 entries). Trypsin/P was designated as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance of the precursor ion was set to 20 ppm in the first search, 5 ppm in the main search, and 0.02 Da for the fragment ion. The carbamoylmethyl group on Cys was designated as a fixed modification, and the phosphorylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr and oxidation on Met were designated as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for the modified peptides was set to > 40. Quantitative values for each condition were obtained from three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucosamine, Cryptococcus neoformans, Yeast-to-hypha transition, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Hao Ding

### Lab Head
Dr Linqi Wang
State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


