### Accession
PXD009704

### Title
IIS-mediated modulation of DIGs proteome in C. elegans.

### Description
Reducing insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) extends lifespan, promotes protein homeostasis (proteostasis) and elevates stress resistance of worms, flies and mammals. How these functions are orchestrated across the organism is only partially understood. One prominent group of IIS-regulated encode for lipid metabolizing enzymes. Thus, we asked whether IIS reduction modulates the protein content and functionality of membranal lipid assemblies. We discovered that in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the IIS positively regulates the expression of caveolin-1 (cav-1), a gene which is primarily expressed in neurons of the adult worm and underlies the formation of caveolae, a subtype of lipid microdomains that serve as platforms for signaling complexes. Accordingly, IIS reduction lowers cav-1 expression and lessens the quantity of neuronal caveolae. Reduced cav-1 expression extends lifespan and mitigates toxic protein aggregation by modulating the expression of aging-regulating and signaling-promoting genes. Our findings define caveolae as aging-governing signaling centers and underscore the potential for cav-1 as a novel therapeutic target for the promotion of healthy aging.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred thousand CF512 worms were treated with daf-2 RNAi bacteria or left untreated and were washed with 1xPBS. The worms were then washed with 1% Triton X-114 in PBS containing Protease Inhibitor (Millipore, Billerica MA; #539134) and homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer. The worm homogenates were incubated on ice for 1 hour and then were spun for 3 min at 850g (3000rpm in a desktop Qiagen centrifuge) to sediment debris. The post debris supernatants were collected, and diluted with 2.4M sucrose to a final sucrose concentration of 1.2 M. This was placed in the bottom of a centrifuge tube and overlaid carefully with 1 ml of 1.1M sucrose followed by 0.25 ml of 0.2M sucrose. The tubes were centrifuged for 18 hours at 166,180g (50,000 RPM) in a TLS-55 Beckman rotor. Ten fractions were collected from Top to bottom. Two independent experiments were normalized according to protein concentration of total sample before placing at the bottom of the sucrose gradient. The top two fractions (1+2) from the experiments were combined. These fractions were frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized for ~20 hours. They were then separated on SDS-PAGE to get rid of lipids and detergents. The gel was stained using Colloidal Blue Stain (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA; # LC6025). Each lane was cut into four slices. The samples were digested by trypsin, analyzed by LC-MS/MS on LTQ-OrbitrapXL (Thermo) and identified by MaxQuant vs the C. elegans section of the NCBI-NR database and quantified by the same software using label free quantification.

### Data Protocol
The data of all four gel slices of the same lane were combined. Criteria for a protein to be classified as differently expressed: 1. When a protein is identified in both samples, there needs to be at least 4.5 times difference between the intensities of the peptides for the difference to be considered as significant. 2. If a protein was identified only in one sample, the identification of the protein has to be with at least four peptides and with an intensity of at least 1E+06. The database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID) analysis was used for functional clustering and annotation of the Mass Spec list (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/). Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources (Huang DW et al., Nature Protoc. 2009; 4(1):44-57). Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. (Huang DW et al., Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37 (1):1-13). This suit consists of an integrated biological knowledgebase and analytic tools aimed at systematically extracting biological meaning from large gene/protein lists. The lists were sorted according to Cellular Compartments or Biological Processes.

### Publication Abstract
Reducing insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) extends lifespan, promotes protein homeostasis (proteostasis), and elevates stress resistance of worms, flies, and mammals. How these functions are orchestrated across the organism is only partially understood. Here, we report that in the nematode <i>Caenorhabditis elegans,</i> the IIS positively regulates the expression of <i>caveolin-1</i> (<i>cav-1</i>), a gene which is primarily expressed in neurons of the adult worm and underlies the formation of caveolae, a subtype of lipid microdomains that serve as platforms for signaling complexes. Accordingly, IIS reduction lowers <i>cav-1</i> expression and lessens the quantity of neuronal caveolae. Reduced <i>cav-1</i> expression extends lifespan and mitigates toxic protein aggregation by modulating the expression of aging-regulating and signaling-promoting genes. Our findings define caveolae as aging-governing signaling centers and underscore the potential for <i>cav-1</i> as a novel therapeutic target for the promotion of healthy aging.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Insulin/igf signaling, Aging, Detergent resistant granules.

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada (IMRIC). School of Medicine. The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem.


### Submitter
Ehud Cohen

### Lab Head
Dr Ehud Cohen
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Institute for Medical Research Israel-Canada (IMRIC). School of Medicine. The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel.


