### Accession
PXD002648

### Title
De-novo synthesized targets of NMD and ER stress

### Description
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) has originally been described as a surveillance mechanism to inhibit the expression of mRNAs with truncated open reading frames (ORFs) and to contribute to the fidelity of gene expression. It is now recognized that NMD also controls the expression of physiological genes with “intact” mRNA. Stress can decrease NMD efficiency and thus increase the mRNA levels of physiological NMD targets. As stress can also inhibit translation, the net outcome for shaping the proteome is difficult to predict. We have thus analyzed de-novo protein synthesis in response to NMD inhibition or the induction of mild endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by treatment of cells with the reducing agent dithiotreitol (DTT). We combined pulsed azidohomoalanine (AHA) and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Labeled proteins were purified by click chemistry-based covalent coupling to agarose beads, trypsinized, fractionated, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. We find that mild ER stress upregulates the de-novo synthesis of components of all three branches of the unfolded protein response (PERK, IRE1a and ATF6) without increasing eIF2a phosphorylation or impairing of protein translation. In contrast, inhibition of NMD induces de-novo protein synthesis of downstream targets of the PERK and IRE1a pathways but not the ATF6 pathway. These data thus support a model that implicates a positive feedback loop of ER stress inhibiting NMD efficiency which further promotes the ER stress response in a branch-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Two days after siRNA transfection cells were washed twice with PBS and pre-incubated in DMEM free of methionine, arginine and lysine, and containing 10% dialyzed FCS (Sigma) and 1% L-glutamine for 30 min to deplete them of methionine, arginine and lysine. Then medium was replaced by SILAC medium containing 0.1 mM L-AHA (AnaSpec, Inc) and either 84 μg/ml [13C6,15N4] L-arginine and 146 μg/ml [13C6,15N2]L-lysine (heavy) or 84 μg/ml [13C6]L-arginine and 146 μg/ml [4,4,5,5-D4]L-lysine (intermediate) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc), and 1.5 mM DTT or H2O. Labels were reversed in biological duplicates. After 6 hours cells were washed in PBS, put on ice and scraped into ice-cold PBS. Newly synthesized proteins were enriched using the Click-iT Protein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen C10416) applying the vendor's protocol with slight modifications as described before (24). Briefly, after washing 100 µl agarose resin slurry with 900 μl water, the protein extract was diluted in 250 μl urea buffer, and catalyst solution were incubated for 16–20 hours at room temperature. The resin was washed with 900 μl water, 0.5 mL SDS buffer and 0.5 μl 1M DTT (Bio-Rad) at 70 °C for 15 min. After removing the supernatant 3.7 mg iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad) was added and incubated for 30 min. Then the resin was washed with 20 ml of SDS buffer, 20 mL of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris, pH 8, 20 ml of 20% isopropanol and 20 ml of 20% acetonitrile, followed by proteolysis by 0.5 μg trypsin (Promega) in digestion buffer (100 mM Tris, pH 8, 2 mM CaCl2 and 10% acetonitrile). Peptide fractionation was performed via High-pH reversed phase chromatography on an Agilent 1260 HPLC system using an XBridge BEH C18 column (1 x 100 mm, 3.5 μm, 130 Å, Waters). Elution was performed at a flow rate of 0.1ml/min using a gradient of mobile phase A (20mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and B (acetonitrile), from 1% to 37.5% over 61 min. Fractions were collected every 2 minutes across the entire gradient length and concatenated into 10 final samples as discussed previously (25). Fractions were dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to MS analysis. Peptides were separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 200 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) OrbitrapVelos or OrbitrapVelos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Proxeon nanospray source. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at 15 μl/min and were eluted at a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 25% in 110 min, followed by an increase to 40% in 4 min, and an increase to 85% in 1 min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer by a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD × 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective). Full scan mass spectrometry spectra with mass range 300–1,700 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) were acquired in profile mode in the orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The filling time was set at maximum of 500 ms with a limitation of 10 million ions. The most intense ions (up to 15) were selected for fragmentation in the ion trap. A normalized collision energy of 40% was used, and the fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 3 × 104 ions or after a filling time of 100 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). Only multiply charged (2+ or 3+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries, with a maximum retention period of 30 s and a relative mass window of 10 p.p.m. Lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (1), and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine (2) against human proteins in UniProt (69,906 entries, downloaded March, 01, 2013, (3). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as the fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and replacement of methionine by AHA were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. The initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 p.p.m. for peptide masses and then was set to 6 p.p.m. in the main search and to 0.5 Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide and protein identification were set to 0.01. At least one unique peptide was required for protein identification. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable 'protein group' if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the 'requantify' and 'match between runs' functions were enabled. Average protein ratios were reported if they could be quantified in both replicates each on the basis of at least two ratio counts.  1. Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nature biotechnology 26, 1367-1372 2. Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., Scheltema, R. A., Olsen, J. V., and Mann, M. (2011) Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Journal of proteome research 10, 1794-1805 3. Jain, E., Bairoch, A., Duvaud, S., Phan, I., Redaschi, N., Suzek, B. E., Martin, M. J., McGarvey, P., and Gasteiger, E. (2009) Infrastructure for the life sciences: design and implementation of the UniProt website. BMC bioinformatics 10, 136

### Publication Abstract
Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) has originally been described as a surveillance mechanism to inhibit the expression of mRNAs with truncated open reading frames (ORFs) and to contribute to the fidelity of gene expression. It is now recognized that NMD also controls the expression of physiological genes with "intact" mRNA. Stress can decrease NMD efficiency and thus increase the mRNA levels of physiological NMD targets. As stress can also inhibit translation, the net outcome for shaping the proteome is difficult to predict. We have thus analyzed de novo protein synthesis in response to NMD inhibition or the induction of mild endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress by treatment of cells with the reducing agent dithiotreitol (DTT). For this purpose, we combined pulsed azidohomoalanine (AHA) and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Labeled proteins were purified by click chemistry-based covalent coupling to agarose beads, trypsinized, fractionated, and analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS). We find that mild ER stress up-regulates the de novo synthesis of components of all three branches of the unfolded protein response (PERK, IRE1 and ATF6) without increasing eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation or impairing of protein translation. In contrast, inhibition of NMD induces de novo protein synthesis of downstream targets of the PERK and IRE1 pathways, whereas we could not detect regulation of ATF6-responsive genes. These data thus support a model that implicates a positive feedback loop of ER stress inhibiting NMD efficiency which further promotes the ER stress response in a branch-specific manner.

### Keywords
Nmd, Dtt, Upr, Pulsed silac, Aha, Click chemistry, Upf1

### Affiliations
Heidelberg University
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, Immunology and Pulmonology University Medical Center for Children and Adolescents Im Neuenheimer Feld 430 D-69120 Heidelberg Germany ( lab head )

### Submitter
Jana Sieber

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas E. Kulozik
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, Immunology and Pulmonology University Medical Center for Children and Adolescents Im Neuenheimer Feld 430 D-69120 Heidelberg Germany ( lab head )


