### Accession
PXD013215

### Title
APEX2-mediated proximity labeling of mitochondrial matrix and chromatin in budding yeast

### Description
Enzyme-catalyzed proximity labeling (PL) with biotin is a novel approach to map organelle compartmentalization and protein interaction networks in living cells. Here, we present a new method based on semi-permeabilized yeast cells and the enzyme APEX2, an engineered ascorbate peroxidase. Combined with stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), we demonstrate proteomic mapping of a membrane-enclosed and a semi-open compartment, the mitochondrial matrix and the nucleus. APEX2 PL revealed nuclear proteins that were previously not identified by conventional techniques. One of these, the Yer156C protein, is highly conserved but of unknown function. In follow-up experiments using quantitative PL with Yer156C-APEX2 we discovered an array of Yer156C interactors. Thus, our approach establishes APEX2 PL as an effective and versatile tool that complements the powerful methods palette for the model system yeast.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC APEX2 experiments the mitochondrial MM-APEX2, the nuclear APEX2-Htb1, and Yer156C-APEX2 samples were SILAC labeled with Lys8, APEX2 samples were SILAC labeled with Lys4, and samples that were later not exposed to H2O2 were labeled with Lys0. APEX2-mediated PL was performed with biotin-phenol and H2O2 using cells labeled with Lys8 and Lys4. Corresponding protein extracts were mixed and affinity purified with streptavidin beads.  For purification SDS PAGE of proteins was done followed by in-gel digestion with LysC (SILAC experiments) or trypsin (qualitative analysis). Extracted and desalted peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer using an 127 minute segmented gradient of 5–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The 15 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 60 s. The target values were 5000 charges for MS/MS fragmentation and 106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Saccharomyces cerevisiae database obtained from Uniprot consisting of 6,721 protein entries and 284 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for LysC and trypsin, respectively. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and to 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level (CID fragmentation). Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. The iBAQ algorithm was enabled. For SILAC experiments, the amino acids Lys0, Lys4 and Lys8 were defined as light, medium and heavy labels, respectively. For protein group quantitation a minimum of two quantified peptides were required.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Budding yeast yer156c interactome, Chromatin, Mitochondrial matrix

### Affiliations
Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry Universität Tübingen Hoppe-Seyler-Straße 4 72076 Tübingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Birgit Singer-Krüger
Interfaculty Institute of Biochemistry Universität Tübingen Hoppe-Seyler-Straße 4 72076 Tübingen Germany


