### Accession
PXD033369

### Title
An integral atlas of hormone peptides of human EECs and their dedicated proteases

### Description
Enteroendocrine cells (EECs) secrete hormones in response to ingested nutrients to control physiological processes such as appetite and insulin release. EEC hormones are synthesized as large pre-proteins that undergo proteolytic processing through peptidases to generate bioactive peptides. Due to the rarity of EECs and lack of cell models, prohormone processing remains challenging to assess. Here, we generated a panel of human organoid models in which EECs can efficiently be induced, combined with CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genetic inactivation or alteration of peptidases. We employed mass spectrometry based analysis to monitor peptide processing in knock-outs and wild type organoids for various hormone-processing enzymes (including PCSK1, PCSK2, PCSK1N, PCSK1mut_S375G, PCSK2mut_R430W, DPP4, CPB1 and CPE). We identify PCSK2-dependent Glucagon production in EECs, which is stimulated by activation of BMP signaling. We further map the substrates of other major EECs endo- and exopeptidases.

### Sample Protocol
For intracellular peptide hormone extraction,  knock-out and wildtype organoid clones lysates were slowly thawed at 4°C and spun down for 10 min at 20,000 x g at 4°C and the supernatants, containing protein and peptides, were kept. Peptides were extracted by the methanol/chloroform method and the water-soluble fraction, containing the peptide hormones, was dried down in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptide samples were then resuspended in a reduction buffer (4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and gently mixed for 1h at room temperature (RT). Following reduction, samples were alkylated in 16 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT and reactions were quenched by addition of 4 mM DTT. Peptide samples were acidified to 5 % formic acid (FA) and loaded into an Oasis HLB μElution plate (Waters) by gently applying positive pressure. Wells were washed with 200 μL 0.1% FA in water followed by a low organic wash with 5% methanol in 1% FA in water. Peptides were eluted twice by addition of 30 μL of 60% methanol in 10% FA in water. Samples were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and kept at -20°C until LC-MS/MS injection. For extracellular peptide hormone extraction,  1 mL of knock-out and wildtype organoid clones supernatants (collected in PBS) were slowly thawed at 4°C, acidified to 5 % FA  and loaded into an Oasis HLB μElution plate (Waters) to be processed as previously described. Extracted peptides were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge, and resuspended in a reduction buffer (4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and gently mixed for 1h at room temperature (RT). Following reduction, samples were alkylated in 16 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature and reactions were quenched by addition of 4 mM DTT. Samples were acidified to 5% FA and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS injection. For peptidomic LC-MS/MS analysis, spectral data were acquired with an Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3µM, 2cm x 100µM) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell, EC-C18, 2.7µM, 50cm x 75µM). Solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA. Trapping of peptides was performed for 2 min in 9% B followed by peptide separation in the analytical column using a gradient of 13–44% B in 95 min. After peptide separation, gradients were followed by a steep increase to 99% B in 3 min, a 5 min wash in 99% B and a 10 min re-equilibration at 9% B. Flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. Peptides were ionized in a nESI source at 2 kV and focused at 70 % amplitude of the RF lens, to improve the ionization of bigger species. Full scan MS1 spectra from 375 - 1600 m/z were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 with the AGC target set to 3×106 and under automated calculation of maximum injection time. Cycle time for MS2 fragmentation scans was set to 1 second. Only peptides with charged states 2-10 were fragmented, and dynamic exclusion was set to a duration of 16 s. Fragmentation was done using stepped HCD normalized collision energies of 24 and 28%. Fragment ions were accumulated until a target value of 1x105 ions was reached under a maximum injection time of 300 ms, with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z before injection in the Orbitrap for MS2 analysis at a resolution of 15,000. To validate the presence of glucagon, we set up a parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assay using the same LC-MS setup, solvents and trapping of the peptides on the trap column as described above.  Separation on the analytical column was performed in 65 min using a gradient of 20-50% B. Wash and equilibration was done as previously described. The MS was operated in multiplexed mode, obtaining a MS1 scan followed by unscheduled PRM. RF lens was set to 70%, MS1 scans were acquired from 375 – 1600 m/z at a resolution of 120,000, with the normalized AGC target set to 100% and injection time set to 300ms. PRM scans were acquired at 240,000 resolution, with a quadrupole isolation width of 0.4 m/z, the normalized AGC target set to 3000 % and injection time set to 512 ms. A stepped HCD approach was utilized with normalized collision energies set to 27, 30, and 33 %.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched in MSFragger (version 3.3)  through Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.5). Spectra were extracted and precursors with a mass between 350 and 12,000 Da were kept, and the signal-to-noise ratio was set to 1.5. To minimize search space, data were searched against a tailored database containing 369 reviewed Homo sapiens proteins (downloaded from Uniprot on october 2021) that contained any peptide annotation or a chain length of up to 60 amino acids, and appended with the non-hormone identified proteins retrieved from a search using SwissProt human database (840 proteins). For spectral searches, precursor mass tolerances were set to ± 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerances to  ± 0.02 Da. Digestion enzyme was set to unspecific, with peptides ranging from 7 to 65 amino acids in length, a maximum charge state for theoretical fragments to match of 4, and automatic clipping of N-terminal methionine. Cys Carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, while Met oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and C-terminal amidation were set as variable modifications, with a maximum co-occurrence of 3 variable modifications per peptide. False discovery rate (FDR) calculations were done using Philosopher (Peptide Prophet, version 4.0) and only high-confidence peptides (1 % FDR) were kept. Minora Feautre Detector and Feature Mapper nodes were used for untargeted MS1-based peptide quantification, with default parameters except for the maximum retention time shift and the mass tolerance, which were set to 5 min and 5 ppm respectively in the chromatographic alignment window. Peptidomics data analysis: For PCSK-like hormone processing analysis, protein or peptide abundances were log2 transformed, z-scaled and plotted across replicates. For glucagon, bioactive regions annotated in Uniprot were extracted from our data and plotted separately. Amidated versions of GRPP and oxyntomodulin, where the amidation site was not followed by a glycine residue,  were not included in the plots. Glucagon  peptide validation was performed by manual inspection of the MS1 and MS2 traces on each file using Skyline Daily (21.2.1.377). Isotopic distributions that highly resembled the theoretical isotope distribution of the ion (idotp ≥ 0.88), with a similar peak shape, low mass error and eluting at expected retention time range (min 89 to 91) were kept. Total abundances were calculated by summation of intensities for each isotope (up to M+4) in each sample. PRM data was analyzed using Byonic & Skyline Daily. Byonic searches were set to ± 10 ppm precursor tolerance, ± 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance, and limited to peptides with 0 miscleavages. A max of 2 variable modifications was set including Met oxidation and C-terminal amidation, and using a fixed Cys carbamidomethylation modification. Spectra were searched against a database of 8 glucagon peptides and decoy peptides. Only high confidence peptides were considered (1% FDR). The identified glucagon peak was further visually assessed using Skyline. Important aspects were similar peak shape of all transitions, low measured MS1 and MS2 mass errors and MS1 isotope distribution.  For CPB1, CPE and DPP4 specificity analysis, peptides found in all injection replicates of at least one organoid clone were included for statistical analysis. Peptide abundances were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed according to the normal distribution of each sample, and Student’s T-test was used to determine which peptides were significantly changing in response to enzyme knock-outs when compared to wildtypes. Peptides were considered significantly changing if corrected p-values (q-value, calculated using the permutation method with 250 iterations) were inferior to 0.05. Peptide abundances were scaled (Z-score) and hierarchically clustered to reveal the subset of peptides accumulating in response to enzyme knock-out. The C-terminal or N-terminal cleavage specificities were plotted using the R package ‘ggseqlogo’.

### Publication Abstract
Enteroendocrine cells (EECs) secrete hormones in response to ingested nutrients to control physiological processes such as appetite and insulin release. EEC hormones are synthesized as large proproteins that undergo proteolytic processing to generate bioactive peptides. Mutations in EEC-enriched proteases are associated with endocrinopathies. Due to the relative rarity of EECs and a paucity of in&#xa0;vitro models, intestinal prohormone processing remains challenging to assess. Here, human gut organoids in which EECs can efficiently be induced are subjected to CRISPR-Cas9-mediated modification of EEC-expressed endopeptidase and exopeptidase genes. We employ mass spectrometry-based analyses to monitor peptide processing and identify glucagon production in intestinal EECs, stimulated upon bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling. We map the substrates and products of major EECs endo- and exopeptidases. Our studies provide a comprehensive description of peptide hormones produced by human EECs and define the roles of specific proteases in their generation.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Peptidomics, Hormones, Enteroendocrine cells, Proteolytic processing

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and  Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht,  The Netherlands Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),  Singapore, Singapore.  Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Julia Bauzá Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and  Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht,  The Netherlands Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),  Singapore, Singapore.  Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543, Singapore.


