### Accession
PXD043536

### Title
Proteomic mapping of the interactome of KRAS mutants identifies new features of RAS signalling networks and the mechanism of action of Sotorasib.

### Description
RAS proteins are key regulators of cell signalling and are master regulators of different cell functions including cell proliferation, differentiation and cell death. Point mutations in the genes of this family are common, particularly in the KRAS. These mutations were thought to cause the constative activation of KRAS, but recent findings showed that some of these mutants can still cycle between active and inactive states. This observation together with the development of covalent KRASG12C inhibitors has led to the arrival to the clinic of KRAS inhibitors. However, most patients develop resistance to these targeted therapies, and we still lack effective treatments for other KRAS mutants. In order to accelerate the development of RAS targeting therapies we need to complete our characterisation of the molecular mechanisms that govern KRAS signalling networks and in particular determine if there are differences among the different KRAS mutants. Here we have used affinity purification mass-spectrometry proteomics to characterise the interactome of KRAS wild type and three KRAS mutants. Bioinformatic analysis associated with experimental validation allow us to map the signalling network mediated by the different KRAS proteins. Using this approach, we have also characterised the effect that clinically approved KRASG12 inhibitor sotorasib has in the interactome of these mutants and KRAS wild type. Our work indicates that this drug regulates the interactome and identifies new crosstalks between KRAS and its effector pathways including the AKT and JAK-STAT signalling modules.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation (IP) and in beads tryptic digestion. Cells were transfected with pCEFL-FLAG-KRAS-WT, -G13D, -G12V, -G12C, -G12D. Cells were lysed in 25mM HEPES (pH7.5), 150mM NaCl, 10mM MgCl2, 1mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Cellular debris in lysates was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4°C for 10 minutes. Baits were immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG M2 conjugated agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich; A2220). After 2h incubation at 4°C, immunoprecipitates were washed twice with lysis buffer containing 1% NP-40 and separated by SDS-PAGE. Blots were quantified using ImageJ. For immunoprecipitation of endogenous RADIL the lysates were incubated with 10µL Protein-G Sepharose beads (Sigma-Aldrich; P3296) with 2.6µg/mL RADIL antibody at 4°C for 2h.  Samples used in the MS analyses were immunoprecipitated with anti-FLAG M2 conjugated agarose beads, performed as above but after 2h incubation at 4°C as described before [21]. Briefly, immunoprecipitates were washed three times with lysis buffer containing 1% NP-40 (Calbiochem) and twice with lysis buffer that does not contain NP-40. Proteins were eluted from beads with 2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5) containing 5µg/mL modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) for 30min. Proteins were digested in 2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5), and 1mM DTT containing 5µg/mL modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature. Peptides were alkylated using iodoacetamide (5mg/mL) and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. C18 Stage Tips were used to desalt samples, as described by [22] and analysed by mass spectrometry. LCMSMS Method (Bruker timsTof Pro/Evosep One/Bruker nanoElute) Samples were run on a Bruker timsTof Pro mass spectrometer connected to an Evosep One liquid chromatography system or a Bruker nanoElute nanoflow chromatography system. In the case of The Evosep platform tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and each sample was loaded on to an Evosep tip. The Evosep tips were placed in position on the Evosep One, in a 96-tip box. The autosampler is configured to pick up each tip, elute and separate the peptides using a set chromatography method (30 samples a day)[23] For the Bruker nanoElute nano-lc chromatography system.  Each sample was loaded onto Acclaim PepMap C18 trap cartridge (0.3 mm inside diameter, 5 mm length) (Thermo Scientific) and then  separated on an Aurora UHPLC column (25cm x 75μm ID, C18, 1.6μm) (Ionopticks) with an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 30 minutes at a flow rate of 250nl/min [24]. The chromatography buffers used for both systems were Buffer A: 99.9% water, 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. All solvents used were LCMS grade. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of between 1600-1800 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180°C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 5 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.03s [25].

### Data Protocol
Analysis of AP-MS data The resulting mass spectra were analysed with MaxQuant [26] software, containing a built-in Andromeda search engine to identify the proteins from the UniProt HUMAN database [27] (release 2014_02). Protein interaction was quantified by LFQ Intensity. This consisted of 3 biological replicates and 2 technical replicates with 3 baits and empty vector controls in 2 cell lines. Sotorasib experiment The raw data was searched against the Homo sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) using the search engine Maxquant (release 2.0.1.0) using specific parameters for trapped ion mobility spectra data dependent acquisition (TIMS DDA). Each peptide used for protein identification met specific Maxquant parameters, i.e., only peptide scores that corresponded to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 were accepted from the Maxquant database search. The normalised protein intensity of each identified protein was used for label free quantitation (LFQ ) [28]. Contaminants and reverse peptides were removed. The statistical analysis was performed as previously reported  [22,29]. In essence, the average protein interaction for each bait was measured. As the first step in the analysis, significant proteins were identified in comparison to the empty vector control.  The ratio of protein abundance and Student’s t-test were used to select proteins significantly interacting with the bait proteins compared to the empty vector control (ratio>2, p-value<0.01). Specific proteins were pooled. For the experiment performed with HKe-3 cells described in Figure 2 bait protein levels (KRAS) were assessed and normalised to remove potential protein interaction bias for one bait over the others. The ratio between conditions were calculated pairwise. To select proteins significantly interacting compared to other baits, the ratio of each protein, combined with Student’s t-test were used to identify proteins significantly interacting (ratio>2 OR <0.5, p-value<0.01).

### Publication Abstract
RAS proteins are key regulators of cell signalling and control different cell functions including cell proliferation, differentiation, and cell death. Point mutations in the genes of this family are common, particularly in <i>KRAS</i>. These mutations were thought to cause the constitutive activation of KRAS, but recent findings showed that some mutants can cycle between active and inactive states. This observation, together with the development of covalent KRASG12C inhibitors, has led to the arrival of KRAS inhibitors in the clinic. However, most patients develop resistance to these targeted therapies, and we lack effective treatments for other KRAS mutants. To accelerate the development of RAS targeting therapies, we need to fully characterise the molecular mechanisms governing KRAS signalling networks and determine what differentiates the signalling downstream of the KRAS mutants. Here we have used affinity purification mass-spectrometry proteomics to characterise the interactome of KRAS wild-type and three KRAS mutants. Bioinformatic analysis associated with experimental validation allows us to map the signalling network mediated by the different KRAS proteins. Using this approach, we characterised how the interactome of KRAS wild-type and mutants is regulated by the clinically approved KRASG12C inhibitor Sotorasib. In addition, we identified novel crosstalks between KRAS and its effector pathways including the AKT and JAK-STAT signalling modules.

### Keywords
Ras, Apms, Signalling

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland University College Dublin.
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr David Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland University College Dublin.


