### Accession
PXD039446

### Title
CedA: A General Transcription Factor from E. coli with a Distinct Mechanism of Action

### Description
Gene expression in E. coli is controlled by well-established mechanisms that activate or repress transcription. Here, we identify CedA as an unconventional transcription factor specifically associated with the RNA polymerase (RNAP) σ70 holoenzyme. Structural and biochemical analysis of CedA bound to RNAP reveal that it bridges distant domains of β and σ70 subunits to stabilize an open-promoter complex. Remarkably, CedA does so without contacting DNA. We further show that cedA is strongly induced in response to amino acid starvation, oxidative stress, and aminoglycosides. CedA provides a basal level of tolerance to these clinically relevant antibiotics, as well as to rifampicin and peroxide. Finally, we show that CedA modulates transcription of hundreds of bacterial genes, which explains its pleotropic effect on cell physiology and pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
To capture FLAG-tagged RNAP or CedA from bacterial lysates, Pierce Anti-DYKDDDDK Magnetic Agarose (Thermo) pre-equilibrated in the lysis buffer was added at 5 μl of packed beads per sample followed by 2-hour incubation at 4 °C on a rotary mixer. Beads were washed four times with a 1 ml ice-cold wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton X-100) and kept on ice before on-beads digestion with trypsin for LC-MS analysis. Before digestion, beads were washed twice with 1 ml ice-cold NH4HCO3 to exchange buffer and remove detergent. Washed beads were resuspended in 50 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 20 ng/μl SOLu trypsin (Sigma) and incubated at 25 °C with vigorous shaking overnight. Beads were then pelleted and supernatants were transferred to the new tubes. Peptides from supernatants were desalted on Pierce C18 spin tips (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried under vacuum. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, concentration was measured at 205 nm on Nanodrop One (Thermo). 0.5–2 μg of peptides were analyzed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano UHPLC (Thermo). After capturing on 2-cm long (0.2 mm I.D., 5 μm particle size) Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (Thermo) and washed with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) over 5 min at 5 μl/min, peptides were resolved on a 50-cm long (75 μm ID., 2 μm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo) over 80-min long gradient 2 to 32% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at flow rate 0.2 μl/min, followed by steep increase to 90% buffer B over 5 min, and 5-min step elution with 90% buffer B. Data-dependent acquisition method was based on a published CHOPIN method with each cycle lasting 2 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using a MAXQUANT 2.0.1. Protein database included E. coli MG1655 proteome (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000625) and a list of common protein contaminants. Search engine was run with default parameters for mass tolerance, up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, variable modifications were methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-terminus and cysteine carbamidomethylation. “Second peptide” and “Match between runs” options were enabled. Label-free quantitation was used for MS1-based peptides quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Initiation factor, Transcription, Antibiotic resistance

### Affiliations
NYU School of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, US

### Submitter
Nikita Vasilyev

### Lab Head
Dr Evgeny Nudler
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, US


