### Accession
PXD007826

### Title
Quantitative proteomic characterization and comparison of T helper 17 and iTreg cells in mouse

### Description
Using mass spectrometry-based label free quantitative proteomics analysis of in vitro differentiated murine Th17 and induced T regulatory (iTreg) cells. More than 4000 proteins covering almost all subcellular compartments were detected. Quantitative comparison of the protein expression profiles resulted in the identification of proteins specifically expressed in the Th17 and iTreg cells. Importantly, our combined analysis of proteome and gene expression data revealed protein expression changes that were not associated with changes at the transcriptional level.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro cultured murine CD4+ T cells were collected after 72h and 10 days of polarization under above indicated polarizing condition. The cells were lysed with lysis buffer containing 0.5% (v/v) NP-40, 150 mM NaCl and 50mM Tris-HCl. The lysates were sonicated in Bioruptor Sonicator and the supernatants were precipitated with Acetone. The obtained pellets were dissolved in 8M Urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and the protein concentrations were measured using Bio-Rad DC protein assay kit. Proteins were reduced with DTT for 1 hour at 37°C and alkylated with Iodoacetamide for 30 mins in dark at room temperature, then were digested with trypsin (Promega sequencing grade). The trypsin to protein ratio of 1:30 (w/w) was used and digestion was performed at 37°C for overnight. The trypsin digestion was stopped by adding 10% of Triflouroacetic acid. Peptides were desalted with C18 tips (OMIX) according to manufacturer’s instruction. The detergent was removed with HiPPR Detergent Removal Spin Column Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s recommendations.

### Data Protocol
The MS data raw files were searched against a mouse UniProt database (Entries and release) using the Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30. The search included carbamidomethyl (C ) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification together with one tryptic missed cleavage. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1%. Match between run options was enabled to transfer the identification across the samples.

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional network and protein regulators that govern T helper 17 (Th17) cell differentiation have been studied extensively using advanced genomic approaches. For a better understanding of these biological processes, we have moved a step forward, from gene- to protein-level characterization of Th17 cells. Mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics analysis were made of in vitro differentiated murine Th17 and induced regulatory T (iTreg) cells. More than 4,000 proteins, covering almost all subcellular compartments, were detected. Quantitative comparison of the protein expression profiles resulted in the identification of proteins specifically expressed in the Th17 and iTreg cells. Importantly, our combined analysis of proteome and gene expression data revealed protein expression changes that were not associated with changes at the transcriptional level. Our dataset provides a valuable resource, with new insights into the proteomic characteristics of Th17 and iTreg cells, which may prove useful in developing treatment of autoimmune diseases and developing tumor immunotherapy.

### Keywords
T lymphocytes, Itreg, Lc-ms/ms, T cell subsets, Th17

### Affiliations
Turku Centre for Biotechnology University of Turku Tykistokatu 6 FI-20520 Turku, Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Imran ahammad Mohammad

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi Jane Chen
Turku Centre for Biotechnology University of Turku Tykistokatu 6 FI-20520 Turku, Finland


