### Accession
PXD039410

### Title
A MYCN-independent mechanism mediating secretome reprogramming and metastasis in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma

### Description
MYCN amplification (MNA) is a defining feature of high-risk neuroblastoma (NB) that predicts poor prognosis. However, whether genes within or in close proximity to the MYCN amplicon also contribute to aggressiveness in MNA+ NB remains poorly understood. Here we identify that GREB1, a transcription factor encoding gene neighboring the MYCN locus, is frequently co-expressed with MYCN, and promotes cell survival in MNA+ NB. GREB1 controls gene expression independently of MYCN in MNA+ NB, among which we uncover Myosin 1B (MYO1B) as being highly expressed in MNA+ NB. MYO1B promotes aggressive features, including invasive capacity in vitro, as well as extravasation and distant metastasis in vivo. Global secretome and proteome profiling further delineate MYO1B as a major regulator of secretome reprogramming in MNA+ NB cells. Moreover, we identify the cytokine MIF as an important pro-invasive and pro-metastatic mediator of MYO1B activity. Together, we have identified a putative GREB1-MYO1B-MIF axis as an unconventional mechanism that promotes the aggressiveness of MNA+ NB, and independently of MYCN. Furthermore, we find that MYO1B is upregulated in association with other oncoproteins during cellular transformation, and is dramatically increased in multiple human cancer types, suggesting a crucial role of MYO1B in cancers in addition to MNA+ NB.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed for total proteome analysis using an SP3-based purification protocol coupled to TMT-MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion MS. Samples were processed for secreted protein analysis using a Click-SILAC protocol coupled to standard DDA analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion MS.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed using Proteome Discoverer and paired with R for downstream data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>MYCN</i> amplification (<i>MNA</i>) is a defining feature of high-risk neuroblastoma (NB) and predicts poor prognosis. However, whether genes within or in close proximity to the <i>MYCN</i> amplicon also contribute to <i>MNA<sup>+</sup></i> NB remains poorly understood. Here, we identify that <i>GREB1</i>, a transcription factor encoding gene neighboring the <i>MYCN</i> locus, is frequently coexpressed with <i>MYCN</i> and promotes cell survival in <i>MNA<sup>+</sup></i> NB. GREB1 controls gene expression independently of MYCN, among which we uncover myosin 1B (<i>MYO1B</i>) as being highly expressed in <i>MNA<sup>+</sup></i> NB and, using a chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) model, as a crucial regulator of invasion and metastasis. Global secretome and proteome profiling further delineates MYO1B in regulating secretome reprogramming in <i>MNA<sup>+</sup></i> NB cells, and the cytokine MIF as an important pro-invasive and pro-metastatic mediator of MYO1B activity. Together, we have identified a putative GREB1-MYO1B-MIF axis as an unconventional mechanism promoting aggressive behavior in <i>MNA<sup>+</sup></i> NB and independently of MYCN.

### Keywords
Myo1b, Mycn, Greb1, Secretome, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist, BC Cancer, Vancouver, Canada
BC Cancer Agency

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Poul Sorensen
Senior Scientist, BC Cancer, Vancouver, Canada


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: brain
- disease: neuroblastoma
- cell type: not available
- label: SILAC light, TMT126, TMT127N, TMT128C, TMT129N, TMT130C, TMT131N
- label: SILAC medium, label free sample
- label: SILAC heavy, label free sample
- instrument: Orbitrap Fusion
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation, TMT6plex
- modification parameters: 2H4, Oxidation
- modification parameters: 13C6, TMT6plex
- modification parameters: 13C6-15N2, not available
- modification parameters: 13C6-15N4, not available

