### Accession
PXD036181

### Title
Comparsion of OMV to membrane proteomes across different media (OMV vs membrane experiments)

### Description
This project examines the impact of different growth media on the protein compositions of OMV and membrane of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron.

### Sample Protocol
Acetone precipitated samples were resuspended in 100ul of 5% SDS by boiling for 10minutes at 95C. Samples were then quantified by BCA and 100ug of samples reduced/alkylated with DTT 10mM and IAA 40mM. Reduced/alkylated samples were then clean up using Micro S-traps (https://protifi.com/pages/s-trap) according to the manufatures instructions Samples were digested overnight with 3ug of trypsin/lys-c (1:33 protease/protein ratio) and then collected. Samples were dried down and then further cleaned up with home made C18 Stage tips to ensure the removal of any particulate matter.  Samples were compared using LFQ analysis: Each of the cleaned up samples were re-suspended in Buffer A_star and separated using a two-column chromatography setup composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 um trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 um analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 3 uL/min for 7 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an either a Orbitrap 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or a Lumos Mass Spectrometer euipped with FAIMS at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 95-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 65 minutes, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 minutes. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 minutes before being held at 2% B for another 8 minutes. The 480 Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z, maximal injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 120k) and up to 3 seconds of HCD scans collected (NCE of 30%, a maximal injection time of 60 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 250% and a resolution of 15k). The Lumos Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode automatically switching between two FAIMS CVs (-60 or -40) and the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z, maximal injection time of 25 ms and a resolution of 120k) follow up to 1.4 seconds of HCD scans collected (NCE of 35%, a maximal injection time of 100 ms, an AGC set to a maximum of 250% and a resolution of 35k).

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched using Maxqunt (v2.0.2.0) using the Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 proteome (Uniprot: UP000001414) allowing for oxidation on Methionine. The LFQ and "Match Between Run"" options were enabled to allow comparison of samples. The resulting data files were then processed using Perseus to compare groups as well as Pearson correlation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Growth conditions, Membrane, Omv, Bacteria

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Feldman
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA


