### Accession
PXD018054

### Title
Phosphorylation mediates hormonal, epigenetic and stress responses related to sugarcane somatic embryogenesis competence

### Description
In somatic embryogenesis, embryos are formed from a single or small group of somatic cells in response to stress and hormonal stimuli. In this study, a high-throughput phosphoproteomic analysis was used to identify and quantify phosphoproteins related to the acquisition of embryogenic competence in sugarcane. Embryogenic (EC) and nonembryogenic (NEC) calli were compared at the multiplication phase, resulting in the identification of 1279 phosphoproteins. After the differential accumulation analysis, 163 phosphoproteins were identified as unique to EC, and nine were unique to NEC, while 51 were upaccumulated, and 40 were downaccumulated in EC compared to NEC. These phosphopeptides were mainly single phosphorylated peptides, with serine residues representing the major site of phosphorylation. The motif-x analysis revealed the enrichment of [xxxpSPxxx], [RxxpSxxx] and [xxxpSDxxx] motifs, which are predicted phosphorylation sites for several kinases related to stress responses. Gene ontology enrichment revealed an overrepresentation of biological processes involved in embryonic development, showing that EC-related phosphoproteins (unique to EC and upaccumulated) were associated with stress responses, regulation of gene expression and epigenetic modifications. The NEC-related phosphoproteins (unique to NEC and downaccumulated) were associated with the translation process. In this sense, EC-related phosphoproteins described as potential regulators of abiotic stress tolerance in response to ABA-induced signals such as OSK3 (a catalytic subunit of SnRK1), ABF1, LEAs, REM4.1 and RD29Bs were identified. On the other hand, the NEC-related phosphoproteins EDR1 and PP2Ac-2 were negative regulators of ABA, suggesting a role of ABA in the acquisition of embryogenic competence linked to stress tolerance. Moreover, EC-related phosphoproteins associated with epigenetic modifications, such as HDA6, HDA19, and TPL, as well as those involved in embryo development, including ASIL1, M3KE1, MCM2, and GRV2, were identified as putative potential regulators of embryogenic competence. Our results provide novel data that may help elucidate the phosphorylation mechanisms controlling the activity, affinity and localization of specific proteins during somatic embryogenesis and suggest a role for these proteins in the hormonal signalling cascade leading to stress adaptation by reprogramming genetic expression.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material and induction  Induction of somatic embryogenesis was performed according to Passamani et al. (2018). During this multiplication period, EC and NEC were separated according to their morphological characteristics. Both EC and NEC were collected for phosphoproteomics analysis at the third subculture in the multiplication phase.  Proteomic procedures Protein extraction  Five biological replicates (300 mg FM each sample) of EC and NEC were lyophilized and ground using a pestle inside 1.5 mL microtubes. The protein extraction was performed according to Passamani et al. (2018). The supernatants were collected, and the protein concentration was estimated using a Bradford Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, USA) using bovine gamma globulin (BGG; Bio-Rad) as a standard.  Protein digestion Protein tryptic digestion was performed using 1600 µg of protein from each biological replicate for both EC and NEC using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) methodology as described by (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) with modifications (Burrieza et al., 2019). Due to the loading limit of the filter unit, each biological replicate was divided into four subaliquots of 400 µg for tryptic digestion using FASP.  Phosphopeptide enrichment A TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to enrich phosphopeptides from tryptic peptides. Aliquots of 500 µg of digested peptides from each biological replicate were vacuum dried, suspended in 150 μL of a solution of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in MS water (Sigma-Aldrich), and placed into TiO2 spin tips. After elution of the phosphopeptides, the eluate was vacuum dried and suspended in 25 μL of aqueous solvent (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in MS water). The phosphopeptide concentration was estimated by measuring A205 nm using a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) nanoflow chromatography system coupled online to a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry - quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics). First, phosphopeptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in aqueous solvent (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to reach a final concentration of 500 ng μL-1. A 2 μL aliquot equivalent to 1 μg of digested phosphopeptides was injected onto a C18 trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; PepMap 100, 5 cm x 300 μm) and then separated using a 400 μL min-1 70 min gradient on a pulled-needle, self-packed, fused silica analytical column (containing Waters BEH-C18, 1.7 μm particles, 20 cm long x 75 μm inner diameter). The column temperature was 50 °C. For phosphopeptide elution, a binary gradient was used: mobile phase A consisted of MS water and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient elution was performed as follows: 2% B for 10 min followed by a 15 min gradient of 2 to 17% B, ramping from 17 to 25% B until 45 min; ramping from 25 to 37% B until 52 min; ramping from 37 to 80% B until 58 min; holding constant at 80% until 70 min; decreasing to 2% B until column equilibration. The total run acquisition time was 60 min (after trap loading). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the PASEF method (Meier et al., 2015, Meier et al., 2018). The capillary voltage was set to 1400 V, with tims-on and PASEF-on.

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomics data analysis Raw data were analysed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and phospho STY were set as variable modifications. Digestion parameters were set to “trypsin/P”, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. At least one unique/razor peptide was set for protein identification. The FDR was set to a maximum of 1%, with a minimum peptide length of six amino acids. MS/MS spectra were searched against Saccharum spontaneum (Zhang et al., 2018). Label-free quantification of the identified proteins was performed using normalized label-free quantification (LFQ intensity) using the MaxLFQ algorithms (Cox et al., 2014). After MaxQuant data analyses, the resulting identified phosphorylation sites (phospho STY(sites).txt table) were filtered only for those that were confidently localized (localization probability ≥ 0.75). Only the proteins containing confident phospho (STY)-modified peptides and presenting LFQ intensity in at least four biological replicates or absent in all biological replicates (for unique proteins) were considered for comparative phosphoproteomics analysis. Differential accumulation of proteins was analysed using Student’s t-test. Proteins with P < 0.05 were considered upaccumulated if the log2 fold change (FC) was greater than 0.5 and downaccumulated if the log2 FC was less than -0.5.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, a label-free quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis was performed to identify and quantify signaling events related to the acquisition of embryogenic competence in sugarcane. Embryogenic and nonembryogenic calli were compared at the multiplication phase, resulting in the identification of 163 phosphoproteins unique to embryogenic calli, 9 unique to nonembryogenic calli, and 51 upregulated and 40 downregulated in embryogenic calli compared to nonembryogenic calli. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018054. Motif-x analysis revealed the enrichment of [xxxpSPxxx], [RxxpSxxx], and [xxxpSDxxx] motifs, which are predicted phosphorylation sites for several kinases related to stress responses. The embryogenic-related phosphoproteins (those unique and upregulated in embryogenic calli) identified in the present study are related to abscisic acid-induced signaling and abiotic stress response; they include OSK3, ABF1, LEAs, and RD29Bs. On the other hand, the nonembryogenic-related phosphoproteins EDR1 and PP2Ac-2 are negative regulators of abscisic acid signaling, suggesting a relationship between phosphoproteins involved in the abscisic acid and stress responses in the acquisition of embryogenic competence. Moreover, embryogenic-related phosphoproteins associated with epigenetic modifications, such as HDA6, HDA19, and TOPLESS, and with RNA metabolism, including AGO1, DEAH5, SCL30, UB2C, and SR45, were identified to play potential roles in embryogenic competence. These results reveal novel phosphorylation sites for several proteins and identify potential candidate biomarkers for the acquisition of embryogenic competence in sugarcane.

### Keywords
Histone deacetylase, Totipotency, Phosphoproteomics, Abscisic acid, Snrk1

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro


