### Accession
PXD031911

### Title
Spatial, Quantitative and Functional Deconstruction of Virus and Host Protein Interactions Inside Intact Cytomegalovirus Particles

### Description
Viral infections involve packaging of the viral genome and proteins into virions. Knowing virion composition and structure is critical to understand viral pathogenesis. However, an integrated picture of virion proteome organization of large viruses, such as Herpesviruses, is lacking. Here we use cross-linking mass spectrometry to derive a spatially resolved structural interactome of intact human cytomegalovirus virions. We capture interactions of 82 host and 33 viral proteins, allowing us to de novo allocate them into distinct virion-layers and identify several host proteins as constitutive virion components recruited via specific protein interactions. The abundant viral protein pp150 forms domain-specific interactions with all virion layers and scaffolds numerous viral and host proteins such as PP1 phosphatase and 14-3-3 proteins, which are incorporated via nearby short linear motifs in pp150’s C-terminus. PP1 recruitment antagonizes 14-3-3 proteins and is pivotal during early and late viral replication steps. Collectively, this study gives a spatial and quantitative inventory of the system-wide organization and functional relevance of protein interactions inside native herpesvirus particles.

### Sample Protocol
Virion purification and cross-linking To prepare HCMV particles for in situ cross-linking, we first harvested infectious cell culture supernatants and clarified them from cellular debris by centrifugation. The remaining viral supernatant was centrifuged for 1 h at 25,000 rpm. The resulting virus pellets were resuspended in PBS and supplemented with 2.5 mM DSSO. The cross-linking reaction was incubated for 30 min at 25°C under shaking conditions. The cross-linking step was repeated once with additional 2.5 mM DSSO before the reaction was quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl for 20 min at 25°C under constant agitation. Subsequently, the cross-linked material was loaded onto glycerol-tartrate gradients and centrifuged for 1 h at 25,000 rpm. The virion band was aspirated through the wall of the ultracentrifuge tube and washed twice in PBS. Virion sample preparation for XL-MS Virions were deglycosylated using Protein Deglycosylation Mix II under denaturing conditions. Lysis was performed by adding 3 volumes of lysis buffer and incubation on ice for 30 min followed by sonication for 45 min in a Bioruptor. Proteins were extracted using methanol-chloroform precipitation, dried and resuspended in digestion buffer. Proteins were digested by adding trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:25 and LysC at a 1:100 ratio overnight in the dark. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C8 cartridges and either subjected to measurement of linear or cross-linked peptides . Peptides destined for cross-link analysis were further fractionated by strong cation exchange using a PolySULFOETHYL ATM column on an Agilent 1260 Infinity II system. A 90 min gradient was applied and 33-35 fractions were collected, desalted by C8 stageTip, dried under speed vacuum and subjected to LC/MS analysis. Affinity purification MS (AP-MS) PLFs were infected with HCMV viruses at an MOI of 5 IU/cell. Cells were harvested by scraping in PBS, washed and pelleted cells were resuspended and lysed for 20 min in lysis buffer. Lysates were sonicated to solubilize nucleocapsid-associated pp150-GFP before clearing the lysates for 20 min at 12.000 rcf at 4°C. For GFP-AP, GFP-trap agarose was employed. Lysates were incubated with the agarose for 1 h, lysis buffer was used for the first two washing steps, lysis buffer without detergent was used for the third and final washing step. Proteins were eluted by incubating the beads in a total volume of 0.2 mL of 8 M GndHCl at 95 °C under shaking. For HA-AP, a µMACS HA isolation kit was employed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lysates were incubated with the magnetic beads for 1 h. Lysis buffer was used for the first washing step, lysis buffer without detergent for the second and 25 mM Tris-HCl for the final washing step. Proteins were eluted by adding 200 µl 95°C GndHCl. Proteins were precipitated from the eluates by adding 1.8 mL ethanol and 1 µL GlycoBlue. Samples were centrifuged for 1 h at 4 °C, ethanol was decanted and the pellet was air-dried before proteins were resolved in digestion buffer additionally containing trypsin at an 1:25 and LysC at an 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio. Digests were incubated overnight at 37 °C, subjected to C18 stage tip desalting followed by LC-MS analysis. Phosphopeptide enrichment Peptides were subjected to IMAC enrichment using a ProPacTM IMAC-10 column on an Agilent 1260 Infinity II system. A 30 min gradient was applied and the fraction corresponding to the phosphopeptides was collected, dried and subjected to LC/MS analysis. LC-MS analysis LC-MS analysis of cross-linked and SCX-fractionated peptides was performed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Reversed-phase separation was performed using a 50 cm analytical C-18 column with a 120 or 180 min gradient. Cross-link acquisition was performed using an LC-MS2 method. The following parameters were applied: MS resolution 120,000; MS2 resolution 60,000; charge state 4-8 enabled for MS2; stepped HCD energy 21, 27, 33. LC-MS analysis of linear peptides was performed using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 system connected to a PepMap C-18 trap-column and an in-house-packed C18 column at 300 nL/min flow rate and 120-240 min gradient lengths. The MS1 scans were performed in the orbitrap using 120,000 resolution. Precursors were isolated with a 1.6 Da isolation window and fragmented by HCD with 30% normalized collision energy. The MS2 scans were acquired either in the ion trap or the orbitrap. For the ion trap, standard AGC target settings, an intensity threshold of 1e4 (5e3 for 240 min gradients) and maximum injection time of 50 ms were used. A 1 s cycle time was set between master scans. For MS2 acquisition in the orbitrap, we used standard AGC settings, an intensity threshold of 5e4, 50 ms maximum injection time and a resolution of 15,000 for unmodified peptides or 30,000 for phosphopeptides. A 2 s cycle time was set between master scans.

### Data Protocol
XL-MS data analysis Peak lists (.mgf files) were generated in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) to convert each .raw file into one .mgf file containing HCD-MS2 data. The .mgf files were used as input to identify cross-linked peptides with a stand-alone search engine based on XlinkX v2.0 (Liu et al., 2017). The following settings of XlinkX were used: MS ion mass tolerance, 10 parts per million (ppm); MS2 ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; fixed modification, Cys carbamidomethylation; variable modification, Met oxidation; enzymatic digestion, trypsin; and allowed number of missed cleavages, 3; DSSO cross-linker, 158.0038 Da (short arm, 54.0106 Da, long arm, 85.9824 Da). All MS2 spectra were searched against concatenated target-decoy databases generated based on the virion proteome determined by bottom-up proteomics, containing 1,318 target sequence entries. Raw-files from both biological replicates were searched combined and cross-links were reported at 1 % FDR at unique lysine-lysine connection level based on a target-decoy calculation strategy using randomized decoys. Bottom-up proteomics data analysis Raw data were analyzed and processed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.6 software (Cox and Mann, 2008). Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification, and variable modifications including methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation. In addition, serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylations were searched as variable modifications for phosphoproteome analysis. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as labels where appropriate (double SILAC samples). The “second peptide” option was enabled and peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm for MS scans and 20 ppm for MS/MS scans. “re-quantify” option, “iBAQ” and “LFQ” options were enabled where appropriate. Database search was performed using Andromeda, the integrated MaxQuant search engine, against a protein database of HCMV strain TB40-BAC4 (Sinzger et al., 2008) and a Uniprot database of homo sapiens proteins (downloaded 2020) with common contaminants. FDR was estimated based on target-decoy competition and set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM), protein and modification site level. For subsequent analysis, we used proteinGroups.txt, peptides.txt or Phospho (STY).txt (phosphoproteomics) MaxQuant output files with potential contaminants, reverse database hits and proteins only identified by (modification) site removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virion, Cross-linking, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Leibniz Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Department of Structural Biology, Structural interactomics lab
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP)

### Submitter
Boris Bogdanow

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Leibniz Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie (FMP), Department of Structural Biology, Structural interactomics lab


