### Accession
PXD028044

### Title
Overexpression of Lin28A in neural progenitor cells in vivo does not lead to brain tumor formation but results in reduced spine density

### Description
The RNA binding protein LIN28A is a stem- and progenitor marker and one of the factors necessary to induce pluripotent stem cells in vitro. LIN28A has been shown to promote the proliferative capacity of neural progenitor cells but its specific role during embryonal and postnatal brain development still remains widely unknown. A high and characteristic overexpression of LIN28A has been identified in malignant brain tumors called embryonal tumors with multilayered rosettes (ETMR). Radial glia cells of the ventricular zone are proposed as a cell of origin for those tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen (FF) and formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) Tissue were used in this analysis. The excised FFPE brain regions were deparaffinized with n-heptane followed by ethanol washes and lysed in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1% w/w sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer, boiled at 95 °C for 60 min antigen retrieval. Samples were sonicated with a probe sonicator for 10 pulses to destroy DNA/RNA. The excised fresh frozen brain regions were lysed in 100 mM TAB and 1% w/w SDC buffer, boiled at 95 °C for 5 min and sonicated with a probe sonicator for 10 pulses. For proteome analysis 20 µg for phosphopeptide enrichment (FF only) 200 µg of protein of each sample was taken and disulfide bonds reduced in the presence of 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 30 min. Cysteine residues were alkylated in presence of 20 mM iodoacetamode at 37 °C in the dark for 30 min and tryptic digestion (sequencing grade, Promega) was performed at a 100:1 protein to enzyme ration at 37 °C over night. Digestion was stopped and SDC precipitated by the addition of 1% v/v formic acid (FA). Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred into a new tube. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Phosphopeptide enrichment with TiO2 A suspension of 1.2 mg TiO2 (5 µm particle size, Titansphere) in 100 µL loading buffer (5 % triflouroacetic acid (TFA), 80% acetonitrile (ACN)) and 1 M glycolic acid was prepared. To each sample 100 µL was added to resuspend peptides. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 1 h at slight agitation (900 prm) in a thermo shaker (Eppendorf). Sample was transferred into a self-prepared C8 stage-tip (C8 disc, 3M). The loading buffer was forced through the tip by centrifugation (5,000 g for 5 min), washed twice with 50 µL loading buffer and once with 50 µL of 0.1% TFA in 20% ACN. The tips were placed into new collection tubes and enriched peptides were eluted first with 50 µL 1% NH4OH in 30% ACN and twice with 50 µL 1% NH4OH in 50% ACN. Elution fractions were combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Acquired DDA LC-MS/MS data to generate a reference peptide spectra library for DIA data extraction were searched against the reviewed mouse SwissProt protein data base downloaded from Uniprot (release January 2019, 17,013 protein entries) using the Sequest algorithm integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.4. Mass tolerances for precursors was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragments. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine residues and the oxidation of methionine, pyro-glutamate formation at glutamine residues at the peptide N-terminus as well as acetylation of the protein N-terminus, methionine loss at the protein N-terminus and the Acetylation after methionine loss at the protein N-terminus were allowed as variable modifications. Only peptide with a high confidence (false discovery rate < 1% using a decoy data base approach) were accepted as identified. For FFPE proteome analysis, were also processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 with similar settings as above but using the reviewed mouse protein data base from Uniprot (release October 2020, 17,053 protein entries) in label free quantification mode with match between runs enabled, performing chromatographic re-calibration for precursors with a 5 min retention time tolerance, no scaling, and no normalization for extracted peptide areas. Peptide areas were summed to protein areas and used for quantitative analysis. Proteome Discoverer search results from brain regions from fresh frozen samples were imported into Skyline software version 4.2 allowing only high confidence peptides with more than 4 fragment ions. A maximum of 5 fragment ions per peptide were used for information extraction from DIA files for peptides with a dot product of > 0.85. The DDA data acquired for the phosphoproteome analysis searched against the reviewed human protein database downloaded from Uniprot (release January 2019 with 17,013 entries) processed with the Andromeda Algorithm included in the MaxQuant Software (Max Plank Institute for Biochemistry, Version 1.6.2.10). All samples were handled as individual experiments. The label-free quantification option with match between runs was used. Trypsin was selected as enzyme used to generate peptides, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages). A minimal peptide length of 6 amino acids and maximal peptide mass of 6000 Da was defined. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, acetylation of protein N-termini and the conversion of glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid was set as variable modification. The carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as fixed modification. The error tolerance for the first precursor search was 20 ppm, for the following main search 4.5 ppm. Fragment spectra were matched with 20 ppm error tolerance. False discovery rate for peptide spectrum matches and proteins was set to 1 %. For Quantification all identified razor and unique peptides were considered

### Publication Abstract
LIN28A overexpression has been identified in malignant brain tumors called embryonal tumors with multilayered rosettes&#xa0;(ETMR) but its specific role during brain development remains largely unknown. Radial glia cells of the ventricular zone (VZ) are proposed as a cell of origin for ETMR. We asked whether an overexpression of LIN28A in such cells might affect brain development or result in the formation of brain tumors.Constitutive overexpression of LIN28A in hGFAP-cre::lsl-Lin28A (GL) mice led to a transient increase of proliferation in the cortical VZ at embryonic stages but no postnatal brain tumor formation. Postnatally, GL mice displayed a pyramidal cell layer dispersion of the hippocampus and altered spine and dendrite morphology, including reduced dendritic spine densities in the hippocampus and cortex. GL mice displayed hyperkinetic activity and differential quantitative MS-based proteomics revealed altered time dependent molecular functions regarding mRNA processing and spine morphogenesis. Phosphoproteomic analyses indicated a downregulation of mTOR pathway modulated proteins such as Map1b being involved in microtubule dynamics.In conclusion, we show that Lin28A overexpression transiently increases proliferation of neural precursor cells but it is not sufficient to drive brain tumors in vivo. In contrast, Lin28A impacts on protein abundancy patterns related to spine morphogenesis and phosphorylation levels of proteins involved in microtubule dynamics, resulting in decreased spine densities of neurons in the hippocampus and cortex as well as in altered behavior. Our work provides new insights into the role of LIN28A for neuronal morphogenesis and development and may reveal future targets for treatment of ETMR patients.

### Keywords
Lin28a, Phosphopetide, Etmr, Dda dia lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Center for Molecular Neurobiology Hamburg (ZMNH), University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Neumann
Center for Molecular Neurobiology Hamburg (ZMNH), University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


