### Accession
PXD022898

### Title
Proteome and secretome profiling of Knufia chersonesos MA5789 wt and MA5790 mutant exposed to low sheer simulated microgravity (LSSMG)

### Description
Proteome and secretome of the extremotolerant rock black fungus Knufia chersonesos and its nonmelanized spontaneous mutant were analyzed following the fungus growth under LSSMG in rotating bioreactors (High Aspect Ratio Vessels; HARV). Tandem Mass Tags (TMS)-based quantitative shotgun proteomics was applied to compare gravity to microgravity conditions as well as to elucidate differences in the response between wild type and mutant strain.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell and secreted proteins were extracted following sample homogenization in a bead beater in presence of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Estimated 250 micrograms proteins were precipitated in 20% TCA at 4°C, reduced by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), and digested with Trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37°C. Peptides from the two sets of samples were processed separately. A total of 40 µg peptides from each whole-cell proteome sample or 13 µg peptides from each culture supernatant were labeled with the Thermo Scientific TMT10plex (TMT10) Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit according to the manufacturer protocol. Eight TMT tags were used to label samples from the same experimental set, while one was used as a reference that contained a pool of 5 µg of peptides from all samples. All nine labeled-peptide samples were combined into a single tube, mixed and fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The purified peptides were dissolved in 1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides separation was carried out on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a 300 μm x 5 mm PepMap100 C18 precolumn and a 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column. The separated peptides were directly analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for both identification and TMT-based quantification.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using the proteomic workflow of Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The fragmentation spectra were searched against a Knufia chersonesos translated database - obtained by the ab initio translation of K. chersonesos MA5789 Wt genome GCA_002319055.1, using AUGUSTUS - using the search engine Sequest-HT. The following parameters were selected for the search: 2 max. missed cleavage sites, 6 minimum peptide length, 5 ppm tolerance for precursor ion masses, and 0.6 Da tolerance for fragment ion masses. The static modification settings included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine, TMT6plex modification of lysine ε-amino groups and peptide N-termini, and acetyl modification of protein N-terminus. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for peptides and proteins was obtained using a target-decoy database search. The reporter ions integration tolerance was 0.5 Da while the co-isolation threshold was 75%. The average signal-to-noise threshold of all reporter peaks was greater than 10. The quantitative abundance of each protein was determined from the total intensity of the detected reporter ions.  For statistical analysis, the sum of reporter ion intensities for each protein was log2 transformed and the technical triplicate measurements for each protein were averaged. Only the proteins that were identified with at least one peptide detected in each technical replicate, and quantified in all technical and biological replicates, were considered for the analysis. Student’s t test was performed to identify differentially expressed proteins between each LSSMG-exposed and unexposed group as well as between all groups. To compare all four experimental conditions, each condition was normalized to the reference channel which contained the equal amounts of peptides from each group. Proteins with p-values of ≤ 0.05 were further evaluated for increased or decreased abundance using a cut-off value of ≥ ±1.5-fold change (log2 fold change of ≥ ± 0.584).

### Publication Abstract
Black fungi are a group of melanotic microfungi characterized by remarkable polyextremotolerance. Due to a broad ecological plasticity and adaptations at the cellular level, it is predicted that they may survive in a variety of extreme environments, including harsh niches on Earth and Mars, and in outer space. However, the molecular mechanisms aiding survival, especially in space, are yet to be fully elucidated. Based on these premises, the rock-inhabiting black fungus <i>Knufia chersonesos</i> (Wt) and its non-melanized mutant (Mut) were exposed to simulated microgravity-one of the prevalent features characterizing space conditions-by growing the cultures in high-aspect-ratio vessels (HARVs). Qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses were performed on the mycelia and supernatant of culture medium (secretome) to assess alterations in cell physiology in response to low-shear simulated microgravity (LSSMG) and to ultimately evaluate the role of cell-wall melanization in stress survival. Differential expression was observed for proteins involved in carbohydrate and lipid metabolic processes, transport, and ribosome biogenesis and translation via ribosomal translational machinery. However, no evidence of significant activation of stress components or starvation response was detected, except for the scytalone dehydratase, enzyme involved in the synthesis of dihydroxynaphthalene (DNH) melanin, which was found to be upregulated in the secretome of the wild type and downregulated in the mutant. Differences in protein modulation were observed between <i>K. chersonesos</i> Wt and Mut, with several proteins being downregulated under LSSMG in the Mut when compared to the Wt. Lastly, no major morphological alterations were observed following exposure to LSSMG. Similarly, the strains' survivability was not negatively affected. This study is the first to characterize the response to simulated microgravity in black fungi, which might have implications on future astrobiological missions.

### Keywords
Knufia chersonesos; simulated microgravity; tmt proteomics

### Affiliations
City of Hope
Department of Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, BOKU, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Markus Kalkum

### Lab Head
Dr Donatella Tesei
Department of Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, BOKU, Vienna, Austria


