### Accession
PXD045024

### Title
Omentum-derived matrix enables the study of metastatic ovarian cancer and stromal cell functions in a physiologically relevant environment

### Description
High-grade serous (HGS) ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynaecological disease in the world and metastases is a major cause. The omentum is the preferential metastatic site in HGS ovarian cancer patients and in vitro models that recapitulate the original environment of this organ at cellular and molecular level are being developed to study basic mechanisms that underpin this disease. The tumour extracellular matrix (ECM) plays active roles in HGS ovarian cancer pathology and response to therapy. However, most of the current in vitro models use matrices of animal origin and that do not recapitulate the complexity of the tumour ECM in patients. Here, we have developed omentum gel (OmGel), a matrix made from tumour-associated omental tissue of HGS ovarian cancer patients that has unprecedented similarity to the ECM of HGS omental tumours and is simple to prepare. When used in 2D and 3D in vitro assays to assess cancer cell functions relevant to metastatic ovarian cancer, OmGel performs as well as or better than the widely use Matrigel and does not induce additional phenotypic changes to ovarian cancer cells. Surprisingly, OmGel promotes pronounced morphological changes in cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs). These changes were associated with the upregulation of proteins that define subsets of CAFs in tumour patient samples, highlighting the importance of using clinically and physiologically relevant matrices for in vitro studies. Hence, OmGel provides a step forward to study the biology of HGS omental metastasis. Metastasis in the omentum are also typical of other cancer types, particularly gastric cancer, implying the relevance of OmGel to study the biology of other highly lethal cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitated overnight at -20 °C in cold acetone, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (Sigma) pH 8.0, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) in the dark for 45minutes at room temperature and digested with Lys C (Wako chemicals) for 3 h at RT and then with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were acidified with trifluoracetic acid (TFA, Sigma) and desalted using C18 StageTip

### Data Protocol
MS .raw data was processed with MaxQuant software 46, version 1.6.14.0 against the Uniprot Mus Musculus (37,654 entries)LFQ and iBAQ quantification options were enabled. First and main searches were done with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main. MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and trypsin cleavage was selected allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications and Carbaimidomethylation as a fixed modification. FDR was set to 1% for both protein and peptide identification.The MaxQuant output proteinGroups file was processed using Perseus software 48 version 1.6.15.0. Contaminants, reverse identification and proteins identified only by site were removed, and only proteins identified with at least 1 unique peptide were kept for the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix; ovarian cancer; caf; matrisome; omentum

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Head of Proteomics, Beatson Institute for Cancer Research

### Submitter
Kelly Hodge

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Head of Proteomics, Beatson Institute for Cancer Research


