### Accession
PXD002834

### Title
Characterization of an equine alpha-S2-casein variant

### Description
Two major forms of equine αS2-casein arising from genomic 1.3 kb in-frame deletion involving two coding exons, one of which represents an equid specific duplication. Findings at the DNA-level have been verified by cDNA sequencing from horse milk of mares with different genotypes. At the protein-level, we were able to show by SDS-page and in-gel digestion with subsequent LC-MS analysis that both proteins are actually expressed

### Sample Protocol
Individual milk samples of two mares with known genotype were used for protein analysis. These samples were dialyzed to remove lactose, subsequently freeze dried and stored at -18 °C for 4 months. Lyophilized milk powder was dissolved in Laemmli buffer (1x) at a concentration of 2 mg/mL and 20 µg of crude protein was loaded onto a 12% SDS-PAGE gel (150V for 85 min). Gel bands were destained, reduced and alkylated and then subsequently in gel-digested overnight with trypsin (60 ng) using standard protocols. Peptides were extracted from the gel, dried down using vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluroacetic acid (TFA) before being analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
MS scans were acquired in the mass range of 300 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The ten most intense signals were subjected to HCD fragmentation using a dynamic exclusion of 15 s. MS/MS parameters - minimum signal intensity: 1000, isolation width: 3.0 Da, charge state: ≥2, HCD resolution: 15,000, Normalized collision energy of 25. Lock mass (445.120025) was used for data acquired in MS mode. HCD spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest-HT search algorithm against the complete reviewed and unreviewed Equus caballus database (28,188 sequences, downloaded 2015.07.16) with common contaminants (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/) appended. The following database search settings were used: MS tolerance; ± 10 ppm, MS2 Tolerance; 0.02 Da, enzyme specificity; trypsin with up to three missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification while, oxidation on methionine, and phosphorylation on serine and threonine residues was set as a variable modification. Only peptides which were identified with medium confidence (FDR <5%) were included.

### Publication Abstract
The production and consumption of mare's milk in Europe has gained importance, mainly based on positive health effects and a lower allergenic potential as compared to cows' milk. The allergenicity of milk is to a certain extent affected by different genetic variants. In classical dairy species, much research has been conducted into the genetic variability of milk proteins, but the knowledge in horses is scarce. Here, we characterize two major forms of equine &#x3b1;S2-casein arising from genomic 1.3 kb in-frame deletion involving two coding exons, one of which represents an equid specific duplication. Findings at the DNA-level have been verified by cDNA sequencing from horse milk of mares with different genotypes. At the protein-level, we were able to show by SDS-page and in-gel digestion with subsequent LC-MS analysis that both proteins are actually expressed. The comparison with published sequences of other equids revealed that the deletion has probably occurred before the ancestor of present-day asses and zebras diverged from the horse lineage.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Casein, Equine, Milk

### Affiliations
Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian Albrechts Universitaet Kiel
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian Albrechts Universitaet Kiel


