### Accession
PXD018776

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Trypanosoma cruzi Spliceosome Complex

### Description
The unicellular protists of the group Kinetoplastea include the genera Leishmania and Trypanosoma, which are pathogens of invertebrate and vertebrate animals. Despite their medical and economical importance, critical aspects of their biology such as specific molecular characteristics of gene expression regulation are just beginning to be deciphered. Gene expression regulation mainly depends on post-transcriptional processing, such as the trans-splicing process. Despite being widely used in Trypanosomes, trans-splicing is a rare event in other eukaryotes. We sought to describe the protein composition of spliceosomes in epimastigotes of T. cruzi, the etiological agent of Chagas disease

### Sample Protocol
We used two TAP-tagged proteins (TcCwc21 and TcSmD1) and a TAP-tagged control (TcTCIP)  to pull-down spliceosomes and analyzed their composition by mass spectrometry. Samples were trypsin digested. Among the 115 identified proteins we detected conserved spliceosome components, as Sm and LSm proteins, RNA helicases, U2- and U5-snRNP specific proteins.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by MASCOT using T. cruzi database.

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular protists of the group Kinetoplastida include the genera Leishmania and Trypanosoma, which are pathogens of invertebrate and vertebrate animals. Despite their medical and economical importance, critical aspects of their biology such as specific molecular characteristics of gene expression regulation are just beginning to be deciphered. Gene expression regulation also depends on post-transcriptional processing steps, such as the trans-splicing process. Despite being widely used in trypanosomes, trans-splicing is a rare event in other eukaryotes. We sought to describe the protein composition of spliceosomes in epimastigotes of T. cruzi, the etiological agent of Chagas disease. We used two TAP-tagged proteins to affinity purify spliceosomes and analyzed their composition by mass spectrometry. Among the 115 identified proteins we detected conserved spliceosome components, as Sm and LSm proteins, RNA helicases, U2- and U5-snRNP specific proteins. Importantly, by comparing our data with proteomic data of human and T. brucei spliceosome complexes, we observed a core group of proteins common to all spliceosomes. By using amino acid sequence comparisons, we identified RNA-associated proteins that might be involved with splicing regulation in T. cruzi, namely the orthologous of WDR33, PABPCL1 and three different HNRNPs. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018776.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma, Splicing, Proteomics

### Affiliations
USP
LCC

### Submitter
Julia Cunha

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Coltri
USP


