### Accession
PXD001983

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis of the amino terminal status of Escherichia coli proteins at the steady-state

### Description
A proteome-wide analysis was performed in Escherichia coli to identify the impact on protein N-termini of the antibiotic actinonin specifically inhibiting peptide deformylase (PDF). A new strategy and tool suite (SILProNaQ) was employed to provide large scale N-terminus acetylation yield quantitation. In control conditions, more than 1000 N-termini could be identified with 56 % Met removal, and additional modifications involving partial or complete N-acetylation (10%) and formyl retention (5%). Among the proteins undergoing these N-terminal modifications, some translocated membrane proteins were highlighted. The early time-course impact of actinonin was followed after the addition of bacteriostatic concentrations of the drug immediately slowing down the growth rate. Under these conditions, 25% of all proteins remain formylated after 10 min, a value reaching more than 60% of all characterized proteins after 40 min of treatment. The N-formylation rate on individual proteins increased with the same trend. Upon PDF inhibition, we finally show that two major categories of proteins retain their formyl group: a large number of inner membrane proteins and proteins involved in protein synthesis including many factors assisting the nascent chains in co-translational events.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli PAL421Tr cells were grown in LB broth supplemented with 50 µg/ml ampicillin at 37°C under 180 rpm agitation. Cell growth was monitored by OD measurement at 600 nm and collected by centrifugation (4°C, 3300 g, 30 min) washed with Tris-EDTA buffer. Cells were disrupted by grinding and extraction buffer was added to the cell lysate. After centrifugation at 210 g at 4°C for 30min, the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by Bradford protein assay. For N-terminus enrichment, 1 mg of proteins was denaturated and reduced before cysteine alkylation using iodoacetamide. To favor d3-acetylation of the proteins N-terminus which also acetylates the -amino group of the Lys, 25 µmol of N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide in DMSO per mg of protein were added to the alkylated proteins resuspended in 50 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.5. After 90 min at 30°C, potential O-acetylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr side-chains were reversed by adding 10 µl of 50% of hydroxylamine (v/v) and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. The sample was acetone precipitated to remove chemical reagent before trypsin digestion. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 mM AmBic and digested by the addition of 1/100 (w/w) of TPCK treated porcine trypsin for 1.5 h at 37°C twice. Peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak™ solid phase extraction and the retained material was eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA followed by evaporation to dryness. The collected material was resuspended in SCX-LC buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN and 0.05% formic acid) and injected into Summit LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) equipped with Polysulfoethyl A 200 x 2.1 mm 5 µm 200 Å column (PolyLC, Colombia, MD). Peptides were eluted with a KCl gradient (SCX-LC Buffer B: 350 mM KCl in SCX-LC Buffer A; 0 - 5 min, 0% B; 15 - 40 min, 5 - 26% B; 40 - 45 min, 26 - 35% B). Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography were resuspended in 0.1% FA, 5% AcN and loaded onto a pre-column followed by an analytical separation using a Nikkyo Technos capillary column. The nano-RP-LC is coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions  were subject to high collision dissociation MS (Top-20 CID) with 20 seconds exclusion time for the precursor acquired. Raw data were extracted and exported with Proteome Discoverer. MS/MS spectra with parent ion signal higher than 1 counts and with a signal over noise ratio higher than 1.5 are extracted and saved in *.mgf text file.

### Data Protocol
Exported *.mgf files were submitted for protein identification and co- or post-translational modification characterisation to Mascot 2.4 software. The database used was the reference proteome for E. coli K12 strain extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112). The parent and fragment mass tolerance were defined to 10 ppm and 0.7 Da respectively with carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys as fix modifications. Few variable modifications were used including Met-Ox, protein N-Fo and protein d0 or d3-N-terminal acetylation (NTA) using trypsin/P. All data were filtered at 1% protein FDR and only peptides with score higher than 25 were retained for the final data treatment. To extract N-terminal peptides, Mascot searches were exported using XML files then submitted to an in-house script written in python. The parsing function is designed to search and to collect peptides with defined modifications such as NTA or N-Fo. If the same peptide was identified several times with the same modification, irrespectively of the peptide charge, only the peptide with the highest score was retained for further investigation and exported in a csv file.

### Publication Abstract
Prokaryotic proteins must be deformylated before the removal of their first methionine. Peptide deformylase (PDF) is indispensable and guarantees this mechanism. Recent metagenomics studies revealed new idiosyncratic PDF forms as the most abundant family of viral sequences. Little is known regarding these viral PDFs, including the capacity of the corresponding encoded proteins to ensure deformylase activity. We provide here the first evidence that viral PDFs, including the shortest PDF identified to date, Vp16 PDF, display deformylase activity in vivo, despite the absence of the key ribosome-interacting C-terminal region. Moreover, characterization of phage Vp16 PDF underscores unexpected structural and molecular features with the C-terminal Isoleucine residue significantly contributing to deformylase activity both in vitro and in vivo. This residue fully compensates for the absence of the usual long C-domain. Taken together, these data elucidate an unexpected mechanism of enzyme natural evolution and adaptation within viral sequences.

### Keywords
Formylation/post-translational modifications/actinonin/acetylation/antibiotics

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy V Bienvenut
Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Bâtiment 23A, 1 avenue de la Terrasse, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.


