### Accession
PXD002136

### Title
Membrane proteome of Bacillus spores

### Description
We carried out in-depth proteomic characterization of membrane proteins of Bacillus dormant and germinated spores. In addition, we relatively quantified the protein changes after spore germination. This project is aimed to identify common and species-specific germination related membrane proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane fractions were enriched by differenciate centrifugation after spores were disrupted by shaking with glass beads. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and gel was fractionated afterwards. Protiens in each gel slices were reduced and alkylated prior to trypsin digestion. Tryptic peptides were separated by LC and spotted on MALDI plates. Peptides were analyzed by AB SCIEX 4800 MALDI-TOF/TOF analyzer.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed by ProteinPilot, and proteins and peptides were exported from Paragon Algorithm searches. The same raw data were also searched by Mascot engine, and relative quantification analysis were performed by Scaffold software. The parameters that used in these softwares were described in manuscript that is subject to publicate shortly.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial endospores produced by <i>Bacillus</i> and <i>Clostridium</i> species can remain dormant and highly resistant to environmental insults for long periods, but they can also rapidly germinate in response to a nutrient-rich environment. Multiple proteins involved in sensing and responding to nutrient germinants, initiating solute and water transport, and accomplishing spore wall degradation are associated with the membrane surrounding the spore core. In order to more fully catalog proteins that may be involved in spore germination, as well as to identify protein changes taking place during germination, unbiased proteomic analyses of membrane preparations isolated from dormant and germinated spores of <i>Bacillus anthracis</i> and <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> were undertaken. Membrane-associated proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE, gel slices were trypsin digested, and extracted peptides were fractionated by liquid chromatography and analyzed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-tandem time of flight mass spectrometry. More than 500 proteins were identified from each preparation. Bioinformatic methods were used to characterize proteins with regard to membrane association, cellular function, and conservation across species. Numerous proteins not previously known to be spore associated, 6 in <i>B. subtilis</i> and 68 in <i>B. anthracis</i>, were identified. Relative quantitation based on spectral counting indicated that the majority of spore membrane proteins decrease in abundance during the first 20&#x2009;min of germination. The spore membranes contained several proteins thought to be involved in the transport of metal ions, a process that plays a major role in spore formation and germination. Analyses of mutant strains lacking these transport proteins implicated YloB in the accumulation of calcium within the developing forespore.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Bacterial endospores can remain dormant and highly resistant to environmental insults for long periods but can also rapidly germinate in response to a nutrient-rich environment. The persistence and subsequent germination of spores contribute to their colonization of new environments and to the spread of certain diseases. Proteins of <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> and <i>Bacillus anthracis</i> were identified that are associated with the spore membrane, a position that can allow them to contribute to germination. A set of identified proteins that are predicted to carry out ion transport were examined for their contributions to spore formation, stability, and germination. Greater knowledge of spore formation and germination can contribute to the development of better decontamination strategies.

### Keywords
Spore, Membrane proteome, Bacillus

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech

### Submitter
Yan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr David L. Popham
Virginia Tech


