### Accession
PXD018348

### Title
Identification and characterization of the heat-induced plastidial stress granules-like foci in Arabidopsis thaliana.

### Description
Plant cells, similar to animal cells repress translation under stressful conditions which leads to formation of cytosolic stress granules (SGs). Here, we report that in addition to cytosolic SGs plants also have plastidial SGs (pSGs). In order isolate and determine protein and metabolite composition of the pSG a combination of differential centrifugation and affinity purification methods was used. Plastidial Snowy Cotyledon 1 (SCO1) fused with GFP was used as a marker protein and its subcellular localization was confirmed  by confocal microscope in a control as well as  stress conditions. Multiple criteria were used to define pSG‐associated proteins. As the pSGs were only present in the heat/dark treated seedlings, we first selected for proteins that were either (i) respectively, present and absent in the pSGs isolate from the stress‐treated versus control seedlings, or (ii) significantly enriched (fold change > 2; t-test<0.05) in the SGs isolate from the stress‐treated versus the control seedlings. We then excluded cytosolic, nuclear, mitochondrial and membrane proteins, as these are unlikely to localize into plastidial SGs and can therefore be viewed as false positives. As an additional negative control, we compered obtained list of pSGs proteins with results gotten from independently performed experiment where we used seedlings over-expressing plastidial glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase GAPCP1-GFP. In the absence of stress, GAPCP1-GFP aggregates into a dot-like condensate, which could be enriched and subsequently isolated using our protocol, but is clearly distinguishable from the SCO1-GFP pSGs. Interestingly, identified components of pSG are very similar to the ones from cytosolic SGs suggesting that the mechanism of their formation and function might be very similar.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µL urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Reduction of cysteines, alkylation and enzymatic digestion using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega Corp., Fitchburg, WI) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Digested proteins were desalted using Finisterre C18 SPE Columns (Teknokroma, Spain).  SCO1-GFP  Dried peptides were resuspended in  MS loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1 % FA) and measured with Q Exactive HF coupled to an Easy nLC1000 UHPLC reverse-phase nano liquid chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hennigsdorf, Germany).The gradient ramped from 4% ACN to 24% ACN over 20 min, then to 45% ACN over the next 15 min followed by a 5 min washout with 80% ACN. The MS was run using a data-dependent MS/MS method with the following settings: full scans were acquired at a resolution of 120 000, AGC target of 3e6, maximum injection time of 50 ms, and an m/z ranging from 200 to 2000. dd-MS2 scan was recorded at the 15,000 resolution  with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 150 ms, isolation window 1.2 m/z, normalized collision energy 30 and the dynamic exclusion of 20 sec.  GAPCP-GFP Dried peptides were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1 % FA) and measured with Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hennigsdorf, Germany) coupled to an reverse-phase nano liquid chromatography ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters). The gradient ramped from 5% ACN to 24% ACN over 7 min, then to 36% ACN over the next 6 min followed by a 2 min washout with 75% ACN. The MS was run using a data-dependent MS/MS method with the following settings: full scans were acquired at a resolution of 60 000, AGC target of 3e6, maximum injection time of 50 ms, and an m/z ranging from 300 to 1600. dd-MS2 scan was recorded at the 30,000 resolution  with an AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, normalized collision energy 27 and the dynamic exclusion of 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw proteomics files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (Version 1.6.0.16) with Andromeda- an integrated peptide search engine. Peptides were identified using Arabidopsis TAIR database (Version 10, The Arabidopsis Information Resource, www.Arabidopsis.org). using default orbitrap settings. Moreover, maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed and threshold for peptide validation was set to 0.01 using a decoy database. In addition, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation was considered as variable modification while cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. In the analysis, following options were selected: “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” and the minimum length of peptide was set to at least seven amino acids.  In the further analysis, only proteins with equal or more than two unique peptides were considered. Moreover, contaminants, i.e. keratins were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Plants exhibit different physiological and molecular responses to adverse changes in their environment. One such molecular response is the sequestration of proteins, RNAs, and metabolites into cytoplasmic bodies called stress granules (cSGs). Here we report that, in addition to cSGs, heat stress also induces the formation of SG-like foci (cGs) in the chloroplasts of the model plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. Similarly to the cSGs, (i) cpSG assemble rapidly in response to stress and disappear when the stress ceases, (ii) cpSG formation is inhibited by treatment with a translation inhibitor (lincomycin), and (iii) cpSG are composed of a stable core and a fluid outer shell. A previously published protocol for cSG extraction was successfully adapted to isolate cpSG, followed by protein, metabolite, and RNA analysis. Analogously to the cSGs, cpSG sequester proteins essential for SG formation, dynamics, and function, also including RNA-binding proteins with prion-like domain, ATPases and chaperones, and the amino acids proline and glutamic acid. However, the most intriguing observation relates to the cpSG localization of proteins, such as a complete magnesium chelatase complex, which is involved in photosynthetic acclimation to stress. These data suggest that cpSG have a role in plant stress tolerance.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Co-ip, Interactions, Snowy cotyledon 1. stress treatment, Stress granules, Ap_ms

### Affiliations
Small Molecules Signaling, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology  Wissenschaftspark Potsdam-Golm, Germany
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology 
Wissenschaftspark 
Am Mühlenberg 1
14476 Potsdam-Golm 


### Submitter
Ewelina Sokolowska

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Small Molecules Signaling, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology  Wissenschaftspark Potsdam-Golm, Germany


