### Accession
PXD005133

### Title
Identification of proteins in a Salmonella SPI-1 type III secretion injectisome basal body mutant

### Description
We determined the cryo-EM structure of a secretion incompetent PrgH130-392 type III secretion injectisome basal body mutant at 6.3 Å. The map shows no density attributable to the inner rod or needle and the periplasmic gate in a closed conformation. We used LC-MS/MS to idensitfy the constituent proteins showing the predominant presence of the major inner- and outer basal body proteins (PrgH+PrgK and InvG respectively) and export apparatus protein SpaP.

### Sample Protocol
Digested proteins were loaded onto a Bruker Impact II Q-ToF mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out on a 50 cm in-house packed 75 μm C18 column by a Proxeon EasynLC UPLC system, using 120 minute water:acetonitrile gradients. Eluted peptides were ionized in positive ion mode, collecting MS/MS spectra for the top 15 peaks >500 counts, with a 30 second dynamic exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Data files were loaded into MaxQuant v1.5.1.0 for analysis. Identification used a 0.006 da MS tolerance and 40 ppm MSMS tolerance, and a Salmonella specific protein database containing all annotated Salmonella proteins extracted from Uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
The type III secretion (T3S) injectisome is a specialized protein nanomachine that is critical for the pathogenicity of many Gram-negative bacteria, including purveyors of plague, typhoid fever, whooping cough, sexually transmitted infections and major nosocomial infections. This syringe-shaped 3.5-MDa macromolecular assembly spans both bacterial membranes and that of the infected host cell. The internal channel formed by the injectisome allows for the direct delivery of partially unfolded virulence effectors into the host cytoplasm. The structural foundation of the injectisome is the basal body, a molecular lock-nut structure composed predominantly of three proteins that form highly oligomerized concentric rings spanning the inner and outer membranes. Here we present the structure of the prototypical Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium pathogenicity island 1 basal body, determined using single-particle cryo-electron microscopy, with the inner-membrane-ring and outer-membrane-ring oligomers defined at 4.3&#x2009;&#xc5; and 3.6&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution, respectively. This work presents the first, to our knowledge, high-resolution structural characterization of the major components of the basal body in the assembled state, including that of the widespread class of outer-membrane portals known as secretins.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Injectisome, Type iii secretion system

### Affiliations
The University of British Columbia
Department of Biochemistry, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada

### Submitter
Liam Worrall

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Strynadka
Department of Biochemistry, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada


