### Accession
PXD016478

### Title
Swiprosin1 controls cargo-specific entry to clathrin and dynamin-independent endocytic pathway

### Description
The clathrin and dynamin-independent endocytic pathway (CLIC-GEEC) is the major route of internalization of a large fraction of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) and other cell surface receptors. Unlike the clathrin-dependent endocytic pathway, where adaptors recruited to the endocytic pit provide the clues to recruit specific cargo, the CLIC-GEEC pathway is considered to take up portions of the membrane without any specificity. Here, we identified actin-binding protein swiprosin1 as the first cargo adaptor for the CLIC-GEEC pathway. We found that swiprosin1 interacts with active Rab21, a known regulator of integrin endocytosis, and couples Rab21 and the integrin cargo to the CLIC-GEEC endocytic machinery. Our work also identified the previously unknown pathway by which Rab21 mediates integrin endocytosis and linked the CLIC-GEEC pathway to integrin-dependent cancer cell invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Every co-IP experiment contains a mixture from a GFP-pulldown of active GFP-Rab21 expressing cells (WT or active Rab21 Q76L mutant) grown in heavy medium with a GFP-pulldown of control cells (expressing GFP or inactive GFP-Rab21 T33N or D135N mutants) grown in light medium (forward experiment). In the reverse experiment, the heavy and light media are exchanged (label swap experiment). For each co-IP, two 15 cm dishes of cells grown until 60-80% confluency were used. Cells were washed with ice cold PBSM (PBS+5mM MgCl2), harvested in PBSM, pooled and washed again. Cell pellets were resuspended in 600 µl lysis buffer LB (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, 1.3% n-beta-octyl-D-glucopyranoside, 10 % Glycerol, protease and phosphatase inhibitors and 500 µM GppNHp for GFP-active Rab21 expressing cells or 500 µM GDP for GFP-inactive Rab21 expressing cells) and lysed by douncing 40x in a tissue grinder and incubating for 20 min on ice. Insoluble fraction was removed by centrifugation at 18000x g. Supernatant was incubated with 20 µl GFP-trap agarose beads (Chromotek) for 60 min at 4°C by overhead rotation. Beads with the bound Rab21-interacting proteins were washed three times with 500 µl washing buffer WB (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 300 mM KCl, 10 % Glycerol), combining the heavy, GFP-active Rab21 IP with the light, GFP-inactive Rab21 IP (forward experiment) during the second washing step. To elute bound proteins from the beads, 100 µl of U/T buffer (6 M urea, + 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) was added twice to the beads and incubate for 15 min at RT shaking at 1400 rpm each time. Eluted proteins were precipitated by adding 70 µl 2.5 M Na-Acetate, pH 5.0, 1 µl GlycoBlue (Thermo Fisher, USA) and 1700 µl ethanol to the pooled elution fractions (200 µl) in a 2 ml tube. After incubation over night at 4°C, the precipitation mixture was centrifuged for 50 min at 20000x g and the resulting pellet dried for 15-20 min at 60-70°C. For in solution protein digestion we followed standard procedures (31). Briefly, pellets were solubilized in U/T buffer, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested by sequential addition of LysC (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted and stored on STAGE tips until LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analysed using 240 min acetonitrile gradients on a 20 cm long 75 µm ID reversed phase column filled with 3 µm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) using a Proxeon HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to the electrospray ion source of a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode with a full scan (AGC target 3E6; R = 70,000) followed by up to ten MS2 scans (R = 17,500; maximal injection time 60 ms) and a dynamic exclusion for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) using default parameters (PSM and Protein FDR=0.01; MatchBetweenRuns and Requantify disabled; Carbamidomethylation(C) as a fixed modification; Oxidation (M) and n-terminal Acetylation as variable modifications) and searched against a Uniprot human protein database (2014-10).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Endocytosis, Rab21, Swiprosin, Clathrin-independent, Silac, Co-ip

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin-Buch
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin-Buch

### Submitter
Henrik Zauber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association Robert-Rössle-Straße 10 13125 Berlin-Buch


