### Accession
PXD041850

### Title
Astrocyte-Oligodendrocyte interaction regulates central nervous system regeneration

### Description
Failed regeneration of myelin around neuronal axons following central nervous system damage contributes to nerve dysfunction and clinical decline in various neurological conditions, for which there is an unmet therapeutic demand. Here, we show that interaction between glial cells – astrocytes and mature myelin-forming oligodendrocytes – is a critical determinant of remyelination. Using in vivo/ ex vivo/ in vitro rodent models and human brain lesion analyses, we discover that astrocytes support the survival of regenerating oligodendrocytes, via downregulation of the Nrf2 pathway associated with increased astrocytic cholesterol biosynthesis pathway activation. Remyelination fails following sustained astrocytic Nrf2 activation in focally-lesioned mice yet is restored by either cholesterol biosynthesis/efflux stimulation, or Nrf2 inhibition using the existing therapeutic Luteolin. We identify that astrocyte-oligodendrocyte interaction regulates remyelination, and reveal a drug strategy for central nervous system regeneration centred on targeting this interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen corpus callosa were pulverised using the Precellys Bioruptor and bead-based lysis kit (VWR). Tissue was transferred to 1.5ml Precellys beaded tubes with 300 µl of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 50 mM TEAB) before being loaded into Precellys Bioruptor for a 3 min cycle at 5500 rpm at 4°C. Lysed tissue was transferred to 1.5 ml lo-bind eppendorfs and boiled at 95°C for 5 min before DNA digestion with Benzonase at 37°C for 15 min. Samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 22°C.  Protein concentration was determined using EZQ protein quantitation kit (Invitrogen) as per the manufacturer instructions. Protein isolation and clean up was performed using S-TRAP™ (Protifi) columns before digestion with trypsin at 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio for 2 h at 47°C. Digested peptides were eluted from S-TRAP™ columns using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by 0.2% aqueous formic acid and 50% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Eluted peptides were dried down overnight before re-suspension in 5% formic acid ready for injection onto the Orbitrap Exploris (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer using data independent acquisition (DIA). Peptides (2 µg/ sample) were injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific) and electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Exploris Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). For liquid chromatography the following buffers were used:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Samples were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.445 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature at 250°C. The MS was operated in DIA mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650), with RF lens at 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalized AGC target at 300, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time at 20 ms, microscan set to 1, and source fragmentation disabled. MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: multiplex ions set to false, collision energy mode set to stepped, collision energy type set to normalized, HCD collision energies set to 25.5, 27 and 30 %, orbitrap resolution 30000, first mass 200, RF lens 40 %, AGC target set to custom, normalized AGC target 3000 %, microscan set to1, maximum injection time 55 ms. Data for both MS Scan and MS/MS DIA Scan events were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was processed using Spectronaut (Biognosys) version 14.10.201222.47784 with the DirectDIA option. The following parameters were selected: cleavage rules were set to Trypsin/P, maximum peptide length 52 amino acids, minimum peptide length 7 amino acids, maximum missed cleavages 2 and calibration mode automatic. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while the following variable modifications were selected: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The FDR threshold for both precursor and protein was set at 1%. Profiling was disabled. DirectDIA data were searched against a mouse database from Uniprot release 2020 06. This database consisted of all manually annotated mouse SwissProt entries along with mouse TrEMBL entries with protein level evidence and a manually annotated homologue within the human SwissProt database. Fold changes in protein abundance were calculated using normalised protein intensities. Normalisation was performed by dividing the intensity for each protein by the summed protein intensity for all proteins identified within an individual sample. We present examples of cholesterol pathway associated proteins which were within the top 3000 proteins upregulated in lesions at 7 DPI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oligodendrocyte, Nrf2, Myelin, Central nervous system, Astrocyte

### Affiliations
United Kingdom Dementia Research Institute at The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh Medical School, Edinburgh, UK, EH16 4TJ.
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Veronique E. Miron
United Kingdom Dementia Research Institute at The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh Medical School, Edinburgh, UK, EH16 4TJ.


