### Accession
PXD013254

### Title
Ex vivo modelling of pancreatic cancer recapitulates in vivo extracellular matrix signatures and drug responses

### Description
The ex vivo modelling of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) using patient-derived cells is a promising tool to predict treatment responses. Matrigel-based organoid and organotypic approaches are limited by their undefined molecular composition, hindering the recapitulation of the tumour’s characteristic desmoplasia, which is known to promote drug resistance. To overcome these limitations, we used self-assembling peptide amphiphiles (PAs) gelled in a minimal extracellular matrix to model the pancreatic tumour microenvironment and to establish 3D multicellular cultures of patient-derived PDAC cells, pancreatic stellate cells and macrophages. Matrisome analysis of 3D cultures demonstrated consistent ECM protein deposition, which was highly reminiscent of the corresponding primary PDAC tissues. The proteomic data obtained was also compared to the corresponding patient-derived xenografts (PDX) in nude mice and Matrigel-based cultures. Characterisation of the chemosensitivity of the cultures revealed realistic treatment responses by PDAC cells in PA hydrogels based on the responses of their corresponding PDX tumours. Histological, transcriptional and functional techniques confirmed these similarities, which were not observed in Matrigel-based cultures. These findings demonstrate the biomimetic nature of PA hydrogels, which enable cultured cells to recreate the PDAC matrisome ex vivo and to respond to chemotherapeutic agents in a predictive manner.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, Extra cellular matrix proteins were digested into peptides using trypsin and peptides were desalted using C18+carbon top tips (Glygen corparation, TT2MC18.96) and eluted with 70% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formaic acid.  Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% buffer B in 120 min at a flow rate 250nL/min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN) . The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur software (version 4.0) and operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. The Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. The full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375- 1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and the MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1) and searched against the SwissProt database (release December 2015) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.5.0) with a FDR of ~1% and restricted to the human entries. Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. The mascot result (DAT) files were extracted into excel files for further normalisation and statistical analysis.  For peptide quantification Pescal Software was used to construct extracted ion chromatograms for all the identified peptides across all conditions. For protein quantification, an in house developed script was used to sum the intensities of all peptides comprised in the same protein. Only proteins with at least 2 different peptides and a score > 50 were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3d cell culture, Pancreatic cancer, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Matrisome, Hydrogel, Tumour microenvironment

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Cell Signalling & Proteomics Group, Barts Cancer Institue, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pedro Cutillas
Cell Signalling & Proteomics Group, Barts Cancer Institue, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK


