### Accession
PXD036094

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveals Transforming growth factor beta Axis Induced by Resveratrol and Hesperetin Coformulation in Endothelial Cells

### Description
The endothelium is the frontline target of multiple metabolic stressors and pharmacological agents. As a consequence, endothelial cells (ECs) display highly dynamic and diverse proteome profiles. We describe here the culture of human aortic ECs from healthy and type 2 diabetic donors, the treatment with a small molecular conformation of trans-resveratrol and hesperetin (tRES+HESP), followed by proteomic analysis of whole-cell lysate. A number of 3666 proteins were presented in all the samples and thus further analyzed. We found that 179 proteins had a significant difference between diabetic ECs vs. healthy ECs, while 81 proteins had a significant change upon the treatment of tRES+HESP in diabetic ECs. Among them, 16 proteins showed a difference between diabetic ECs and healthy ECs and the difference was reversed by the tRES+HESP treatment, with the top 5 drastically altered proteins being ACVRL1, ADAM9, ITGAV, PCCB, and TGFBR2. Follow-up functional assays identified ACVRL1 and TGFBR2 as the most pronounced mediator for tRES+HESP-induced protection of angiogenesis in vitro. Our study has revealed the global changes in proteins and biological pathways in ECs from diabetic donors, which are potentially reversible by the tRES+HESP formula. Furthermore, we have identified the TGFβ signaling axis as a responding mechanism in ECs treated with this formula, shedding light for future studies for deeper molecular characterization

### Sample Protocol
Human aortic endothelial cells (HAECs) from healthy or diabetic donors (Purchased from Lonza) were cultured in endothelial growth media.        
For Proteomic analysis, Diabetic ECs from 4 donors were treated with tRES+HESP (both at 5µM) or vehicle control for 24 hours. We used TMT11, so we optioned to use healthy ECs without tRES+HESP treatment (n=3, healthy controls) and diabetic ECs (n=8, 4 with tRES+HESP treatment, diabetic tRES+HESP; and 4 with vehicle treatment, diabetic controls). The cells were lysed, and 250 ug of proteins from each of the 11 samples were subsequently digested in-solution by trypsin. The concentration of the resulting tryptic peptides was measured, and 100 ug peptides from each sample were labeled with 11 unique TMT tags purchased from Thermo-Fisher Scientific. Labeling efficiency for each sample was measured by high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS), which was all >97%. An aliquot of the combined TMT-labeled peptides (100 ug) was separated using high pH reverse phase fractionation purchased from Thermo-Fisher Scientific, and each fraction was analyzed separately by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos to identify and quantify proteins. 

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were analyzed using MaxQuant, with a false discovery rate for both protein and peptide identification at 0.01, to identify proteins and to obtain the intensity for the 11 TMT reporter ions for each peptide and protein. The TMT reporter ion intensities were used to calculate the relative abundance for each protein in these 11 samples. We first normalized the reporter ion intensity for each of proteins against the reporter ion intensity for the 11th TMT tag to obtain the ratio for each protein. We then calculated the median for the resulting ratios of proteins for each TMT tag (i.e., each of the 11 samples used for the preliminary study). The median ratio for each 11 TMT tag were identical since an equal amount of TMT labeled peptides were mixed before HPLC-ESI-MS/MS, and most of the proteins are expected to have similar abundance among these 11 samples. The resulting normalized protein ratios were log 2 transformed and compared among the 3 groups of samples (healthy controls, diabetic controls, and diabetic tRES+HESP). Independent t-test was used to assess the statistical significance of the effects of type 2 diabetes on protein abundance between healthy controls and diabetic controls, while paired t-test was used to assess the statistical significance of the effects of tRES+HESP treatment on protein abundance between diabetic controls and diabetic tRES+HESP treatment groups

### Publication Abstract
The endothelium is the frontline target of multiple metabolic stressors and pharmacological agents. As a consequence, endothelial cells (ECs) display highly dynamic and diverse proteome profiles. We describe here the culture of human aortic ECs from healthy and type 2 diabetic donors, the treatment with a small molecular coformulation of trans-resveratrol and hesperetin (tRES+HESP), followed by proteomic analysis of whole-cell lysate. A number of 3666 proteins were presented in all of the samples and thus further analyzed. We found that 179 proteins had a significant difference between diabetic ECs vs. healthy ECs, while 81 proteins had a significant change upon the treatment of tRES+HESP in diabetic ECs. Among them, 16 proteins showed a difference between diabetic ECs and healthy ECs and the difference was reversed by the tRES+HESP treatment. Follow-up functional assays identified activin A receptor-like type 1 and transforming growth factor &#x3b2; receptor 2 as the most pronounced targets suppressed by tRES+HESP in protecting angiogenesis <i>in vitro</i>. Our study has revealed the global differences in proteins and biological pathways in ECs from diabetic donors, which are potentially reversible by the tRES+HESP formula. Furthermore, we have identified the TGF&#x3b2; receptor as a responding mechanism in ECs treated with this formula, shedding light on future studies for deeper molecular characterization.

### Keywords
Endothelial cells; type 2 diabetes; trans-resveratrol; proteomics; transforming growth factor-beta

### Affiliations
Integrated Biosciences; Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA
Wayne State University

### Submitter
Zhengping Yi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Zhengping Yi
Integrated Biosciences; Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, USA


