### Accession
PXD028417

### Title
Cholangiocyte organoid culture in hydrogels from decellularized liver tissue

### Description
Culture of human cholangiocyte organoids in hydrogels derived from healthy liver extracellular matrix (LECM) extracts prepared from decellularized human livers are evaluated in an effort to establish a platform for production of cholangiocyte organoids for clinical regenerative applications.  Human intrahepatic cholangiocyte organoids (ICO) grown in hydrogels made from LECM are compared those grown in mouse tumor derived basement membrane extracts (BME). Culture was performed with amino acids labeled with stable heavy isotopes to enable separation of ECM from the hydrogels from that of the produced by the cells with mass spectrometry (MS). MS data were used to evaluate the protein production of ICO comparing the different hydrogel substrates. The study also contains evaluation of the properties of the hydrogel substrates and focuses on expansion and differentiation of the ICO.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from organoid culture in hydrogels were snap frozen and lyophilized and stored at -80°C until further processing. Samples were rehydrated in 100-200 µl extraction buffer with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate + 8 M urea and homogenized using a Bioruptor®Plus (Diagenode SA) at 4°C for 40 cycles, 15 s ON/OFF. This was followed by a centrifuge step (14000 g, 15min) and the protein content of supernatants was determined using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). 30 µg of protein was processed further by reduction with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine for 30 min at 37°C and subsequently alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at RT. This was followed by overnight trypsin digestion at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid until pH was < 3. Desalting was performed using C18 reversed-phase spin columns (UltraMicro Spin Column, Nest group) according to manufacturer’s instructions. After desalting, samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop 2000c (Thermo Scientific). The LC MS/MS analysis was performed on Tribrid mass spectrometer (MS) Orbitrap Fusion equipped with a Nanospray source and coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography pump (Thermo Fischer Scientific). One microgram of peptide was loaded and concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 precolumn (75μm x 2cm, Thermo Scientific) and then separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75μm x 25cm, nanoViper, C18, 2μm, 100Å) with a column temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear 2h gradient at the flow rate of 300 nl/min from 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid /ACN, Merck)/98% Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water, Merck) to 40% solvent B. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS survey scans from m/z 375-1500 with a resolution 120,000 were performed in the Orbitrap detector. The automatic gain control target was set to 4 × 105 with an injection time of 50ms. The most intense ions (up to 20) with charge states 2-7 from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation. MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Dissociation and detected in Orbitrap detector with the resolution of 30,000. The normalized collision energy in HCD cell was set 30%. The values for the automatic gain control target and injection time were 5 × 104 and 54ms, respectively. The duration of dynamic exclusion was set 45s and the mass tolerance window 10parts per million (PPM).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of raw files was performed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0). The resulting peak lists were searched in Andromeda against a reviewed human UniProtKB database (release 2020_04), complemented with the standard MaxQuant contaminant database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5PPM and fragment ion mass tolerance to 20PPM. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification and deamidation (Asparagine), oxidation (Methionine), hydroxyproline and acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins, “match between runs” was enabled. Additional data analysis using LFQintensities was done in R (version 4.0.3). EdgeR (version 3.32.1) and Limma (version 3.46.0) R packages were used for differential expression analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Human cholangiocyte organoids are promising for regenerative medicine applications, such as repair of damaged bile ducts. However, organoids are typically cultured in mouse tumor-derived basement membrane extracts (BME), which is poorly defined, highly variable and limits the direct clinical applications of organoids in patients. Extracellular matrix (ECM)-derived hydrogels prepared from decellularized human or porcine livers are attractive alternative culture substrates. Here, the culture and expansion of human cholangiocyte organoids in liver ECM(LECM)-derived hydrogels is described. These hydrogels support proliferation of cholangiocyte organoids and maintain the cholangiocyte-like phenotype. The use of LECM hydrogels does not significantly alter the expression of selected genes or proteins, such as the cholangiocyte marker cytokeratin-7, and no species-specific effect is found between human or porcine LECM hydrogels. Proliferation rates of organoids cultured in LECM hydrogels are lower, but the differentiation capacity of the cholangiocyte organoids towards hepatocyte-like cells is not altered by the presence of tissue-specific ECM components. Moreover, human LECM extracts support the expansion of ICO in a dynamic culture set up without the need for laborious static culture of organoids in hydrogel domes. Liver ECM hydrogels can successfully replace tumor-derived BME and can potentially unlock the full clinical potential of human cholangiocyte organoids.

### Keywords
Human, Regeneration, Cholangiocyte, Liver, Organoid, Hydrogel

### Affiliations
Lung Biology, Department Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Oskar Rosmark

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Luc van der Laan
Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.


