### Accession
PXD003387

### Title
Proteomic analysis of glutamine deprivation in HepG2 cells

### Description
We applied the quantitative proteomics approach to estimate the relative abundance of proteins in HepG2 cells treated by glutamine deprivation. Two independent cultured cell lysates, namely control and glutamine deprivation, were marked with iTRAQ labels and subjected to LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides of two samples were labeled with mass 113 (control) and 119 (glutamine deprivation) isobaric iTRAQ tags.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and treatments The human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 was a gift from Zaiqing Yang (Huazhong agriculture university, Wuhan, China) and cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM; Gibco, C11995) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, 10099-141), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 U/ml). Cells were maintained at 37 ℃ in an atmosphere of 5 % CO2. Two independent cell cultures were performed for iTRAQ analysis, namely control and glutamine deprivation. HepG2 cells in control group were cultured in complete medium. For glutamine deprivation assay, HepG2 cells were cultured in glutamine deprivation medium (DMEM medium (Sigma; D5546) which contains 1000 mg/L glucose and without glutamine, 10 % fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 U/ml)) for 50 min. Then cells were harvested. Cell lysis and protein preparation Cells were scraped in cold PBS and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 min at 4 ℃. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 % Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (1 μg/ml leupeptin, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 1 μg/ml pepstatin A, and 50 μg/ml PMSF). The lysates were placed on ice for 30 min, then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 ℃. Finally, the supernatants were kept at -80 ℃ for further analysis iTRAQ labeling and strong cationic-exchange chromatography (SCX) fractionation Each protein sample (100 μg) of the two independent cell cultures was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 ℃ for 16 h. Following trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.5 mol TEAB (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy). Two samples were labeled with iTRAQ tags as follow: control sample (113 tag) and glutamine deprivation sample (119 tag). The labeled samples were incubated for 2 h at room temperature, then they were mixed and dried by vacuum centrifugation. An LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) and 4.6 mm × 250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex) were coupled to SCX chromatography. The peptide mixtures were eluted for 10 min at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with 4 mL buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25 % ACN, pH 2.7), and for 27 min and 1 min with 5‒60 % and 60‒100 % buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25 % ACN, pH 2.7), respectively. The elution process was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm and fractions were collected every 1 min. Finally, 20 fractions were collected and desalted with a Strata X C18 column and vacuum-dried. LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis Each fraction was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min after resuspending in buffer A (2 % ACN, 0•1 % FA). Then, 5 μg labeled peptides was loaded onto LC-20AD nano-HPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column and eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm). The samples were loaded at 8 μl/min for 4 min, then the 44 min gradient was run at 300 nL/min starting from 2 % to 35 % buffer B (95 % ACN, 0.1 % FA), followed by 2 min linear gradient to 80 %, and maintenance at 80 % buffer B for 4 min, and finally return to 5 % buffer B in 1 min. Q-EXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer was coupled online to the HPLC. Peptides were detected by MS analysis with a resolution of 70,000 and a mass range of 350‒2,000 m/z. Then 15 most abundant precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 20,000 were selected for tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) analysis. MS/MS analysis was recorded with a resolution of 17,500 and a mass range of 100‒1,800 m/z. Peptides were fractured with a normalized collision energy setting of 27.0 and detected on the Q-EXACTIVE.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using 5600 msconverter. Protein identification was performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against the Uniport database containing human protein sequences. The precursor mass tolerance was set as 0.05 Da, and 0.1 Da for fragmented mass tolerance to prevent precursor interference. Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ) as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence of database was generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores ( ≥ 20) at the 99 % confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified, and each confident protein identification was supported by at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, it was required that a protein contains at least two unique peptides. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com/help/quant_config_help.html). The minimum precursor charge was set to 2+ and minimum peptides were set to 2 and only unique peptides were used to quantify proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Glutamine, a multifunctional amino acid, functions in nutrient metabolism, energy balance, apoptosis, and cell proliferation. Lipid is an important nutrient and controls a broad range of physiological processes. Previous studies have demonstrated that glutamine can affect lipolysis and lipogenesis, but the effect of glutamine on the detailed lipid metabolism remains incompletely understood. Here, we applied the quantitative proteomics approach to estimate the relative abundance of proteins in HepG2 cells treated by glutamine deprivation. The results showed that there were 212 differentially abundant proteins in response to glutamine deprivation, including 150 significantly increased proteins and 62 significantly decreased proteins. Interestingly, functional classification showed that 43 differentially abundant proteins were related to lipid metabolism. Further bioinformatics analysis and western blotting validation revealed that lipid accumulation may be affected by &#x3b2;-oxidation of fatty acid induced by glutamine deprivation in HepG2 cells. Together, our results may provide the potential for regulating lipid metabolism by glutamine in animal production and human nutrition. The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifier PXD003387.

### Keywords
Hepg2 cells, Glutamine

### Affiliations
Hua Zhong Agricultural University
College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
Baisheng Long

### Lab Head
Dr Xianghua Yan
College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, China


