### Accession
PXD042146

### Title
Immunoprecipitation of RNA-DNA hybrid interacting proteins in Trypanosoma brucei reveals conserved and novel activities, including in host immune evasion by antigenic variation

### Description
RNA-DNA hybrids are widespread epigenetic features of genomes that provide a growing range of activities in transcription, chromatin and DNA replication and repair. Understanding of these diverse functions has been advanced by characterising the proteins that interact with the hybrids, with all such studies revealing hundreds of potential interactors. However, all interaction analyses to date have focused on mammalian cells, and so it is unclear if a similar spectrum of RNA-DNA hybrid interactors found in other eukaryotes, thus limiting our understanding of the conserved and lineage-specific activities linked to these genetic structures. The African trypanosome is a compelling organism in which to address these questions. As a divergent single-cell eukaryotic parasite of the Discoba grouping, Trypanosoma brucei displays substantial divergence in several aspects of core biology from its mammalian host and, unusually for a protist, has well-developed tools for molecular genetic analysis. For these reasons, we used DNA-RNA hybrid immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry to reveal 602 putative interactors in T. brucei mammal- or insect vector-infective stage cells. We show that the approach selects for a subset of the parasite proteome and reveals a range of predicted RNA-DNA hybrid associated activities, some overlapping with similar studies in mammals. We demonstrate that loss of three factors, two putative helicases and a RAD51 paralogue, impact on T. brucei nuclear RNA-DNA hybrid and DNA damage levels. Moreover, loss of each affects the operation of the crucial parasite immune survival mechanism of antigenic variation. Thus, our work reveals the broad range of activities contributed by RNA-DNA hybrids to T. brucei biology, including new functions in host immune evasion as well as many conserved with mammals, and so likely fundamental to eukaryotic genome function.

### Sample Protocol
DRIP-MS  DRIP-MS approach was adapted from Cristini et al (Cristini et al., 2018). 2.5 x 108 mid-log growth phase parasites were pelleted and washed in 1 ml of 1X PBS, before incubation in 1 mL of lysis buffer (80 mM KCl, 5 mM PIPES pH 8.0, 0.5% Nonidet P-40 substitute) on ice for 20 min. The pellet was homogenized using a tight-fitting dounce homogenizer until the nuclei were release, as checked with microscope. Nuclei were pelleted (2,400 rcf for 10 min, 4 ºC) and resuspended in 200 μL of RSB sonication buffer [1X RSB buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2), 0.2% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 0.05% sodium lauroyl sarcosinate, 0.5% Triton X-100] before sonicating for 10 min in the Diagenode Bioruptor using cycles of 30 sec ON and 90 sec OFF. The sonicated nuclei were then diluted with 600 μL RSB+T buffer (1X RSB buffer, 0.5% Triton X-100) plus 0.8 ng RNase A to degrade single-stranded RNA. For benzonase control IPs, 1U/μL benzonase was added and incubated for 30 min at 37ºC. 20 μL was reserved as input control samples. Pre-prepared Protein A Dynabeads (incubated with 5 μg of S9.6 antibody (Millipore) in 1X PBS plus 0.5% BSA overnight at 4ºC), were washed in 1X PBS + 0.5% BSA and suspended in the sonicated sample. Samples were incubated on a rotor at 4ºC for 2 hrs to bind DNA-RNA hybrids and interacting proteins. Beads were then wash in 1 mL cold RSB+T buffer (4 times) and 1 mL cold RSB buffer (twice), before collecting by centrifugation at 1,000 rcf for 3 min at 4ºC. Beads were retained using a magnetic rack and supernatant was discarded. Beads were suspended in 15 μL loading buffer (1X NuPAGE LDS loading buffer, 1X PBS, 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol) for 10 min at 70ºC. Beads were pelleted and supernatant, containing eluted proteins collected.  Proteins were resolved using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and stained using InstantBlue® Coomassie Protein Stain (Abcam). Gel segments only found in S9.6 IP samples and not benzonase controls were excised for Nanoflow HPLC Electrospray Tandem Mass Spectrometry (nLC-ESIMS/MS), performed by Proteomics Facility of Glasgow Polyomics. Briefly, the gel pieces were de-  stained by incubation in 500 μL of 50% acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min on a shaker, dehydrated by incubation in acetonitrile for 10 min then dried a vacuum centrifuge. Trypsin was added to rehydrate the gel pieces and digested overnight at 37ºC, before gel pieces were pelleted. The supernatant containing peptides was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and solubilized in 20 μL 5% acetonitrile with 0.5% formic acid.  Trypsinized peptide samples were analyzed using nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-ESI–MS/MS). Online detection of peptide ion was by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Elite MS (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a PepmapTM C18 reversed phase column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm) (Thermo Scientific). Samples were fractionated with mobile phase A consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisting of acetonitrile (80% v/v) and water (20% v/v). The peptide separation was performed at a fixed solvent flow rate of 0.3 µL/min, using a gradient of 4–100% mobile phase B over 120 min. The Orbitrap EliteTM MS acquired full-scan spectra in the mass range of m/z 300–2000 Da for a high-resolution precursor scan at a set mass resolving power of 60,000 (at 400 m/z). Collision-induced dissociation was performed in the linear ion trap with the 20 most abundant precursors using rapid scan mode.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (v2.6.2, Matrix Science) by interrogating MS data against protein databases of Trypanosoma brucei Lister 427. A mass tolerance of 10 ppm was allowed for the precursor and 0.3 Da for MS/MS matching, with the following search parameters: trypsin enzyme specificity, allowing one missed cleavage; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification, while N-terminal carbamidomethylation, asparagine-glutamine deamidation, tyrosine iodination, and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Proteins within a significance score of p < 0.05 and with at least one unique peptide were considered. Four and two independent biological replicates were generated for BSF and PCF T. brucei, respectively. Corresponding emPAI values were compared between IP and benzonase controls; proteins with mean log2 fold-change >0 across all biological replicates constituted the RNA/DNA hybrid interactome for each form. BSF-specific interactome was defined as proteins with > 0 log2 fold-change in BSF vs PCF.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-DNA hybrids are epigenetic features of genomes that provide a diverse and growing range of activities. Understanding of these functions has been informed by characterising the proteins that interact with the hybrids, but all such analyses have so far focused on mammals, meaning it is unclear if a similar spectrum of RNA-DNA hybrid interactors is found in other eukaryotes. The African trypanosome is a single-cell eukaryotic parasite of the Discoba grouping and displays substantial divergence in several aspects of core biology from its mammalian host. Here, we show that DNA-RNA hybrid immunoprecipitation coupled with mass spectrometry recovers 602 putative interactors in T. brucei mammal- and insect-infective cells, some providing activities also found in mammals and some lineage-specific. We demonstrate that loss of three factors, two putative helicases and a RAD51 paralogue, alters T. brucei nuclear RNA-DNA hybrid and DNA damage levels. Moreover, loss of each factor affects the operation of the parasite immune survival mechanism of antigenic variation. Thus, our work reveals the broad range of activities contributed by RNA-DNA hybrids to T. brucei biology, including new functions in host immune evasion as well as activities likely fundamental to eukaryotic genome function.

### Keywords
R loops; dna-rna interactors

### Affiliations
University of Glasgow

### Submitter
Richard Burchmore

### Lab Head
Dr Richard McCulloch
University of Glasgow


