### Accession
PXD045665

### Title
Loss of lysosomal acid lipase results in mitochondrial dysfunction and fiber switch in skeletal muscles of mice

### Description
Objective: Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) is the only enzyme known to hydrolyze cholesteryl esters (CE) and triacylglycerols in lysosomes at an acidic pH. Despite the importance of lysosomal hydrolysis in skeletal muscle (SM), research in this area is limited. We hypothesized that LAL may play an important role in SM development, function, and metabolism as a result of lipid and/or carbohydrate metabolism disruptions. Results: Mice with systemic LAL deficiency (Lal-/-) had markedly lower SM mass, cross-sectional area, and Feret diameter despite unchanged proteolysis or protein synthesis markers in all SM examined. In addition, Lal-/- SM showed increased total cholesterol and CE concentrations, especially during fasting and maturation. Regardless of increased glucose uptake, expression of the slow oxidative fiber marker MYH7 was markedly increased in Lal-/-SM, indicating a fiber switch from glycolytic, fast-twitch fibers to oxidative, slow-twitch fibers. Proteomic analysis of the oxidative and glycolytic parts of the SM confirmed the transition between fast- and slow-twitch fibers, consistent with the decreased Lal-/- muscle size due to the “fiber paradox”. Decreased oxidative capacity and ATP concentration were associated with reduced mitochondrial function of Lal-/- SM, particularly affecting oxidative phosphorylation, despite unchanged structure and number of mitochondria. Impairment in muscle function was reflected by increased exhaustion in the treadmill peak effort test in vivo. Conclusion: We conclude that whole-body loss of LAL is associated with a profound remodeling of the muscular phenotype, manifested by fiber type switch and a decline in muscle mass, most likely due to dysfunctional mitochondria and impaired energy metabolism, at least in mice.

### Sample Protocol
“Red” and “white” parts of GA were lysed in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 containing 1% SDS, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, and 40 mM chloroacetamide using Bead Mill Max in combination with 2.8 mm ceramic beads (VWR International GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany). Samples were then reduced and alkylated at 95°C for 10 min and centrifuged at 7,000 x g and 4°C for 5 min to remove cell debris. After protein estimation by PierceTM BCA Protein Assay, 50 µg of each sample was precipitated with acetone, dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), and digested with Promega Trypsin/LysC Mix (25:1) by overnight shaking at 550 rpm and 37°C. Thereafter, 4 µg of the peptide solution was acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using self-made stage-tips with styrenedivinylbenzene - reversed phase sulfonate as material. Peptides were separated on the UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano  Dionex system (ThermoFisher Scientific Waltham, MA) using an IonOpticks Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm) (IonOpticks, Fitzroy, Australia) by applying an 86.5 min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min at 40°C (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water; solvent B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; 0-5.5 min: 2% B; 5.5-25.5 min: 2-10% B; 25.5-45.5 min: 10-25% B, 45.5-55.5 min: 25-37% B, 55.5-65.5 min: 37-80% B, 65.5-75.5 min: 80% B; 75.5-76.5 min: 80-2% B; 76.5-86.5 min: 2% B). The timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) was operated as follows: positive mode, enabled trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS), 100% duty cycle (ramp 100 ms); source capillary voltage: 1600 V; dry gas flow: 3 L/min, 180°C; scan mode: data-independent parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation as previously described by Meier using 21 x 25 Th isolation windows, m/z 475 – 1,000; 0 Th overlap between windows. Two and three isolation windows were fragmented per TIMS ramp after the MS1 scan, respectively (overall DIA cycle time: 0.95 s).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed and proteins were quantified using DIA-NN software (version 1.8.1). The SwissProt Mus musculus proteome database in fasta format (containing common contaminants; downloaded on 2021/08/17, 17,219 sequences) was used for a library-free search with FDR set to 1%. Deep learning-based spectra and retention time prediction was enabled, minimum fragment m/z was set to 200 and maximum fragment m/z to 1800. N-terminal methionine excision was enabled, and the maximum number of trypsin missed cleavages was set to 2. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 and the maximum to 30 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. DIA-NN optimized the mass accuracy automatically using the first run in the experiment. Data processing using protein group quantities and functional analysis were done with Perseus software version 1.6.15.0, Jupyter Notebook using Python version 3.9 and Cytoscape. Protein intensities were log2-transformed before filtering the data for at least 4 valid values in at least one group and replacing missing values by random values from the Gaussian distribution (width of 0.3, downshift of 1.8).  Principal component analyses were performed on standardized data (z-scored) and visualized with Jupyter Notebook using the Pandas, Numpy, Matplotlib, Sklearn, Seaborn, and Bioinfokit packages. Two-sample t-tests followed by correction of multiple testing by the permutation-based FDR method were used to identify altered protein groups (S0 = 0.1, FDR < 0.01 ). Enrichment analysis for Gene Ontology Biological Process (GOBP), GO Cellular Component (GOCC), and Reactome pathways was performed using the PANTHER enrichment test for log2-fold changes of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lal deficiency, Energy metabolism, Lal-deficient mouse, Lal, Muscle proteomics

### Affiliations
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria;  Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;  BiotechMed-Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria; 

### Submitter
Laura Liesinger

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien (TU Wien), 1060 Vienna, Austria;  Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;  BiotechMed-Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria;


