### Accession
PXD002601

### Title
HYPE mediated AMPylation profiling in human lysates

### Description
We describe here the first example of global chemoproteomic screening and substrate validation for HYPE mediated AMPylation in mammalian cell lysate. Through quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics coupled with novel chemoproteomic tools providing MS/MS evidence of AMP modification we identified a total of 27 AMPylated proteins, including the previously validated substrate, ER chaperone BiP (HSPA5), along with novel substrates involved in pathways of gene expression, ATP biosynthesis and maintenance of cytoskeleton. This dataset represents the largest library of AMPylated human proteins reported to date and a foundation for substrate-specific investigations that can ultimately decipher the complex biological networks involved in eukaryotic AMPylation.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC based identification of HYPE candidate substrates in cell lysates, AMPylation was carried out separately in 0.2 mg of light (no enzyme control) and 0.2 mg of heavy (various AMPylators) labeled HEK293 lysates in AMPylation buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 % Triton X-100, 1 x EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor) supplemented with DTT (1 mM), bioorthogonal substrate probe Yn-6-ATP (100 µM) and +/- recombinant AMPylators (1/10 w/w enzyme to total protein). After 3 h at 30 °C the lysates were mixed in 1:1 ratio and proteins were immediately precipitated to quench the reaction. Samples were prepared in biochemical triplicates. For HYPE titration and ATP competition experiments a ‘spike in’ standard was prepared by performing AMPylation reaction with HYPE E234G for 3 h at 30 °C as described above in a heavy labeled HEK293 lysate. This standard was then added in 1:2 ratio to light samples (0.2 mg each) prepared analogously and supplemented with decreasing amounts of HYPE E234G (1/10 – 1/1000 w/w enzyme to total protein) or increasing amounts of ATP (0 – 1000 µM) followed by immediate protein precipitation to quench the reaction. Those samples were prepared in biochemical duplicates. Proteins (2 mg/mL, 0.4 %SDS in PBS) were subjected to CuAAC to biotinylated capture reagent followed by enrichment of target proteins on NeutrAvidin agarose resin. Protein digestion on-bead was initiated upon addition of trypsin (ca. 1/1000 w/w protease to protein) and samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C and stage-tip purified prior to shotgun analysis on a QExactive mass spectrometer. For AMPylation site identification only light lysates were used in AMPylation reactions and site ID reagent (Az-RTB) was used for target enrichment. For identification of HYPE interaction partners in vivo HEK293 cells grown in R10K8 or R0K0 DMEM were supplemented with biotin (4 µM) and reverse transfected with equal amounts of WT-bio and BirA or BirA alone for 18 h. Heavy (WT-bio/BirA) and light (BirA) lysates (120 µg each) were used immediately to maintain native protein interactions. The samples were enriched separately on NeutrAvidin beads for 1 h. The beads were then mixed in 1:1 ratio, proteins were reduced alkylated and digested with trypsin. Samples were prepared in biological duplicates.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25) and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against human referenced (with isoforms) proteome (UniProt, October 2014, 41,917 entries) using Andromeda search engine. SILAC based experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the built-in quantification algorithm with minimal ratio count = 2 and enabled ‘Match between runs’ option (time window 0.7 minutes) and ‘Re-quantify’ feature. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification (PPI experiments only) and methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-terminus as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome the following peptide bond cleavages were allowed: arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid (a general setting referred to as Trypsin/P). Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.  “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected to allow identification and quantification of proteins in groups (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). AMPylation site ID data were processed with PEAKS7 suite. Samples were searched against the same UniProt Homo sapiens database that was used in MaxQuant analyses. Trypsin (specific, up to three missed cleavages allowed) was selected for database searches, and no enzyme was chosen in de novo searches (up to 5 candidates per spectrum reported). The maximal mass error was set to 10 ppm (de novo search) or 5 ppm (database search) for precursor ions and 0.01 Da for product ions. Methionine oxidation as well as AMP-derived adducts (+624.1918 Da and +329.0525 Da) to Ser, Thr and Tyr were set as variable modifications. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set as five. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides and minimum of one unique peptide per protein was required.

### Publication Abstract
AMPylation of mammalian small GTPases by bacterial virulence factors can be a key step in bacterial infection of host cells, and constitutes a potential drug target. This posttranslational modification also exists in eukaryotes, and AMP transferase activity was recently assigned to HYPE Filamentation induced by cyclic AMP domain containing protein (FICD) protein, which is conserved from Caenorhabditis elegans to humans. In contrast to bacterial AMP transferases, only a small number of HYPE substrates have been identified by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry approaches, and the full range of targets is yet to be determined in mammalian cells. We describe here the first example of global chemoproteomic screening and substrate validation for HYPE-mediated AMPylation in mammalian cell lysate. Through quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics coupled with novel chemoproteomic tools providing MS/MS evidence of AMP modification, we identified a total of 25 AMPylated proteins, including the previously validated substrate endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone BiP (HSPA5), and also novel substrates involved in pathways of gene expression, ATP biosynthesis, and maintenance of the cytoskeleton. This dataset represents the largest library of AMPylated human proteins reported to date and a foundation for substrate-specific investigations that can ultimately decipher the complex biological networks involved in eukaryotic AMPylation.

### Keywords
Fic, Hype, Ampylation, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London Department of Chemistry
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Edward W. Tate
Imperial College London Department of Chemistry


