### Accession
PXD031114

### Title
Optimized TMT-based quantitative cross-linking mass spectrometry strategy for large-scale interactomic studies

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry is a powerful method for the investigation of protein-protein interactions from highly complex samples. XL-MS combined with tandem mass tag labeling holds the promise of large-scale PPI quantification. However, a robust and efficient TMT-based XL-MS quantification method has not yet been established due to the lack of a benchmarking dataset and thorough evaluation of various MS parameters. To tackle these limitations, we generate a two-interactome dataset by spiking-in TMT-labeled cross-linked E. coli lysate into TMT-labeled cross-linked HEK293T lysate using a defined mixing scheme. Using this benchmarking dataset, we assess the efficacy of cross-link identification and accuracy of cross-link quantification using different MS acquisition strategies. For identification, we compare various MS2- and MS3-based XL-MS methods, and optimize stepped HCD energies for TMT-labeled cross-links. We observed a need for notably higher fragmentation energies compared to unlabeled cross-links. For quantification, we assess the quantification accuracy and dispersion of MS2-, MS3- and synchronous precursor selection-MS3-based methods. We show that a stepped HCD-MS2 method with stepped collision energies 36-42-48 provides a vast number of quantifiable cross-links with high quantification accuracy. This widely applicable method paves the way for multiplexed quantitative PPI characterization from complex biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and cross-linking: HEK293T and E. coli cell pellets were resuspended in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.8 to a concentration of 1 mg/mL. For cross-linking, 0.5 mM DSSO cross-linker was added twice to the cell suspension and incubated for 30 min each at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and incubation for 15 min at room temperature. HEK239T cells were lysed with 8 M Urea, 50 mM TEAB supplemented with protease inhibitor and then sonicated. All forms of DNA and RNA were degraded using 250 U Benzonase. E. coli cells were lysed for 10 min at 100 °C in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, followed by sonication. Proteins were precipitated by adding one sample volume of chloroform and four sample volumes of methanol. Cross-linked proteins were reduced, alkylated and proteolyzed with Lys-C endopeptidase and trypsin. The digestion was stopped with 1% formic acid (FA). Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C8 cartridges (Waters), quantified with Pierce colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried and stored at ‒20 °C until further use. TMT-labeling: Peptides were reconstituted in 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 to a concentration of 5 µg/µL. 0.8 mg TMT reagent was dissolved in 42 µL 100% ACN. For each TMT channel, 100 µg of peptides were labeled with 160 µg TMT 10-plex reagent (Thermo Scientific). The reaction mixture was incubated for 1 h at room temperature and quenched with 66 mM Tris pH 8.0 for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were mixed and dried. Strong cation exchange chromatography: Peptides were resuspended in 1% FA and desalted using Sep-Pak C8. Desalted peptides were loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL A column (PolyLC INC.) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity II system and separated using a 90 min gradient. Selected fractions were resuspended in 1% FA and desalted with C8 StageTips.  LC-MS/MS analysis: Separation of the samples was achieved by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex™ UltiMate™ 3000 system connected to a PepMap C-18 trap-column (Thermo Scientific) and an in-house packed C18 column for RP separation at 300 nL/min flow rate. RP separation was accomplished using a 180 min gradient. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with FAIMS Pro™ device (Thermo Scientific) and Instrument Control Software version 3.4. Cross-linked samples were fragmented using different acquisition strategies, including CID-MS2-CID-MS3, CID-MS2-HCD-MS3, stepped HCD-MS2, stepped HCD-MS2-CID-MS3, CID-MS2-HCD-MS3-SPS-MS3, and stepped HCD-MS2-SPS-MS3. Samples for method testing were measured in technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: RAW files were searched for cross-links with XlinkX v2.0 node in Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Scientific). Mono-links and linear peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT search engine node. XlinkX node parameters were used as follows: MS1 mass tolerance, 10 ppm; MS2 mass tolerance, 20 ppm; MS3 mass tolerance, 0.5 Da; maximum number of missed cleavages, 3; minimum peptide length, 6; peptide-mass, 350 – 8,000 Da. The acquisition strategy in the XlinkX node was adjusted according to the experiment. Cross-links were detected by searching for the DSSO modification (+ 158.004 Da) on lysines. Carbamidomethylation (+ 57.021 Da) on cysteines was used as a static modification. Oxidation of methionine (+ 15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. TMT6plex (+ 229.163 Da) was added as a modification for lysines and peptide N-termini. Data were searched against a database containing 5812 identified human Uniprot/SwissProt entries for DSSO method testing. For TMT interference studies, cross-links were searched against a database with 2919 human and 1366 E. coli proteins generated from a linear peptide search of an unfractionated sample using the whole Uniprot human proteome and E. coli BL21-DE3 proteome. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the CSM level by simple FDR validation. Identified cross-links were further filtered using an XlinkX Score cutoff of 50 and a ΔXlinkX Score cutoff of 10. For reporter ion quantification, isotope correction was applied and the co-isolation threshold was set to 75% for SPS-MS3 quantification and 50% for MS2 quantification. Average reporter signal-to-noise was set to 10. Additionally, for SPS-MS3 methods, at least 65% of MS2 fragments needed to be selected for MS3 fragmentation. Imputation was disabled.  Inclusion list: For NCE optimization experiments, the benchmarking samples were measured using stepped HCD-MS2 21-27-33 and searched with XlinkX node in Proteome Discoverer. The reduced database containing 2919 human and 1366 E. coli proteins identified from a linear peptide search was used for cross-link search. The precursor masses from 1011 CSMs of the TMT-labeled sample and 943 CSMs of the unlabeled samples with charge states from +4 to +6 were transferred to targeted inclusion lists with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and ± 10 min retention time window. Measurements for NCE optimization were performed on the same sample as previously described16 using four consecutive NCEs per acquisition. Quantitative data analysis and data presentation: For quantification accuracy and dispersion analyses, TMT abundance values of identified cross-links were exported from Proteome Discoverer. Identifications were filtered for cross-links containing only human peptides with abundance values > 0 in all channels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Interference, Ratio distortion, Dsso, Lumos, Hek, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Sps, Stepped hcd, Faims, Mass spectrometry, E. coli

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut for Molecular Pharmacology
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut fuer Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Max Ruwolt

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Liu
Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut fuer Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin, Germany


