### Accession
PXD007533

### Title
Vitamin C inhibits bacterial biofilms by affecting the synthesis of the extracellular polymeric matrix

### Description
Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) produced by bacteria form a matrix for the complex three-dimensional architecture of biofilms. The EPS matrix of a biofilm is primarily composed of polysaccharides, proteins and extracellular DNA (eDNA). In addition to supporting the community structure, the EPS matrix protects bacterial biofilms from the environment. Specifically, the EPS matrix reduces the penetration of antimicrobial agents into the biofilm, thereby reducing their efficiency. Strategies for disrupting the formation of the EPS matrix can therefore lead to a more efficient use of antimicrobial agents. Here, we examine the biofilm-disrupting activity of vitamin C (sodium ascorbate). Quantitative proteomics analysis of vitamin C treated biofilms show that exposure to vitamin C inhibits quorum sensing and other regulatory mechanisms underpinning biofilm development. This results in inhibition of the EPS biosynthesis, and depletion of the polysaccharide component of the matrix. Once the EPS content is reduced beyond a critical point, bacterial cells get fully exposed to the medium, thereby experiencing a planktonic-like state.  At this stage, the cells are more susceptible to killing, either by vitamin C-induced oxidative stress as reported here, or by other antibacterial compounds or treatments.

### Sample Protocol
All experiments for MS analysis were carried out in biological triplicates. 24 h biofilms of B. subtilis (control as well as sodium ascorbate treated) were collected and centrifuged to obtain a cell pellet. Cell lysis was performed. Protein lysate obtained was digested with endoprotease Trypsin.Samples were analyzed on an Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.3.30) (20), integrated with an Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy database of Bacillus subtilis 168 downloaded from UniProt (taxonomy ID 1423), containing 4,195 protein entries, and additionally including also 248 commonly observed laboratory contaminant proteins. Endoprotease Trypsin/P was set as the protease with a maximum missed cleavage of two. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification. Label free quantification was enabled with a minimum ratio count of two. A false discovery rate of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein level individually for filtering identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacteria, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Professor Director of Chalmers Area of Advance Life Science Engineering  Systems and Synthetic Biology  Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Vaishnavi Ravikumar

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Mijakovic
Professor Director of Chalmers Area of Advance Life Science Engineering  Systems and Synthetic Biology  Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10 SE-412 96 Göteborg SWEDEN


