### Accession
PXD016839

### Title
Antileukemic activity of the VPS34-IN1 inhibitor in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive disease with a poor prognosis. Vacuolar protein sorting 34 (VPS34) is a member of the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase lipid kinase family that controls the canonical autophagy pathway and vesicular trafficking. Using a recently developed specific inhibitor (VPS34-IN1), we found that a VPS34 block induces apoptosis in AML cells but not in normal CD34+ hematopoietic cells. Complete and acute inhibition of VPS34 was required for the anti-leukemic activity of VPS34-IN1. This inhibitor also has pleiotropic effects against various cellular functions related to class III PI3K in AML cells that may explain their survival impairment. VPS34-IN1 inhibits basal and L-asparaginase-induced autophagy in AML cells. A synergistic cell death activity of this drug was also demonstrated. VPS34-IN1 was additionally found to impair vesicular trafficking and mTORC1 signaling. From an unbiased approach based on phosphoproteomic analysis, we identified that VPS34-IN1 specifically inhibits STAT5 phosphorylation downstream of FLT3-ITD signaling in AML. The identification of the mechanisms controlling FLT3-ITD signaling by VPS34 represents an important insight into the oncogenesis of AML and could lead to new therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomic analysis: MOLM-14 cells were cultivated for 2 weeks with heavy lysine (+8 Da) and heavy arginine (+10 Da). At the end of the culture period, more than 90% of Arg and Lys in the proteins were of the heavy forms. Two distinct experiments were then performed with a label swap between the two. In the first of these, heavy cells were treated with 5µM VPS34-IN1 for 1 hour while light cells received vehicle only (DMSO). At the end of the experiment, cells were recovered and the heavy (VPS34-IN1-treated) and light (control) cells were mixed. In the second experiment, light cells were treated with VPS34-IN1 and heavy cells were used as a control. After PBS washing, 50x106 mixed cells were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with 1 ml buffer A (100 mM Tris/HCl pH8.00 containing 8M urea, 1 mM sodium glycerophosphate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 20 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 50 mM sodium chloroacetamide). The cell extract was then diluted with 3 ml 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.00 and incubated overnight with 400 µg trypsin. Peptides were cleaned by chromatography through SepPak columns and dried. Two mg of peptides were used for phosphopeptide purification using TiO2 (Titansphere, GL Science) and 2 mg were also used for the purification of phosphotyrosine-containing peptides using anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies. Two successive immunoprecipitations were performed using PY100 antibodies in the first instance (Cell Signaling Technology) and then protein-sepharose (GE Healthcare; Chicago, IL), followed by a mixture of agarose-bound PY99 (Santa-Cruz; Heidelberg, Germany) and 4G10 (Millipore;  Darmstat, Germany) antibodies. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed using a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were solubilized in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) containing 10% acetonitrile (ACN) and separated on a C18 column (2 µm particle size, 75 µm inner diameter, 15 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 3 hour gradient (TiO2 purified peptides) or a 1 hour gradient (anti-phosphotyrosine purified peptides) starting from 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and ending with 55% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent manner and full MS scans were acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by stepped-HCD fragmentation at NCE 30 +/-5% on the most abundant ions, and fragments detection in the ion trap with top speed mode set at 5 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox J. et col. Nat. protocols 2009). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2016-06) and a list of contaminant sequences from MaxQuant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin’s. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification while acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification Phosphoproteomics: the modification table of phosphosites (STY) allowed location of phosphotyrosines positions which are highlighted in the supplemental table 2. The percentage of phosphorylation inhibition was obtained from the averaged values out of the two distinct experiments with swapped SILAC labels.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive disease with a poor prognosis. Vacuolar protein sorting 34 (VPS34) is a member of the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase lipid kinase family that controls the canonical autophagy pathway and vesicular trafficking. Using a recently developed specific inhibitor (VPS34-IN1), we found that VPS34 inhibition induces apoptosis in AML cells but not in normal CD34+ hematopoietic cells. Complete and acute inhibition of VPS34 was required for the antileukemic activity of VPS34-IN1. This inhibitor also has pleiotropic effects against various cellular functions related to class III PI3K in AML cells that may explain their survival impairment. VPS34-IN1 inhibits basal and L-asparaginase-induced autophagy in AML cells. A synergistic cell death activity of this drug was also demonstrated. VPS34-IN1 was additionally found to impair vesicular trafficking and mTORC1 signaling. From an unbiased approach based on phosphoproteomic analysis, we identified that VPS34-IN1 specifically inhibits STAT5 phosphorylation downstream of FLT3-ITD signaling in AML. The identification of the mechanisms controlling FLT3-ITD signaling by VPS34 represents an important insight into the oncogenesis of AML and could lead to new therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Aml, L-asparaginase, Vps34, Autophagy, Vps34-in1, Human molm-14 cells, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Service d’hématologie Clinique et biologique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris. Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, Inserm U1016, Département Développement, Reproduction, Cancer, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 8104 Paris
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Bouscary
Service d’hématologie Clinique et biologique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris. Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, Inserm U1016, Département Développement, Reproduction, Cancer, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 8104 Paris


