### Accession
PXD022199

### Title
Proteomics analysis of a new Cas9-targeting PROTAC molecule

### Description
Scientists have developed several methods to control the activity of Cas protein in a timely way and hence reduce off-target effects, including anti-CRISPR proteins and small molecule inhibitors. The PROTAC is a new conception of using the natural ubiquitin-proteasome system to degrade the protein of interest in drug design and development. Here, we engineered Cas proteins (Cas9, Cas12, and Cas13) by inserting a Phe-Cys-Pro-Phe (FCPF) amino acid sequence (also known as the π-clamp system) and demonstrate that the modified CasFCPF proteins could be labeled in live cells by perfluoroaromatics carrying FITC fluorophore or were degraded by perfluoroaromatics-functionalized PROTAC (PROTAC-FCPF). Proteome-wide analysis of PROTAC-FCPF-mediated Cas9FCPF protein degradation revealed high target specificity, suggesting a wide application of chemically induced proximity in combination with site-specific protein modification in the regulation of protein stability, activity and functionality.

### Sample Protocol
Gel lanes were cut into 7 equally sized bands using a grid-cutter (Gel Company, San Francisco, CA) and gel bands were processed as previously described (Shevchenko et al., 2007), with minor modifications. Briefly, individual gel bands were destained with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) in 50mM Ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC) and proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56°C, alkylated with 40mM Chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at RT under light-protection and digested with 350ng Trypsin at 37°C over-night, all in the presence of 50mM ABC. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel pieces consecutively with 30% ACN containing 0.5% Formic acid (FA), then 60% ACN containing 1% FA and finally 100% ACN for 30 minutes each. Extraction solutions were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation before reconstitution in 200 µl 75% isopropanol, 0.75% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptide clean-up using SDB-RPS stage tips (Empore discs, 3M) according to Kulak et al., 2014.Dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur , Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4-28% acetonitrile over 45 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (300-1650 m/z) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 15 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 15,000, a maximum injection time of 25 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state above 5 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20s to minimize the acquisition of fragment spectra of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.14.0) applying default parameters. Acquired spectra were searched against the human “one sequence per gene” database (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (12-03-2020; 20531 sequences), the sequence of the FCPF-mutant of Cas9 as well as a collection of 244 common contaminants (“contaminants.fasta” provided with MaxQuant) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016a). Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Protein quantification and data normalization relied on the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
The discovery of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats and their associated proteins (Cas) has revolutionized the field of genome and epigenome editing. A number of new methods have been developed to precisely control the function and activity of Cas proteins, including fusion proteins and small-molecule modulators. Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) represent a new concept using the ubiquitin-proteasome system to degrade a protein of interest, highlighting the significance of chemically induced protein-E3 ligase interaction in drug discovery. Here, we engineered Cas proteins (Cas9, dCas9, Cas12, and Cas13) by inserting a Phe-Cys-Pro-Phe (FCPF) amino acid sequence (known as the &#x3c0;-clamp system) and demonstrate that the modified Cas<sup>FCPF</sup> proteins can be (1) labeled in live cells by perfluoroaromatics carrying the fluorescein or (2) degraded by a perfluoroaromatics-functionalized PROTAC (PROTAC-FCPF). A proteome-wide analysis of PROTAC-FCPF-mediated Cas9<sup>FCPF</sup> protein degradation revealed a high target specificity, suggesting a wide range of applications of perfluoroaromatics-induced proximity in the regulation of stability, activity, and functionality of any FCPF-tagging protein.

### Keywords
Crispr-cas9, Protac, Qexactive hf, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 15. R. 3.652, D-60438 Frankfurt am Main.
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Xinlai Cheng
Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 15. R. 3.652, D-60438 Frankfurt am Main.


