### Accession
PXD002390

### Title
Identification of microRNA394 target genes in A. thaliana

### Description
Expression of the F-Box protein Leaf Curling Responsiveness (LCR) is regulated by microRNA, miR394, and alterations to this interplay in Arabidopsis thaliana produce defects in leaf polarity and shoot apical meristem (SAM) organisation. Although the miR394-LCR node has been documented in Arabidopsis, the identification of proteins targeted by LCR F-box itself has proven problematic. Here, a proteomic analysis of shoot apices from plants with altered LCR levels identified a member of the Major Latex Protein (MLP) family gene as a potential LCR F-box target. Bioinformatic and molecular analyses also suggested that other MLP family members are likely to be targets for this post-translational regulation. Direct interaction between LCR F-Box and MLP423 was validated. Additional MLP members had reduction in protein accumulation, in varying degrees, mediated by LCR F-Box. Transgenic Arabidopsis lines, in which MLP28 expression was reduced through an artificial miRNA technology, displayed severe developmental defects, including changes in leaf patterning and morphology, shoot apex defects, and eventual premature death. These phenotypic characteristics resemble those of Arabidopsis plants modified to over-express LCR. Taken together, the results demonstrate that MLPs are driven to degradation by LCR, and indicate that MLP gene family is target of miR394-LCR regulatory node, representing potential targets for directly post-translational regulation mediated by LCR F-Box. In addition, MLP28 family member is associated with the LCR regulation that is critical for normal Arabidopsis development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from shot apexes dissected from Arabidopsis seedlings [approximately 8 plants per biological replicate; wild-type Arabidopsis and LCR-overexpression (OE) and LCR-kockdown (KD) transformant lines] as described previously [29]. Peptide preparation, stable isotope labelling with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ; ABSciex), peptide fractionation, and nano-reverse phase liquid chromatography- electrospray ionization- tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed as described previously [30]. Briefly, 100 µg of peptide was labelled with iTRAQ according to the manufacturer’s instructions and desalted with hydrophilic-lipophilic balance solid phase extraction (Waters; Milford, MA). The peptides were resuspended in 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and fractionated into 10-11 fractions on an in-house packed amide-HILIC column (320 µm x 17 cm with µm particles; Tosoh, Japan) using an Agilent 1200. The gradient was 90% - 60% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA over 30 min at 6 µl/min. Each fraction was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and separated on an in-house packed C18AQ column (75 µm x 17 cm with 3 µm particles; Dr Maisch, Germany) using an Easy nLC-II. The gradient was 0-30% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid over 120 min at 250 nl/min. The separation was coupled to either an LTQ-Orbitrap XL or LTQ-Orbitrap velos. For LTQ-Orbitrap XL analysis, an MS1 precursor scan was measured at 400-1600 m/z (30,000 resolution and 1e6 AGC) followed by data-dependent MS2 analysis by both LTQ-CID (35 NCE and 3e4 AGC) and Orbitrap-HCD (55 NCE, 7,500 resolution and 4e5 AGC) of the top three most intense ions. For LTQ-Orbitrap velos analysis, a similar data-dependent acquisition was performed except the top seven most intense ions were analysed by Orbitrap-HCD only (48 NCE, 7,500 resolution and 4e4 AGC). An additional biological replicate was performed with 3-plex dimethyl labelling with labelling performed essentially as described previously [31]. These peptides were fractionated by amide-HILIC and analysed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL essentially as described above excepted data-dependent acquisition was performed on the top ten most intense ions with LTQ-CID.

### Data Protocol
All resulting raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4beta (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the Arabidopsis TAIR-10 database (35,386 entries) with SequestHT. The parameters included a tolerance of 20 ppm for MS1 and 0.02 Da for HCD-MS/MS or 0.6 Da for CID-MS/MS. The data was searched with methionine oxidation as a variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification with either fixed modification of iTRAQ peptide N-terminus and lysine or, fixed modification of 3-plex demethylation of peptide N-terminus and lysine (in three separate searches). All results were filtered to 1% FDR with Percolator [PMID; 17952086]. Further statistical analysis of MS data was conducted in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Expression of the F-Box protein Leaf Curling Responsiveness (LCR) is regulated by microRNA, miR394, and alterations to this interplay in Arabidopsis thaliana produce defects in leaf polarity and shoot apical meristem organization. Although the miR394-LCR node has been documented in Arabidopsis, the identification of proteins targeted by LCR F-box itself has proven problematic. Here, a proteomic analysis of shoot apices from plants with altered LCR levels identified a member of the Latex Protein (MLP) family gene as a potential LCR F-box target. Bioinformatic and molecular analyses also suggested that other MLP family members are likely to be targets for this post-translational regulation. Direct interaction between LCR F-Box and MLP423 was validated. Additional MLP members had reduction in protein accumulation, in varying degrees, mediated by LCR F-Box. Transgenic Arabidopsis lines, in which MLP28 expression was reduced through an artificial miRNA technology, displayed severe developmental defects, including changes in leaf patterning and morphology, shoot apex defects, and eventual premature death. These phenotypic characteristics resemble those of Arabidopsis plants modified to over-express LCR Taken together, the results demonstrate that MLPs are driven to degradation by LCR, and indicate that MLP gene family is target of miR394-LCR regulatory node, representing potential targets for directly post-translational regulation mediated by LCR F-Box. In addition, MLP28 family member is associated with the LCR regulation that is critical for normal Arabidopsis development.

### Keywords
Mlp proteins, Microrna394, Arabidopsis, Lcr f-box, Gene regulation, Lc-ms/ms, Plant development

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
The university of sydney

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The university of sydney


