### Accession
PXD024549

### Title
Serum quantitative proteomics identifies prognostic biomarkers and physiological processes related to COVID-19 symptomatology

### Description
The coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) posts a challenge for the understanding of factors affecting disease severity and the identification of prognostic biomarkers and physiological processes relevant for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic interventions to contribute to the control of this pandemic. To address this challenge, in this study we used a quantitative proteomics together with multiple data analysis algorithms to characterize serum protein profiles in five cohorts from healthy to SARS-CoV-2-infected asymptomatic, recovered, nonsevere and severe individuals. The results corroborated previous findings, but the analysis was focused on novel disease processes and biomarkers. Our results contributed to the characterization of SARS-CoV-2-host molecular interactions and provided protein prognostic biomarkers and physiological disorders associated with COVID-19 with potential implications for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic interventions to contribute to the control of this pandemic.

### Sample Protocol
The coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) posts a challenge for the understanding of factors affecting disease severity and the identification of prognostic biomarkers and physiological processes relevant for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic interventions to contribute to the control of this pandemic. To address this challenge, in this study we used a quantitative proteomics together with multiple data analysis algorithms to characterize serum protein profiles in five cohorts from healthy to SARS-CoV-2-infected asymptomatic, recovered, nonsevere and severe individuals. The results corroborated previous findings, but the analysis was focused on novel disease processes and biomarkers. Our results contributed to the characterization of SARS-CoV-2-host molecular interactions and provided protein prognostic biomarkers and physiological disorders associated with COVID-19 with potential implications for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic interventions to contribute to the control of this pandemic.

### Data Protocol
For SWATH processing, up to ten peptides with seven transitions per protein were automatically selected by the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in the PeakView 2.2 software with the following parameters: 15 ppm ion library tolerance, 5 min XIC extraction window, 0.01 Da XIC width, and considering only peptides with at least 99% confidence and excluding those which were shared or contained modifications. However, to ensure reliable quantitation, only proteins with 3 or more peptides available for quantitation were selected for XIC peak area extraction and exported for analysis in the MarkerView 1.3 software (AB SCIEX). Global normalization according to the Total Area Sums of all detected proteins in the samples was conducted.The Student's t-test (p < 0.05) was used to perform two-sample comparisons between the averaged area sums of all the transitions derived for each protein across the nine replicate runs for each group under comparison, in order to identify proteins that were significantly differentially represented between groups.

### Publication Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 challenges the understanding of factors affecting disease progression and severity. The identification of prognostic biomarkers and physiological processes associated with disease symptoms is relevant for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic interventions to contribute to the control of this pandemic. To address this challenge, in this study, we used a quantitative proteomics together with multiple data analysis algorithms to characterize serum protein profiles in five cohorts from healthy to SARS-CoV-2-infected recovered (hospital discharge), nonsevere (hospitalized), and severe [at the intensive care unit (ICU)] cases with increasing systemic inflammation in comparison with healthy individuals sampled prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. The results showed significantly dysregulated proteins and associated biological processes and disorders associated to COVID-19. These results corroborated previous findings in COVID-19 studies and highlighted how the representation of dysregulated serum proteins and associated BPs increases with COVID-19 disease symptomatology from asymptomatic to severe cases. The analysis was then focused on novel disease processes and biomarkers that were correlated with disease symptomatology. To contribute to translational medicine, results corroborated the predictive value of selected immune-related biomarkers for disease recovery [Selenoprotein P (SELENOP) and Serum paraoxonase/arylesterase 1 (PON1)], severity [Carboxypeptidase B2 (CBP2)], and symptomatology [Pregnancy zone protein (PZP)] using protein-specific ELISA tests. Our results contributed to the characterization of SARS-CoV-2-host molecular interactions with potential contributions to the monitoring and control of this pandemic by using immune-related biomarkers associated with disease symptomatology.

### Keywords
Human serum, Covid-19, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
University of Castilla- La Mancha
SaBio IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM) Biochemistry UCLM

### Submitter
Margarita Villar

### Lab Head
Dr Margarita Villar
SaBio IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM) Biochemistry UCLM


