### Accession
PXD007175

### Title
Oxidative stress-triggered interactions between the succinyl- and acetyl-proteomes of rice leaves

### Description
Protein lysine acylation, such as succinylation and acetylation are important posttranslational modification (PTM) mechanisms, with key roles in the regulation of diverse metabolic and cellular processes. Antibody-based affinity enrichment, high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis and integrated bioinformatics analysis, were used to characterize the lysine succinylome (Ksuc) and acetylome (Kace) in rice leaves. Rice (Oryza sativa., Wuyunjing 7) was kindly provided byJiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Jiangsu Province, China. Rice seeds were surface-sterilized with 5% NaClO for 20 min, washed extensively with distilled water and then germinated in distilled water at 28ºC for 2 days. Germinated seeds were cultivated on half-strength ammonium-free Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium. For oxidative stress treatments, 14-days-old rice seedlings were transferred to 1/2 MS medium in the absence or presence of 1 mM H2O2 for 6 days. Rice seedlings were then harvested for protein extraction.

### Sample Protocol
The leaves of 14-day-old rice seedlings that in been grown in the absence or presence of H2O2 were ground in liquid nitrogen. The frozen powder was transferred to centrifuge tubes, lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail set VI (Merck) was added. The extracts were sonicated three times on ice and the soluble proteins isolated by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Soluble proteins were precipitated by adding cold 15% trifluoroacetic acid (TCA) and the mixture was incubated -20 °C for 2 h. After centrifugation of the mixtures at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatants were discarded. The protein precipitates were washed three times with cold acetone. Proteins were re-dissolved in buffer containing 8 M urea, 100 mM borane-triethylamine complex (TEAB pH 8.0). Protein concentrations were determined using a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to digestion, the proteins in the solution were first reduced by the addition of 10 mM DTT with incubation for 1 h (37 °C). Proteins were then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) with incubation at room temperature for 45 min in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (Thermo, defined as the amount of reagent required to label 1 mg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl acetonitrile (ThermoFisher chemical). The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Samples were separated into fractions (18 for inputs and 6 each for succinylome and acetylome)using high pH reverse-phase HPLC with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated on a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 10). Over 80 min the extracts were separated into 80 fractions. Peptides were dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) to bind Kace or Ksuc peptides, respectively. The mixtures were incubated at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were then washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with double-distilled H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and then and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (Fluka), directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient comprised of 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for 40 min, 25% to 35% for 10 min and climbing to 80% in 6 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 270 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system coupled to a Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. MS spectra were aquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 70,000. HCD fragmentation was performed using NCE setting of 28, 32; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.5.1) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Succinylation was added in the MaxQuant configurations with a mass of 100.01604 as modification on lysine residues allowed anywhere in the peptide. Acetylation of lysine residues was used as pre-defined, with C-term acetylation excluded. Tandem mass spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot_OSjaponica 39947 database (63,195 sequences). Sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences were automatically added during the search. Group specific parameters and fractions were defined for the whole proteome, succinyllysine- and acetyllysine-enriched samples, respectively. Oxidation on Met was set as variable modification in all parameter groups. Succinylation and acetylation on lysine were specified as variable modifications within their respective parameter groups. A maximum number of five modifications per peptide were allowed. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two (whole proteome) or four missed cleavages (acetylome, succinylome) were allowed. The minimal peptide length was set toseven amino acids. TMT6plex labels were defined as reporter MS2 ions at the N-terminus and lysine residues, respectively. TMT correction factors were defined in the configurations tab according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In global parameters, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide identifications were set to 1%. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40 and the minimum delta score for modified peptides was set to 6. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. Only peptides with a site localization probability of > 0.75 were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine acylations, such as succinylation and acetylation, are important post-translational modification (PTM) mechanisms, with key roles in cellular regulation. Antibody-based affinity enrichment, high-resolution liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis, and integrated bioinformatics analysis were used to characterize the lysine succinylome (K<sub>suc</sub> ) and acetylome (K<sub>ace</sub> ) of rice leaves. In total, 2,593 succinylated and 1,024 acetylated proteins were identified, of which 723 were simultaneously acetylated and succinylated. Proteins involved in photosynthetic carbon metabolism such as the large and small subunits of RuBisCO, ribosomal functions, and other key processes were subject to both PTMs. Preliminary insights into oxidant-induced changes to the rice acetylome and succinylome were gained from treatments with hydrogen peroxide. Exposure to oxidative stress did not regulate global changes in the rice acetylome or succinylome but rather led to modifications on a specific subset of the identified sites. De-succinylation of recombinant catalase (CATA) and glutathione S-transferase (OsGSTU6) altered the activities of these enzymes showing that this PTM may have a regulatory function. These findings not only greatly extend the list of acetylated and/or succinylated proteins but they also demonstrate the close cooperation between these PTMs in leaf proteins with key metabolic functions.

### Keywords
Hydrogen peroxide, Lysine succinylation, Lysine acetylation, Proteome, Rice

### Affiliations
University of Muenster
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology  University of Muenster Schlossplatz 7 48149 Muenster Germany

### Submitter
Iris Finkemeier

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Iris Finkemeier
Institute of Plant Biology and Biotechnology  University of Muenster Schlossplatz 7 48149 Muenster Germany


