### Accession
PXD021765

### Title
Analysis of circulating proteins in serum of WT mice

### Description
In this study, we performed mass spectometry on serum of WT male mice. Circulating proteins were retrieved in this analysis.

### Sample Protocol
10µg of total serum protein loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel 10%. A low migration was performed for 5min, (until the total volume of the sample was stuck into the gel). Each sample was cut in two bands, one upper 50kDa and one below 50kDa.The excised gel bands were cut into small pieces, washed 3 times in 50 mM NH4HCO3/acetonitrile(ACN)-50/50-v/v, dehydrated with acetonitrile, dried in speed-vac, reduced with a solution of 10 mM DTT (in 100 mM NH4HCO3), alkylated with a solution of 55mM iodoacetamide (in 100 mM NH4HCO3). Reduction was performed at 56°C and alkylation at room temperature and both for 45min under agitation (850rpm). Then they were washed again in 25 mM NH4HCO3, dehydrated with acetonitrile and dried in a speed-vac. Then the gel pieces were rehydrated with 25 µL of trypsin solution 10 ng/µL (in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10% Acetonitrile, 2mM CaCl2) (Promega) and incubated overnight at 37°C. The peptides were extracted twice with acetonitrile/water/formic acid (FA) - 50/50/0.2-v/v/v followed by a final extraction with acetonitrile/water/formic acid (FA) - 90/10/0.2-v/v. Peptide mixtures were dried on Speed-Vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on Mus musculus database (Swissprot, non-reviewed, release 2019_08_07, 55121 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, rank 1 and proteins were identified with 1 unique peptide. For the Label-Free Quantification, the protein abundancies were calculated from the average of the peptide abundancies using the TOP N (where N = 3, the 3 most intense peptides for each protein), and only the unique peptide were used for the quantification. The protein ratio were calculated according to the “Pairwise ratio based” from PD2.4.

### Publication Abstract
Omics analyses are powerful methods to obtain an integrated view of complex biological processes, disease progression, or therapy efficiency. However, few studies have compared different disease forms and different therapy strategies to define the common molecular signatures representing the most significant implicated pathways. In this study, we used RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry to profile the transcriptomes and proteomes of mouse models for three forms of centronuclear myopathies (CNMs), untreated or treated with either a drug (tamoxifen), antisense oligonucleotides reducing the level of dynamin 2 (DNM2), or following modulation of DNM2 or amphiphysin 2 (BIN1) through genetic crosses. Unsupervised analysis and differential gene and protein expression were performed to retrieve CNM molecular signatures. Longitudinal studies before, at, and after disease onset highlighted potential disease causes and consequences. Main pathways in the common CNM disease signature include muscle contraction, regeneration and inflammation. The common therapy signature revealed novel potential therapeutic targets, including the calcium regulator sarcolipin. We identified several novel biomarkers validated in muscle and/or plasma through RNA quantification, western blotting, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) assays, including ANXA2 and IGFBP2. This study validates the concept of using multi-omics approaches to identify molecular signatures common to different disease forms and therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U1258, Universitéde Strasbourg,  1, rue Laurent Fries 67404 Illkirch, France
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U1258, Université de Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch, France

### Submitter
Sarah Djeddi

### Lab Head
Dr Jocelyn Laporte
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U1258, Universitéde Strasbourg,  1, rue Laurent Fries 67404 Illkirch, France


