### Accession
PXD004075

### Title
Spatiotemporal proteomic profiling of cerebral development

### Description
iPS cell based neuronal differentiation was used to generate pure NPCs and maturing nerons in tissue culture. LFQ mass spectrometry on Q Exactive was used to measure proteomic profile differences between the generated cell types. The identified proteomic signatures were then compared to human fetal cerebral development over the developmental age of 16-36 gestational weeks in four macrodissected regions. Statistical analysis were performed using the Perseus program to compare the datasets and identify spatiotemporally relevant protein modules.

### Sample Protocol
Following the tissue culture differentiations cells were washed 3X with PBS and scraped into 8 M urea lysis solution. Lysis was performed on ice for 30 minutes, cells were scraped and collected into 1.5mL tubes and sonicated for 5X 10 second pulses. Reduction was performed in 5mM DTT at 50 degrees and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were spun down and supernatant was transferred into a new tube. Following protein quantification samples were trypsin digested overnight and quenched in 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were ziptipped using Omix C18 MB tips and loaded from a 96-well microplate autosampler C18 trap column using the EASY-nC1000 system onto Q Exactive Plus system and 90 minute gradients were run.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched in MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 and searched with Human SwissProt database (2015/01 release) using carbometylation of cystein as a fixed modification and oxidation, phosphorylation, N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. LFQ values and matching between runs was set as a search criterium and LFQ values were analyzed in the Perseus proteomic profiling software.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of human post-mortem central nervous system (CNS) tissue and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based directed differentiations offer complementary avenues to define protein signatures of neurodevelopment. Methodological improvements of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) protein isolation now enable widespread proteomic analysis of well-annotated archival tissue samples in the context of development and disease. Here, we utilize a shotgun label-free quantification (LFQ) MS method to profile magnetically enriched human cortical neurons and neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from iPSCs. We use these signatures to help define spatiotemporal protein dynamics of developing human FFPE cerebral regions. We show that the use of high resolution Q Exactive mass spectrometers now allow simultaneous quantification of &gt;2700 proteins in a single LFQ experiment and provide sufficient coverage to define novel biomarkers and signatures of NPC maintenance and differentiation. Importantly, we show that this abbreviated strategy allows efficient recovery of novel cytoplasmic, membrane-specific and synaptic proteins that are shared between both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> neuronal differentiation. This study highlights the discovery potential of non-comprehensive high-throughput proteomic profiling of unfractionated clinically well-annotated FFPE human tissue from a diverse array of development and diseased states.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Neuronal differentiation

### Affiliations
Mount Sinai Hospital and University Health Network
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Eleftherios Diamandis
Mount Sinai Hospital and University Health Network


