### Accession
PXD024323

### Title
Profiling of sika deer antler proteins at different developmental stages based on label-free

### Description
We used label-free proteomics approach to analyze the protein expression dynamics of the antler tip in 6 developmental periods (15, 25, 45, 65, 100 and 130 days after the previous antler cast) and costal cartilage. the stages special proteins and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in different development stages were analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
3 4-year-old male sika deer (Cervus nippon Temminck) from a local deer farm (Changchun, China) were anesthetized, and the antler were to be harvested on days 15, 25, 45, 65, 100 and 130 after casting of the previous hard antlers. The protein was extracted with SDT buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) and was digested using Filter aided proteome preparation (FASP) method. Then the peptide was separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 system and analyzed using Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Science).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.17) for database retrieval. The parameters were set as follows: digest enzyme of trypsin, max missed cleavage of 2, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl, variable modifications of methionine oxidation, the precursor mass window in the main search of 6 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The cutoff value of the false discovery rate (FDR) was defined as 0.01 to identify peptides and proteins. And protein abundance was calculated using label free quantification algorithm. The result was analyzed by Perseus version 1.5.5.3. The proteins marked with reverse or potential contaminant were removed. The proteins identified with less than two unique peptides were also excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Antler is a special bone tissue that has the ability to regenerate completely periodically. It is the fastest growing bone in the animal kingdom. Antler provides a valuable research model for bone growth and mineralization. Antler grows longitudinally by endochondral ossification with their growth center located in its tip. Many scholars have carried out detailed studies on morphology and gene expression of antler tip. However, few scholars have analyzed the protein expression patterns of antler tip at different development stages. This study used label-free proteomics approach to analyze the protein expression dynamics of the antler tip in six developmental periods (15, 25, 45, 65, 100 and 130&#xa0;days after the previous antler cast) and costal cartilage. In result, 2052 proteins were confidently quantified, including 1937 antler proteins and 1044 costal cartilage proteins. Moreover, 913 antler core proteins and 132 antler-special proteins were obtained. Besides, the stages special proteins and differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in different development stages were analyzed. A total of 875 DEPs were determined by one-way AVOVA. It is found that the growth period (15, 25, 45 and 65&#xa0;days) showed more up-regulated protein including several chondrogenesis-associated proteins (collagen types II, collagen types XI, HAPLN1, PAPSS1 and PAPSS2). In ossification stages, the up-regulated proteins related with lysosome (CTSD, CTSB, MMP9, CAII) indicated that the antler has higher bone remodeling activity. Given the up-regulated expression of immune-related molecules (S100A7, CATHL7, LTF, AZU1, ELANE and MPO), we speculate that the local immune system may contribute to the ossification of antler tip. In conclusion, proteomics technology was used to deeply analyze the protein expression patterns of antler at different development stages. This provides a strong support for the research on the molecular regulation mechanism of rapid growth and ossification of velvet antler.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Sika deer, Antler

### Affiliations
Institude of special animal and plant sciences,  Chinese academy of agricultural sciences
Institute of Special Animal and Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Ranran Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiumei Xing
Institute of Special Animal and Plant Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


