### Accession
PXD012080

### Title
Freshly isolated rat liver sinusoidal endothelial cells and Kupffer cells,  LC-MSMS

### Description
Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) and Kupffer cells (KCs) have important roles in liver homeostasis and host defense. Sharing the same microenvironment in the liver sinusoid, they form an effective scavenger cell system for removal of potentially harmful blood-borne substances. Unlike most other endothelia, LSECs are highly efficient in endocytosis of nanoparticles, including virus. Though controversial, LSECs have been reported to act as antigen presenting cells, thus contributing importantly to induction of immune tolerance in liver. There are also controversies about LSEC and KC specific markers, which may be due to overlapping cell functions, species differences, and/or problems with cell purification. We therefore used label-free proteomics to characterize and quantitatively compare proteome of freshly isolated, highly pure rat LSECs (SE-1/CD32b positive) and KCs (CD11b/c positive.We found that most immune genes expressed in KCs were also expressed in LSECs, albeit at a lower density, and they also have overlap in cell surface marker expression. Both cell types express high levels of scavenger receptors and immune lectins.

### Sample Protocol
Plated MACS-isolated cells were allowed to adhere for 30 min (KC, n=4 biological replicates) or 1h (LSECs, n=3 biological replicates) to 90mm petri dishes. The cells were washed with RPMI-1640 (37ºC) to remove non-adherent cells, then immediately scraped in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) solution (ThermoFisher) to collect protein lysate, which was centrifuged to remove cellular debris. Protein pellets were resuspended in 2M urea and 50mM TEAB.  Samples of 20 µg protein were digested for 6h in 1:100 (w/w) Lysyl Endopeptidase (Fujifilm Wako Chemicals Europe GmBH, Neuss, Germany), then diluted to 1M urea and digested overnight by 1/20 (w/w) trypsin (V511A, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI). OMIX C18 tips (Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA) were used for sample cleanup and concentration. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system and EASY-Spray column (C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 50µm, 50 cm). Peptides were fractionated using a 2-100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 50min at a flow rate of 250nl/min. The separated peptides were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data was collected in data dependent mode using a Top10 method

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the Q-Exactive MS/MS were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (39) (version 1.5.6.0). Proteins were identified using the built in Andromeda search engine using the UniProtKB Rattus norvegicus database (Jan 2017). Main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. A false discovery rate (FDR) ratio of 0.01 was needed to give a protein identification. At least 2 peptides had to be quantified to give a quantitation value.  To estimate absolute protein amounts, iBAQ values (i.e. the sum of peak intensities of all peptides matching to a specific protein divided by the number of theoretically observable peptides (40)) were generated with MaxQuant, and used for downstream quantitative proteomic analysis with Perseus (version 1.6.02). Perseus, R statistical computing (version 3.4.1), and Bioconductor (version 3.5) environments were used for bioinformatics and statistical analyses. The generated list of proteins was filtered to remove protein hits that were annotated as only identified by site, contaminants and reverse hits in Perseus. The annotation of the protein IDs and the corresponding genes were carefully curated. The iBAQ values of all protein IDs corresponding to a specific gene were added. Then the values were divided by the total sum of iBAQ values, and scaled to per million for each run. All samples for proteomics were run twice on LC-MS/MS and the median of the normalized iBAQ value was used as expression value. The same edge-R-limma workflow as used in the RNA-seq data analysis was used for the subsequent differential analysis of the proteomics data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Liver cells, Immunity, Macrophage, Endothelium

### Affiliations
UiT
Institute of Medical Biology, Faculty of Health, UiT/The Arctic University of Norway

### Submitter
Sabin Bhandari

### Lab Head
Dr Karen Kristine Sørensen
Institute of Medical Biology, Faculty of Health, UiT/The Arctic University of Norway


