### Accession
PXD013868

### Title
Arabidopsis proteomic tissue atlas

### Description
Qualitative and quantitative atlas of the transcriptomes, proteomes and phosphoproteomes of 30 tissues of the model plant Arabidopsis. We describe how many genes were detected as proteins (>18,000), where they are expressed, in which approximate quantities (>6 logs dynamic range) and to what extent they are post-translationally modified by phosphorylation (>43,000 sites). We also measured protein complexes in three tissues (flower, root, leaf) using size-exclusion chromatography (SEC-MS) and the seed proteome in response to cycloheximide and MG132 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana wild type (Columbia-0) plants were grown on soil, plates or in liquid culture depending on tissue type. Tissue samples were homogenized and digested with Trypsin. For the tissue atlas, protein digests (1 mg) for all 30 tissue types were divided into full proteome and phosphoproteome samples using IMAC enrichment and further off-line fractionated (full proteome: 24 fractions, hydrophilic strong anion exchange chromatography; phosphoproteome: 4 fractions, basic reversed-phase chromatography). For protein complex analysis, native size-exclusion chromatography was performed with 1 mg of protein input for three selected tissues (leaf, flower, root) on a Superose 6 10/30 GL column and 80 consecutive fractions were collected. For the chase experiment seeds were treated with cycloheximide or MG132 for 8h, 16h and 24h. Samples were offline-fractionated using basic reversed-phase chromatography (48 fractions). All measurements were performed in DDA mode on a Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (1.5.8.3). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome (Araport11; www.araport.org) supplemented with common contaminants and a library of phospho or retention time spike-in peptides. For short open reading frame (sORF) identification full proteome MS/MS spectra were searched against sORF (ARA-PEP, ATSO) databases in combination with Araport11.

### Publication Abstract
Plants are essential for life and are extremely diverse organisms with unique molecular capabilities<sup>1</sup>. Here we present a quantitative atlas of the transcriptomes, proteomes and phosphoproteomes of 30 tissues of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Our analysis provides initial answers to how many genes exist as proteins (more than 18,000), where they are expressed, in which approximate quantities (a dynamic range of more than six orders of magnitude) and to what extent they are phosphorylated (over 43,000 sites). We present examples of how the data may be used, such as to discover proteins that are translated from short open-reading frames, to uncover sequence motifs that are involved in the regulation of protein production, and to identify tissue-specific protein complexes or phosphorylation-mediated signalling events. Interactive access to this resource for the plant community is provided by the ProteomicsDB and ATHENA databases, which include powerful bioinformatics tools to explore and characterize Arabidopsis proteins, their modifications and interactions.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Tissue atlas

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich
TUM

### Submitter
Julia Mergner

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
TUM


### SDRF
- organism: Arabidopsis thaliana
- organism part: seed, leaf, root, stem, flower, fruit, callus, pollen
- cell type: plant cell
- disease: normal
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive HF
- fractionation method: Strong anion-exchange chromatography (SAX), Reversed-phase chromatography (RP), Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), High-pH reversed-phase chromatography (hpHRP)
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Acetyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: not applicable, Phospho
- factor value[organism part: seed, leaf, root, stem, flower, fruit, cell culture, callus, pollen

