### Accession
PXD016265

### Title
Intracellular peptides mediate phenotypic differences between wild type and thimet oligopeptidase null mice possibly through their binding to microRNAs

### Description
The constant increase in the obese and overweight population creates opportunities for novel therapeutic innovations to allow people to eat without getting fat and getting sick.  Here, fed a hyperlipidic diet (HD)C57BL6 thimet oligopeptidase null (THOP1-/-) male mice were shown to gain only 25% (females gained 60%) of the weight gained by control wild type (WT) mice. Distinct from WT mice,THOP1-/- fed HD exhibited normal blood glucose levels and no insulin resistance. THOP1-/-fed HD phenotype benefits also include regular blood cholesterol levels, reduced fat in adipose and liver tissues, increased adipose tissue adrenergic-stimulated lipolysis, and greater resistance and endurance on treadmill running tests at high intensity. THOP1-/-compared to WT have alterations on the expression levels of specific genes and microRNAs related to obesity. Intracellular peptides that had their relative levels altered in THOP1-/-were shown to modulate the expression levels of genes and mature microRNAs associated to obesity, in 3T3L1 adipocyte. The ubiquitous existence of intracellular peptides in different cells of different species suggests a broader biological significance of the present results, connecting proteasomal protein degradation to protein synthesis. These exciting results suggest THOP1 and intracellular peptides as novel therapeutic targets to control obesity and obesity-associated diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide isolation and concentration were conducted as previously described (17, 34, 84). Procedures for reductive methylation used in isotope labeling were performed as previously described (41). A schematic view of sample preparation is shown in Supplemental Fig 4 and Supplementary Table 2 and. For each group (WT - SD, WT - HD, THOP1-/-/ SD, THOP1-/-/HD) five biological samples were prepared. These samples were labeled 2 times (forward and reverse labeling) and pooled into 10 runs of LC-MS according to the scheme described in table Supplementary Table 2. Odd runs are different biological samples and pairs runs are technical replicate of each biological sample. LC/MS and LC/MS/MS experiments were performed in an Orbitrap (OT) Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ‎Waltham, MA‎, U.S.A) at Harvard Medical School facilities, using similar conditions to those previously described (41). Briefly, OT top speed data-dependent precursor ion selection was used. The parent ions were scanned with an OT resolution of 60 K and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3,000,000. Dynamic exclusion was turned on with the following settings: exclusion time = 60 s; mass tolerance = +/− 7 ppm; repeat count = 1. For OT detection, the parent ions were scanned in the range of 395–1800 m/z, and the fragment ions were scanned with the Ion Trap (IT) with maximum injection time of 200 ms, and AGC target of 50,000. Precursor ions with charges +2 and +3 were considered. A normalized collision energy of 35% was used for CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
To identify peptides, the raw data files were converted to a peak list format (mgf) by Mascot Distiller version 2.7.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) and analyzed using the search engine MASCOT version 2.6.2 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). Database searched included SwissProt (555100 sequences; 198754198 residues) and taxonomy Mus musculus (16916 sequences). No cleavage site was specified and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da was applied to the MS and MS/MS ions. Variable modifications included were N-terminal protein acetylation,  methionine oxidation and also  the reductive Me labels: Dimethyl (K), Dimethyl (N-term), Dimethyl:2H(2) (N-term), Dimethyl:2H(2) (K), Dimethyl:2H(4) (K), Dimethyl:2H(4) (N-term), Dimethyl:2H(6)13C(2) (K), Dimethyl:2H(6)13C(2) (N-term). All search results were manually interpreted to eliminate false positives. In brief, the criteria included (1) observed mass within 40 ppm of the theoretical mass; (2) the number of Me tags observed matched the number

### Publication Abstract
Thimet oligopeptidase (EC 3.4.24.15; EP24.15; THOP1) is a potential therapeutic target, as it plays key biological functions in processing biologically functional peptides. The structural conformation of THOP1 provides a unique restriction regarding substrate size, in that it only hydrolyzes peptides (optimally, those ranging from eight to 12 amino acids) and not proteins. The proteasome activity of hydrolyzing proteins releases a large number of intracellular peptides, providing THOP1 substrates within cells. The present study aimed to investigate the possible function of THOP1 in the development of diet-induced obesity (DIO) and insulin resistance by utilizing a murine model of hyperlipidic DIO with both C57BL6 wild-type (WT) and THOP1 null (THOP1<sup>-/-</sup>) mice. After 24 weeks of being fed a hyperlipidic diet (HD), THOP1<sup>-/-</sup> and WT mice ingested similar chow and calories; however, the THOP1<sup>-/-</sup> mice gained 75% less body weight and showed neither insulin resistance nor non-alcoholic fatty liver steatosis when compared to WT mice. THOP1<sup>-/-</sup> mice had increased adrenergic-stimulated adipose tissue lipolysis as well as a balanced level of expression of genes and microRNAs associated with energy metabolism, adipogenesis, or inflammation. Altogether, these differences converge to a healthy phenotype of THOP1<sup>-/-</sup> fed a HD. The molecular mechanism that links THOP1 to energy metabolism is suggested herein to involve intracellular peptides, of which the relative levels were identified to change in the adipose tissue of WT and THOP1<sup>-/-</sup> mice. Intracellular peptides were observed by molecular modeling to interact with both pre-miR-143 and pre-miR-222, suggesting a possible novel regulatory mechanism for gene expression. Therefore, we successfully demonstrated the previously unanticipated relevance of THOP1 in energy metabolism regulation. It was suggested that intracellular peptides were responsible for mediating the phenotypic differences that are described herein by a yet unknown mechanism of action.

### Keywords
Obesity; insulin resistance; steatosis; overweight; proteasome; proteases; peptidases; microrna; gene expression; mass spectrometry; peptidome

### Affiliations
Unicamp
Department of Pharmacology, University of São Paulo. São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

### Submitter
Amanda Miquilini Cordibello

### Lab Head
Dr Emer Suavinho Ferro
Department of Pharmacology, University of São Paulo. São Paulo, SP, Brazil.


