### Accession
PXD018539

### Title
LC-MSMS of primary AML class I immunopeptidome (mTECs+MPCs k-mer depletion approach)

### Description
The development of therapeutic anticancer vaccines calls for the identification of tumor-specific antigens (TSAs). Though a combination of four cutting-edge proteogenomic approaches, we performed a deep exploration of the MHC-I presented peptides (MAPs) of 19 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and identified various TSAs that could serve for the design of an anti-AML vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
Diagnostic AML samples (cryovials of DMSO-frozen leukemic blasts) were obtained from the Banque de cellules leucémiques du Québec program (BCLQ, bclq.org). One hundred million cells of each AML sample were thawed (1 min in 37°C water bath) and resuspended in 48 ml of 4°C PBS. Two million cells (1 ml) were pelleted and resuspended in 1 ml Trizol for RNA-Sequencing while the remaining 98 million were pelleted and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for mass spectrometry analyses. Cells from 14H124 patient were expanded in NSG mice and a one tumor having a size >1 cm³ was collected and snap frozen for MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
All liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) data were searched against the relevant personalized databases (built with four different protocols, based on RNA-seq data of each AML specimen) using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The occurrences of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. Following peptide identification, a list of unique peptides was obtained for each sample and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% was applied on the peptide scores. Binding affinities to the sample’s HLA alleles were predicted with NetMHC 4.0 and only 8 to 11-amino-acid-long peptides with a percentile rank ≤ 2% were used for further annotation.  Database building for mTECs+MPCs k-mer depletion approach:  To perform this approach, the same methods described for mTECs k-mer depletion were used with the following modifications: (i) an additional normal k-mer database, combining the fastq files of 11 MPC samples, was generated with Jellyfish. The k-mer database was generated with the -C option and R1 fastq files were not reverse-complemented. (ii) AML k-mers present either in mTECs or MPCs k-mer database were removed, and consequently the number of k-mers filtered by this step was greater than in mTECs k-mer depletion approach. (iii) Because of the higher efficacy of k-mer depletion by normal samples, we could use lower occurrence thresholds to pre-filter AML k-mers, changing dramatically the identity of k-mers present in these databases compared to mTECs k-mers depletion only. Importantly, no occurrence threshold lower than 3 was used in order to exclude possible sequencing errors.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has not benefited from innovative immunotherapies, mainly because of the lack of actionable immune targets. Using an original proteogenomic approach, we analyzed the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC class I)-associated immunopeptidome of 19 primary AML samples and identified 58 tumor-specific antigens (TSAs). These TSAs bore no mutations and derived mainly (86%) from supposedly non-coding genomic regions. Two AML-specific aberrations were instrumental in the biogenesis of TSAs, intron retention, and epigenetic changes. Indeed, 48% of TSAs resulted from intron retention and translation, and their RNA expression correlated with mutations of epigenetic modifiers (e.g., DNMT3A). AML TSA-coding transcripts were highly shared among patients and were expressed in both blasts and leukemic stem cells. In AML patients, the predicted number of TSAs correlated with spontaneous expansion of cognate T&#xa0;cell receptor clonotypes, accumulation of activated cytotoxic T&#xa0;cells, immunoediting, and improved survival. These TSAs represent attractive targets for AML immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Aml, Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
IRIC
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


