### Accession
PXD026903

### Title
Platelet proteome dynamics in hibernating 13-lined ground squirrels

### Description
Hibernating mammals undergo a dramatic drop in temperature and blood flow during torpor and must suppress hemostasis to avoid stasis blood clotting. In addition, cold storage of most mammalian platelets induces cold storage lesions, resulting in rapid clearance following transfusion. 13-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus) provide a model to study hemostasis and cold storage of platelets during hibernation because, even with a body temperature of 4-8C, their platelets are resistant to cold storage lesions. We quantified and systematically compared proteomes of platelets collected from ground squirrels at summer (activity), fall (entrance), and winter (topor) to elucidate how molecular-level changes in platelets may support hemostatic adaptations in torpor. Platelets were isolated from squirrel blood collected in June, October, and January. Platelet lysates from each animal were digested with trypsin prior to 11-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis for relative protein quantification. We found over 700 platelet proteins with significant changes over the course of entrance, torpor, and activity – including systems of proteins regulating translation, platelet degranulation, metabolism, complement, and coagulation cascades. We also noted species specific differences in hemostatic, secretory, and inflammatory regulators in ground squirrel platelets relative to human platelets. In addition to providing the first ever proteomic characterization of platelets from hibernating animals, our results support a model whereby systematic changes in metabolic, hemostatic, and other proteins support physiological adaptations in torpor. In addition, our results could translate into better methods to cold store human platelets, increasing their supply and quality for transfusions.

### Sample Protocol
Animals. Ground squirrels were born in captivity and housed at the University of Wisconsin-La Crosse following protocols approved by the institutional IACUC. Non-hibernating animals were housed individually in rooms with a Wisconsin photoperiod (9 hours in December gradually increasing to 15.5 hours in June and then decreasing again). Animals were implanted with a temperature transponder (IPTT-300, BioMedic Data Systems) and body temperatures monitored with a hand-held reader. In October, when an animal’s body temperature dropped to 25C (ambient), they were moved into a 4C hibernaculum. Blood and organs were collected from hibernating animals in the torpid state in January and February at a body temperature of about 10C. Blood samples at the summer and fall times were collected from anesthetized animals at normal body temperatures (about 36C). All applicable international, national, and/or institutional guidelines for the care and use of animals were followed. For comparative studies of human platelets, blood was drawn from healthy volunteers at Oregon Health & Science University.  Platelet isolation.  Blood was collected in 1/9 volume of acid citrate dextrose (ACD) anticoagulant from the tail arteries of active (summer), entrance (fall), or topor (winter) ground squirrels while under anesthesia with isoflurane (1.5-5%). Blood cell counts were performed using a HemaVet HV950 (Drew Scientific, Waterbury, CT). Differential centrifugation was performed at 25C with a brake to isolate platelets. Blood was centrifuged at 200 x g for 8 minutes, and the platelet rich plasma (PRP), white blood cells, and a limited number of red blood cells were isolated and centrifuged at 100 x g for 6 minutes. Prostaglandin I2 (PGI2, final concentration of 6.0 microM) was added to the PRP to prevent platelet activation and centrifuged at 1000 x g for 5 minutes. Plasma aliquots were stored at -20C for incubations, and the platelet pellet was resuspended in 200 microliters of Tyrodes-HEPES buffer (12 mM NaHCO3, 138 mM NaCI, 5.5 mM glucose, 2.9 mM KCI, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4). Platelets were counted on a hemacytometer and resuspended at 1 x 10^9 platelets/ml in Tyrodes. For comparative studies of human platelets, washed platelets were similarly prepared from blood isolated from volunteers.  Platelet sample lysis and digestion. Washed platelet samples were resuspended in an equal volume of 2x lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 65 mM NaCl, 10 mM HEPES, 6 mM NaHCO3, 1.45 mM KCl, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.17 mM Na2HPO4, 5 mM glucose, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM NaF and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 Sigma Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 & 3) and were immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80C for later analysis. A small volume (50 microliters) of each sample was prepared in Laemmli sample buffer for Western blot analysis. After thaw, lysates were additionally lysed by sonication (4x for 30 s with a 30 s rest between cycles, power 5-6). Protein concentrations were then determined with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Protein was digested using an eFASP protocol. Following an overnight digestion at 37C, samples were acidified, and 20 micrograms of each digested sample was solid phase extracted using Oasis HLB 1cc cartridges, dried by vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 25 microliters of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labeled using TMT-11plex reagents (Thermo Scientific).  The manufacturer-suggested protocol was used, except recommended amounts of each reagent were scaled to match amount of protein used.

### Data Protocol
TMT labeled peptides were separated by two dimensions of reverse phase chromatography using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system for sample loading and second dimension reverse phase separation, and a Dionex NCP-3200RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system for dilution of the first-dimension reverse phase eluent. Twenty microliter samples containing 30 micrograms of pooled TMT-labeled digest were injected for 10 min onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 microliters/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), 2% acetonitrile (ACN).  Peptides were then eluted by sequential injection of 20 microliter volumes of 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at the same flow rate.  Peptides were delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap on a switching valve.  After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were separated at low pH in the second dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nanoliters/min flow rate. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific).  Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer, and data-dependent MS2 scans in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole.  Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole.    Proteome UP000005215 (13-lined ground squirrel, taxon ID 43179) canonical FASTA sequences (18,446 proteins) were downloaded July 2019 from www.UniProt.org. Common contaminants (179 sequences) were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated for a final protein FASTA file of 37,250 sequences. Proteome UP000005640 (human, taxon ID 9606) canonical FASTA sequences (20,603 proteins) were downloaded April 2020. Common contaminants (174 sequences excluding any albumins) were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated for a final protein FASTA file of 41,554 sequences.  The binary instrument files were processed with the PAW pipeline. Binary files were converted to text files using MSConvert. Python scripts extracted TMT reporter ion peak heights and fragment ion spectra in MS2 format. The Comet search engine (version 2016.03) was used: 1.25 Da monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance, fully tryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, variable oxidation of methionine residues, static alkylation of cysteines, and static modifications for TMT labels (at peptide N-termini and at lysine residues). The squirrel samples (ASLA-754 project) were searched against the canonical squirrel FASTA file, and the human samples (ASLA-798 project) were searched against the canonical human FASTA file.  Top-scoring peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using interactive delta-mass and conditional Peptide-prophet-like linear discriminant function scores. Incorrect delta-mass and score histogram distributions were estimated using the target/decoy method. The filtered PSMs were assembled into protein lists using basic and extended parsimony principles and required two distinct peptides per protein. The final list of identified proteins, protein groups, and protein families were used to define unique and shared peptides for quantitative use. Total (summed) reporter ion intensities were computed from the PSMs associated with all unique peptides for each protein.   The protein intensity values for each biological sample in each biological condition were compared for differential protein expression using the Bioconductor package edgeR within Jupyter notebooks. Result tables contained typical proteomics summaries, reporter ion intensities, and statistical testing results. Squirrel does not have as well an annotated proteome as human, and the BLAST program (version 2.2.22+) from www.NCBI.nlm.nih.gov was used to find orthologs between identified squirrel proteins and human canonical sequences (using scripts at https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_BLAST). Additional annotations from www.UniProt.org were added (https://github.com/pwilmart/annotations).

### Publication Abstract
Hibernating mammals undergo a dramatic drop in temperature and blood flow during torpor, yet avoid stasis blood clotting through mechanisms that remain unspecified. The effects of hibernation on hemostasis are especially complex, as cold temperatures generally activate platelets, resulting in platelet clearance and cold storage lesions in the context of blood transfusion. With a hibernating body temperature of 4&#xb0;C-8&#xb0;C, 13-lined ground squirrels (<i>Ictidomys tridecemlineatus</i>) provide a model to study hemostasis as well as platelet cold storage lesion resistance during hibernation. Here, we quantified and systematically compared proteomes of platelets collected from ground squirrels at summer (active), fall (entrance), and winter (topor) to elucidate how molecular-level changes in platelets may support hemostatic adaptations in torpor. Platelets were isolated from a total of 11 squirrels in June, October, and January. Platelet lysates from each animal were digested with trypsin prior to 11-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis for relative protein quantification. We measured &gt;700 proteins with significant variations in abundance in platelets over the course of entrance, torpor, and activity-including systems of proteins regulating translation, secretion, metabolism, complement, and coagulation cascades. We also noted species-specific differences in levels of hemostatic, secretory, and inflammatory regulators in ground squirrel platelets relative to human platelets. Altogether, we provide the first ever proteomic characterization of platelets from hibernating animals, where systematic changes in metabolic, hemostatic, and other proteins may account for physiological adaptations in torpor and also inform translational effort to improve cold storage of human platelets for transfusion.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Torpor, Tmt labeling, Hibernation, Psr-ohsu, Platelet transfusion, Platelets, Platelet cold storage

### Affiliations
Biology Department University of Wisconsin-La Crosse 1725 State St. La Crosse, WI 54601 USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Scott Cooper
Biology Department University of Wisconsin-La Crosse 1725 State St. La Crosse, WI 54601 USA


