### Accession
PXD022842

### Title
Patagonin - CRISP: Antimicrobial activity and source of antimicrobial  molecules in Duvernoy's gland secretion - Philodryas patagoniensis snake

### Description
Snake venoms contain a variety of toxins with a range of biological activity. Among these are the cysteine-rich secreted proteins (CRISPs). The proteins of this family have masses of 20–30 kDa and display homologous amino acid sequences containing 16 cysteine residues, forming eight disulfide bonds. Some of these proteins have been explored, characterized, and described in terms of their activity; however, little is known of their range of activities. A search for new antimicrobial molecules is ongoing, as the number of microbial strains resistant to available antibiotics is increasing. We identified antimicrobial activity in the secretion of the Duvernoy’s gland of the rear-fanged Philodryas patagoniensis. Fractions of this venom were subjected to Reverse Phase – High Performance Liquid Chromatography and analyzed to determine their antimicrobial activity with a liquid broth inhibition assay. One of the fractions presented activity against a Gram-negative bacterium and a filamentous fungus. This fraction was analyzed with LC-MS/MS, and a protein of 24,848.8 Da was identified. Database searches allowed us to identify it as a CRISP due to the presence of some unique fragments in the molecule. We called it patagonin-CRISP, as the same protein in the venom of P. patagoniensis had previously been characterized as having a different biological activity. Patagonin-CRISP presented activity at very low concentrations and showed no cytotoxic activity. This is the first time that antimicrobial activity has been identified for P. patagoniensis venom or for a CRISP family protein.

### Sample Protocol
The venom was obtained from an adult female belonging to the Zoological Park Foundation of São Paulo. The extraction was performed using a pair of 100 µL microcapillary tubes placed in contact with the rear-fangs according to the procedure previously described (Ferlan et al., 1983).  Then, the freeze-dried crude P. patagoniensis venom (~2 mg/mL) was homogenized in a 0.05% aqueous solution of TFA-trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) Shimadzu LC-10 system. In the first step, the sample was used for semi-preparative Jupiter® RP-C18 LC-Column (10 μm, 300 Å, 10 mm × 129 250 mm, Phenomenex™) that had previously been balanced with A solvent (0.05% TFA). Elution was performed in a linear acetonitrile (ACN) gradient equilibrated in 0.05% TFA of 0–80% for 80 min at a flow rate of 2 mL/min. The absorbance was monitored at 225 nm and 280 nm, and the fractions were manually collected. Then, lyophilized fractions were suspended in 500 µL ultrapure water an aseptically filtered in Millipore® 0.22 μm filters for antimicrobial assay. The molecule, was submitted to a second step of fractionation in a linear gradient of ACN (20–55%) with 0.05% TFA for 80 min, at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min and an analytic column Jupiter® C18 LC-Column (10 μm, 300 Å, 4.60 × 250 mm, Phenomenex™), with ACN equilibrated in 0.05% TFA. The hand-collected fractions were dried (Savant Instrument Inc®) and suspended in 500 µL ultrapure water for MIC and MBC. The antimicrobial activity was monitored with a liquid growth inhibition assay  (de Jesus Oliveira et al., 2019), performed on 96-well sterile microplates with a final volume of 100µL. Samples were submitted to 20% SDS-PAGE gel (sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis). The protein band of interest was excised from the gel and eluted for antimicrobial activity and mass spectrometry analyses. The same band was digested with trypsin (Hanna et al., 2000) and analyzed by mass spectrometry.  The samples were suspended in 10µL 0.1% formic acid solution and analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using LTQ-Orbitrap Velos equipment (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) coupled to the Easy-nLC II liquid nano-chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). A 5µLsample was automatically injected into a C-18Jupiter C-18 (10µm × 100µm× 50 mm) pre-column (Phenomenex), coupled to an ACQUAC-18analytical reverse phase column (5µm × 75µm× 100 mm) (Phenomenex). A linear gradient of 0 to60% ACN for 60 min was used, with a flow rate of 200nL/min. The ionization adopted was used in a positive mode that detects positively charged ions.

### Data Protocol
The data were acquired by the Qual Browser program in XCalibur software (version 2.0; Thermo Fisher Scientific), using the default parameters, and the data were exported as text. The intact mass of protein was calculated with the deconvolution of the m/z values from the MS spectra text file, performed with the softwareMagTran1.02 (Zhang and Marshall, 1998; Potron et al., 2015). The MagTran used a mass range of 3000–30,000 and a charge range of 2–30. The raw data files were processed with a search on PEAKS Studio software (version 8.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). The analyses had a 10ppm error tolerance for the precursor ions and a 0.6 Da tolerance for the fragment ions. Oxidation was considered a variable modification, and trypsin was considered to be enzyme-specific. The data were analyzed with cysteine carbamidomethylating as fixed modification and the oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the proteins database for snakes, Dipsadidae, Colubridae, and CRVP (downloaded in FASTA format on October 20, 2019, from UniprotKB; http://www.uniprot.org/; 17546, 3867, 12437, and 208 entries, respectively). The sequence obtained for the selected protein was subjected to similarity searches through the public NCBI (National Center for Biotechnology) database using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (Blast) tool to confirm the protein identity. To determine amino acid sequences, the LC-MS/MS files were loaded into PEAKS Studio software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) and again subjected to analyses in the Uniprot databases.   

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crisp; antimicrobials; bioprospecting; dipsadidae; snakes; rear-fanged.

### Affiliations
Butantan Institute

### Submitter
Juliana  Badari

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Ismael da Silva Junior
Butantan Institute


