### Accession
PXD023862

### Title
SSc biomarkers detection in the secretome of TGF1-activated primary human lung fibroblasts.

### Description
TGFβ1 is a profibrotic mediator that contributes to a broad spectrum of pathologies, including pulmonary fibrosis (PF). However, the secretome of TGFβ1-stimulated primary human normal lung (NL) fibroblasts has not been well characterized. Using fluorescent 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) and differential gel electrophoresis (DIGE), we identified 37 differentially secreted proteins in the conditioned media of TGFβ1-activated NL fibroblasts and generated a protein-protein association network of the TGFβ1 secretome using STRING. Functional enrichment revealed that biological processes and pathways characteristics of PF were enriched. Using the DrugBank database, we determined that 32 of the secreted proteins are targets of known experimental, investigational and approved drugs. Additionally, by comparing the TGFβ1 secretome of NL fibroblasts to proteomic biomarkers from biological fluids of systemic sclerosis (SSc) patients, we identified 11 overlapping proteins. Together our data validate the TGFβ1-induced secretome of NL fibroblasts as a valid in vitro model that reflects SSc biomarkers and identifies potential therapeutic targets for SSc-PF.

### Sample Protocol
Spots with intensity changes of 1.5-fold or larger and a p-value of 0.05 or less were cut out and sent to MS facilities for protein identification (Figure 1B-e). The MS Core Facility at the Medical University of South Carolina used tryptic digestion and liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as previously described [19]. Briefly, cut out gels were destained, washed, and dried via vacuum centrifuge, digestion of protein was performed via incubation with trypsin overnight, followed by dehydration and then reconstitution with 10 μl of 2% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. Samples were analyzed via LC-MS/MS on a linear ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ; Thermo Finnigan) coupled to an LC Packings nano LC system. A 75-μm C18 LC column (Microtech Scientific) was used with a 60-min gradient from 2% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid to 60% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid.  MS methodology at Bioproximity: Gel bands were cut into 1 mm3 pieces and washed twice with MilliQ water. The gel was destained using 1:1 methanol:50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 min, twice. The gel pieces were dehydrated for 5 min using 1:1 acetonitrile: 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile for 30 s.  The gel pieces were dried in a speed-vac (Thermo Savant) for 10 min. The gel pieces were rehydrated in 5 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 56C for 20 min. After discarding the supernatant, the gel pieces were incubated in 15 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 20 min in the dark. The gel pieces were washed twice with water and dehydrated and dried as before. The dried gel pieces were rehydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 250 ng of mass spectrometry-grade trypsin and incubated overnight at 37C. Following digestion, the reaction mixture was acidified to 1% formic acid and desalted. The digested peptides were desalted using C18 stop-and-go extraction (STAGE) tips. Briefly, for each sample a C18 STAGE tip was activated with methanol, then conditioned with 60% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid followed by 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. Samples were loaded onto the tips and desalted with 0.5% acetic acid. Peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid and lyophilized in a SpeedVac (Thermo Savant) to near dryness, approximately 2 h. Each digestion mixture was analyzed by UHPLC-MS/MS. LC was performed on a Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo). Mobile phase A was 99.9% MilliQ water, 0.1% acetic acid. Mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The 20 min LC gradient ran from 0% B to 35% B over 10 min, then to 80% B for the remaining 10 min. Samples were loaded directly to the column. The column was 15 cm x 75 um I.D. and packed with 2 micron C18 media (Thermo Easy Spray PepMap). The LC was interfaced to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher) via nano-electrospray ionization using a source with an integrated column heater (Thermo Easy Spray source). The column was heated to 50C. An electrospray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire, by data-dependent acquisition, tandem mass spectra from the top 20 ions in the full scan from 400 - 1200 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15s, singly-charged ions were excluded, isolation width was set to 1.6 Da, full MS resolution to 70,000 and MS/MS resolution to 17,500. Normalized collision energy was set to 27, automatic gain control to 2e5, max fill MS to 20 ms, max fill MS/MS to 60 ms and the underfill ratio to 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
Bioproximity: Mass spectrometer RAW data files were converted to MGF format using msconvert. Detailed search parameters are printed in the search output XML files. Briefly, all searches required 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, strict tryptic cleavage, 0 or 1 missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine alkylation, variable modification of methionine oxidation and expectation value scores of 0.01 or lower. MGF files were searched using the specified human (9606) UniProtKB (SwissProt plus TrEMBL) sequence library from August 2014. MGF files were searched using x! tandem TORNADO and by OMSSA 2.1.9. All searches were performed on Amazon Web Services-based cluster compute instances using the Proteome Cluster interface. XML output files were parsed, and non-redundant protein sets determined using Proteome Cluster. MS1-based features were detected, and peptide peak areas were calculated using OpenMS. Proteins were required to have 1 or more unique peptides across the analyzed samples with E-value scores of 0.01 or less.

### Publication Abstract
TGF&#x3b2;1 is a profibrotic mediator that contributes to a broad spectrum of pathologies, including systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary fibrosis (SSc-PF). However, the secretome of TGF&#x3b2;1-stimulated primary human normal lung (NL) fibroblasts has not been well characterized. Using fluorescent 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2D-PAGE) and differential gel electrophoresis (DIGE) followed by Mass Spectrometry, we identified 37 differentially secreted proteins in the conditioned media of TGF&#x3b2;1-activated NL fibroblasts and generated a protein-protein association network of the TGF&#x3b2;1 secretome using STRING. Functional enrichment revealed that several biological processes and pathways characteristic of PF were enriched. Additionally, by comparing the TGF&#x3b2;1 secretome of NL fibroblasts to proteomic biomarkers from biological fluids of systemic sclerosis (SSc) patients, we identified 11 overlapping proteins. Together our data validate the TGF&#x3b2;1-induced secretome of NL fibroblasts as a valid in vitro model that reflects SSc biomarkers and identify potential therapeutic targets for SSc-PF. SIGNIFICANCE: All proteins secreted by fibroblasts into the extracellular space, representing the secretome, promote cell-to-cell communication as well as tissue homeostasis, immune mechanisms, developmental regulation, proteolysis, development of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and cell adhesion. Therefore, it is crucial to understand how TGF&#x3b2;1, a well-known profibrotic cytokine, modulates the secretome of pulmonary fibroblasts, and how the TGF&#x3b2;1-induced secretome resembles biomarkers in SSc. Using functional enrichment analysis, key pathways and hub proteins can be identified and studied as potential therapeutic targets for pulmonary fibrosis.

### Keywords
Fibroblasts, Tgfbeta, Secretome

### Affiliations
Medical University of SC
Medical University of South Carolina, Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, 96 Jonathan Lucas St, MSC 637, Charleston, SC, 29425, United State of America.

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Carol A. Feghali-Bostwick
Medical University of South Carolina, Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, 96 Jonathan Lucas St, MSC 637, Charleston, SC, 29425, United State of America.


