### Accession
PXD022527

### Title
Quantitative proteomics characterization of proteins modified by very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) under necroptosis

### Description
Necroptosis is a caspase-independent form of regulated cell death that is characterized by membrane permeabilization and rupture. This membrane rupture is responsible for the inflammatory properties of necroptosis and is critical for disease states involving this process. In efforts to understand how lipids might contribute to necroptosis, we previously showed that saturated very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) are functionally involved in this process, potentially through protein fatty acylation. Here we define the scope of protein acylation by saturated VLCFAs during necroptosis using a clickable lipid analog and IonStar quantitative proteomics.As a result, a total of 1672 proteins were quantified with high precision and no missing data across samples in the same condition. 1267 were detected with higher abundances in control cells and 405 were detected with higher abundance in necroptotic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the role of fatty acylation by VLCFAs and identify the proteins that are modified by VLCFAs during necroptosis, we analyzed the proteins that are modified by a representative VLCFA during this process using quantitative proteomics. We used ω-alkynyl C20:0 fatty acid (C20 alkFA) to identify proteins that are modified with this probe using delivery and enrichment protocols we described previously (n=3 for each condition). After collecting cell pellets and isolating membrane fraction by ultracentrifugation, we installed a biotin reporter and captured proteins that are covalently modified by C20 alkFA (referred to as enriched portion from here on). We then carried out quantitative proteomics in order to identify proteins that are acylated by C20 alkFA and compared their levels in control and necroptotic cells. Briefly, once the proteins were enriched on the neutravidin beads, beads were resuspended in detergent containing buffers and were subjected to a surfactant-aided precipitation/on-bead digestion procedure modified from a recently published SEPOD method. Derived tryptic peptides were analyzed by a well-optimized trapping nano LC-Orbitrap mass spectrometry system. Each sample was analyzed twice, once by Orbitrap (OT) and once by Ion Trap (OT) to allow accurate and sensitive peptide detection as well as cross validation of protein identification results. Proteomic quantification was accomplished by IonStar, an in-house developed MS1 ion current-based quantitative proteomics method.

### Data Protocol
Database searching: SEQUEST embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4; Search result integration: Scaffold 4.5; Identification criteria: < 1% protein/peptide FDR with ≥2 unique peptides; Quantification: IonStar

### Publication Abstract
Necroptosis is a form of cell death characterized by receptor-interacting protein kinase activity and plasma membrane permeabilization via mixed-lineage kinase-like protein (MLKL). This permeabilization is responsible for the inflammatory properties of necroptosis. We previously showed that very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) are functionally involved in necroptosis, potentially through protein fatty acylation. Here, we define the scope of protein acylation by saturated VLCFAs during necroptosis. We show that MLKL and phosphoMLKL, key for membrane permeabilization, are exclusively acylated during necroptosis. Reducing the levels of VLCFAs decreases their membrane recruitment, suggesting that acylation by VLCFAs contributes to their membrane localization. Acylation of phosphoMLKL occurs downstream of phosphorylation and oligomerization and appears to be, in part, mediated by ZDHHC5 (a palmitoyl transferase). We also show that disruption of endosomal trafficking increases cell viability during necroptosis, possibly by preventing recruitment, or removal, of phosphoMLKL from the plasma membrane.

### Keywords
Ionstar proteomics acylation necroptosis

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences University at Buffalo, State University of New York

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences University at Buffalo, State University of New York


