### Accession
PXD023879

### Title
Proteome changes in PTBP1 deficient hematopoietic cells

### Description
Ribosomopathies constitute a range of disabling conditions associated with defective protein synthesis mainly affecting hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and erythroid development. Here we demonstrate that deletion of Polypyrimidine Tract Binding Protein 1 (PTBP1) in the hematopoietic compartment led to the development of  a ribosomopathy-like condition. Specifically, loss of PTBP1 was associated with a decrease in HSC self-renewal, erythroid differentiation and protein synthesis. Consistent with its function as a splicing regulator, PTBP1 deficiency led to splicing defects in hundreds of genes and we demonstrate that the up-regulation of a specific isoform of CDC42 could partly mimic the protein synthesis defect associated with loss of PTBP1. Furthermore, PTBP1 deficiency was associated with a marked defect in ribosome biogenesis and a selective reduction in the translation of mRNAs encoding ribosomal proteins. Collectively, this work identifies PTBP1 as a key integrator of ribosomal functions and highlights the broad functional repertoire of RNA binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
80,000–100 000 preMegEs (Lin- Sca-1- c-kit+ CD41- FcgRII/III - CD150+ CD105-) and preCFU-Es (Lin- Sca-1- c-kit+ CD41- FcgRII/III - CD150+ CD105+) were FACS sorted washed twice with ice-cold PBS. Resulting samples were subjected to sample preparation similar to (Kulak et al., 2014). Cells were lysed using 20 ul of lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris pH8.5). Samples were boiled at 95oC for 5 minutes, after which they were sonicated on high for 3x 10 seconds in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4oC. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37oC for 4hrs. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% Acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5, trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37oC. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were desalted and fractionated on in-house packed SCX Stagetips []. For each sample, 3 discs of SCX material (3M Empore) were packed in a 200ul tip, and the SCX material activated with 80μl of 100% Acetonitrile (HPLC grade, Sigma). The tips were equilibrated with 80μl of 0.2% TFA, after which the samples were loaded using centrifugation at 4,000x rpm. After washing the tips twice with 100μl of 0.2% TFA, two initial fractions were eluted into clean 500μl Eppendorf tubes using 75 and 300mM ammonium acetate in 20% Acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid respectively. The final fraction was eluted using 5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% Acetonitrile. The eluted peptides were frozen on dry ice and concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis. Mass Spectrometry Acquisition For each sample, peptides were loaded onto a 2cm C18 trap column (ThermoFisher 164705), connected in-line to a 50cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES803) using 100% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) at 750bar, using the Thermo EasyLC 1000 HPLC system in a single-column setup and the column oven operating at 45°C. Peptides were eluted over a 200 minute gradient ranging from 5 to 48% of 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min, and the Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a 3 second MS-OT, ddMS2-IT-HCD top speed method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000, with an AGC target of 4×105 or maximum injection time of 50ms and a scan range of 400–1500m/z. Ions were isolated in a 1.6m/z window, with an AGC target of 1×104 or maximum injection time of 35ms, fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30 and the resulting MS2 spectra were obtained in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds, and ions with a charge state <2, >7 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and standard settings. Briefly, label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled with a requirement of 2 unique peptides per protein, and iBAQ quantitation was also enabled during the search. Variable modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), Gln->pyro-Glu and Glu->pyro-Glu. Fixed modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl (C), false discovery rate was set to 1% and “match between runs” was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Hematopoiesis, Scx

### Affiliations
1 The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 4 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, DanStem, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Porse
1 The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark 2 Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark 4 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, DanStem, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


