### Accession
PXD017149

### Title
Integrative -omics and HLA-ligandomics analysis to identify novel drug targets for ccRCC immunotherapy

### Description
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the dominant subtype of renal cancer. With currently available therapies, cure of advanced and metastatic ccRCC is achieved only in rare cases. Here, we developed a workflow integrating different -omics technologies to identify ccRCC-specific HLA-presented peptides as potential drug targets for ccRCC immunotherapy. We analyzed frequent ccRCC-specific peptides by MS-based HLA ligandomics of 55 ccRCC tumors (cohort 1), paired non-tumor renal tissues and 158 benign tissues from other organs. Pathways enriched in ccRCC compared to its cell type of origin were identified by transcriptome and gene set enrichment analyses in 51 tumor tissues of the same cohort. To retrieve a list of candidate target genes with involvement in ccRCC pathogenesis, ccRCC-specific pathway genes were intersected with the source genes of tumor-exclusive peptides. The candidates were validated in an independent cohort from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA KIRC, n=452), yielding 113 candidate genes. DNA methylation (TCGA KIRC, n=273), and somatic mutations (TCGA KIRC, n=392), as well as correlations with tumor metabolites (cohort 1, n=30) and immune-oncological markers (cohort 1, n=37) were analyzed to refine regulatory and functional involvements of candidates. Immunogenicity analysis identified candidate epitopes able to activate native CD8+ T cells. Functional analysis of EGLN3, a candidate with frequent ccRCC-specific immunogenic peptides, revealed possible tumor-promoting functions. Integration of HLA ligandomics, transcriptomics, genetic and epigenetic data leads to the identification of novel functionally relevant therapeutic targets for ccRCC immunotherapy. Validation of the identified targets is now mandatory to expand the treatment landscape of ccRCC.

### Sample Protocol
HLA ligandomics was performed by reversed phase liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry as previously described (Löffler et al. Genome Med 2019, Kowalewski and Stevanović Methods Mol Biol 2013, Nelde et al. Methods Mol Biol 2019). The monoclonal antibodies W6/32, Tü39 and L243 (in-house production at the Department of Immunology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany) were used for immunoaffinity purification of HLA class I and II-peptide complexes. Five technical replicate LC-MS runs were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
For annotation, data was processed against the human proteome as available from the Swiss-Prot database (release: September 27th 2013; 20,279 reviewed protein sequences contained) within the Proteome Discoverer (v1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. The search was not restricted to enzymatic specificity and oxidized methionine was enabled as dynamic modification. Percolator (Käll et al. Nat Methods 2007) assisted false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 5 % and results restricted to rank 1 (best match for each spectra) and length of 8-12 amino acids for HLA class I and 9-25 amino acids for class II peptides. NetMHCpan-3.4 (rank < 2 or 500 nM) and SYFPEITHI (= 60% of maximal score) were used to define the HLA ligands.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer vaccine, Renal cell carcinoma, Immunotherapy, Hla peptidomie, Kidney cancer, Peptide vaccine, Ccrcc, Ligandomics

### Affiliations
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany
Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Annika Nelde

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Stevanović
Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Tübingen, Germany


