### Accession
PXD017835

### Title
Antioxidant mechanism of glutaredoxins and their role in symbiotic nitrogen fixation in Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae 3841

### Description
Glutaredoxins (Grx) are redoxin family proteins that  reduce disulfifides and mixed disulfifides between glutathione and proteins. Rhizobium leguminosarum 3841  contains three genes coding for glutaredoxins: RL4289 (grxA) codes for a dithiolic glutaredoxin, RL2615 (grxB) codes for a monothiol glutaredoxin, while RL4261 (grxC) codes for a glutaredoxin-like NrdH protein. In this study, we have generated mutants which have interrupted one, two, or three glutaredoxin genes. These mutants had no different growth phenotypes from the wild type RL3841. Mutation of grxC did not affect R. leguminosarum antioxidant or symbiotic capacities, while grxA-derived or grxB-derived mutants decreased the antioxidant and fixation nitrogen capacity. grxA-derived mutants was severely impaired in there rhizosphere colonization, and formed maller nodules with defects of bacteroid differentiation. whereas nodules induced by grxB-derived mutants contained abnormally thick cortexs and  prematurely senescent bacteroids. Surprisingly the grx triple mutant presented an enhanced defect in antioxidant and symbiotic capacities of R. leguminosarum. LC-MS/MS analysis quantitative proteomics techniques were employed to compare differential grx triple mutant root bacteroids in response to  the wild type infection. 137 differentially expressed proteins were identified including 56 up-regulated and 81 down-regulated proteins. By sorting the identified proteins according to metabolic function, twenty-eight proteins were involved in transporter activity, twenty proteins were related to stress response and virulence, and sixteen proteins were related to amino acid metabolism. Overall, R. leguminosarum glutaredoxins play an important role in root nodule symbiosis by involving the functions of anti-oxidant defenses, Fe-S cluster assembly, and control of bacteroid differentiation and senescence.

### Sample Protocol
The 4-week-nodule samples were grinded into cell powder in liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was then added to the cell powder, and the slurry was sonicated for 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected and the protein content was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockland, IL). The resulting proteins were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, and then alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Each protein sample was then diluted by 100 mM tetraethyl ammonium bromide (TEAB) to obtain a urea concentration of less than 2 and  1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second digestion of 4 h. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides then were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column and vacuum-dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according the manufacturer’s instructions of the TMT kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, USA). Concisely, one unit of tandem mass tag (TMT) reagent was dissolved and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in dissolved in solvent A ( 0.1% formic acid in aqueous solution) and loaded directly onto a  reversed phase analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm length). The loaded material was eluted from this column in a linear gradient of 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile ) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min, climbing to 80% in 3 min and holding at 80% for 3 min with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The MS proteomics data were deposited to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) by using a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the  ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV. For the full scan mode, the m/z scan range was from 350 to 1800. The intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected to run MS/MS analysis using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were measured using a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. The MS analysis alternated between MS and data-dependent tandem MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to accumulate 5×104 ions with the Fixed first mass of 100 m/z. Experiments were conducted in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed and prepared for database search using the MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox et al., 2008).  The resulting tandem mass spectra were searched against the Rhizobium leguminosarum genome database concatenated with reverse decoy database (Young et al., 2006). Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, and the tolerance of the ions was set to  0.02 Da for fragment ion matches. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was specified, and the minimal peptide score for modified peptides was set to 40. Protein expression was analyzed statistically using Student’s t tests (p<0.05). Upregulated and downregulated proteins were defined as having fold changes (FC) > 1.2 and <0.83, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glutaredoxins; rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae 3841; antioxidant capacity; symbiotic nitrogen fixation; proteomics analysis

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities

### Submitter
Guojun Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Guojun Cheng
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities


