### Accession
PXD012056

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling discovers novel proteins associated with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects 25% of the population and can progress to cirrhosis, where treatment options are limited. As the liver secrets most of the blood plasma proteins, its diseases should affect the plasma proteome. Plasma Proteome Profiling of 48 patients with cirrhosis or NAFLD, revealed eight significantly changing (ALDOB, APOM, LGALS3BP, PIGR, VTN, IGHD, FCGBP and AFM), two of which are already linked to liver disease. Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) was significantly elevated in both cohorts with a 2.7-fold expression change in NAFLD and 4-fold change in cirrhosis and was further validated in mouse models. Furthermore, a global correlation map of clinical and proteomic data strongly associated DPP4, ANPEP, TGFBI, PIGR, and APOE to NAFLD and cirrhosis. The prominent diabetic drug target DPP4 is an aminopeptidase like ANPEP, ENPEP and LAP3, which all upregulated in the human or mouse data. Furthermore, ANPEP and TGFBI have potential roles in extracellular matrix remodeling in fibrosis. Thus, Plasma Proteome Profiling can identify potential biomarkers and drug targets in liver disease.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma sample preparation All plasma samples were prepared according to the previously published Plasma Proteome Profiling pipeline on an automated liquid handling system (Agilent Bravo) in a 96-well plate format (Geyer et al., 2016a). In brief, proteins were denatured, reduced, alkylated, digested and peptides purified on StageTips (Kulak et al., 2014) using reagents from the PreOmics ‘iST' Kit (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH).  High pressure liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry Samples were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a nano-electrospray ion source and a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified peptides were separated on 40 cm HPLC-columns (ID: 75 µm; in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). For each LC-MS/MS analysis, around 0.5 µg peptides were injected for the 45 min gradients and 1 µg for the fractions of the deep plasma data set. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO (v/v)) and eluted with a linear 35 min gradient of 3-30% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile), followed by a 7 min increase to 75% of buffer B and a 1 min increase to 98% of buffer B, and a 2 min wash of 98% buffer B at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. Column temperature was kept at 60 °C by a Peltier element containing an in-house-developed oven. For human plasma, MS spectra were acquired with a Top15 data-dependent MS/MS scan method (topN method) for the library and with the BoxCar scan method for study samples (Meier et al., 2018). The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 x 106 charges in the 300-1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Fragmentation of precursor ions was performed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. For mouse plasma, MS spectra were acquired with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 350-1,650 m/z range (AGC target of 3 x106, maximum injection time of 50 ms) at a resolution of 120, 000 and 22 DIA segments (AGC target of 3 x106, maximum injection time of 54 ms) at a resolution of 30, 000 (Suppl. Table 2). Normalized stepped collision energy was set to 25, 27.5, 30, with a default charge state of 2.  The acquisition of samples was randomized to avoid bias.

### Data Protocol
For human plasma, mass spectrometric raw files were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment v.1.5.8.6 (Cox and Mann, 2008) employing the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version 201704, 157,510 entries). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications with a minimum required peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set at the peptide and protein levels. Study samples were analyzed together with our in-house generated matching library and the ‘match between runs’ algorithm (Nagaraj et al., 2012). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2 and normalized in a separate group from the library raw files (Cox et al., 2014).  For mouse plasma, DIA raw data were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar XTM with an in-house generated spectra library of mouse plasma that contains 8899 peptides and 1458 protein groups (mouse FASTA Uniprot FASTA database version 201806 containing 92,096 entries).  Spectronaut Pulsar XTM was used with default settings for DIA data with the decoy generation set to “mutated”.  Bioinformatic analysis Bioinformatic analysis was performed in the Perseus platform (Tyanova et al., 2016) and Python scripts. Two-sample Student’s t-test was used to determine the significantly changed proteins between disease and control groups with a permutation based FDR of 0.05. For significant hits, minimal fold changes together with p-values (controlled by the s0 parameter in Perseus) were used with a permutation based FDR of 0.05 resulting from an s0 of 0.01. For mouse plasma analysis, we used scipy.stats.ttest_ind to calculate T-test probabilities for the means of two independent samples. This was corrected for an FDR of 0.05 by the Benjamini/Hochberg method. Results were filtered to have both a significant FDR-corrected P-value and a minimum log2-fold change of ±1.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) affects 25% of the population and can progress to cirrhosis with limited treatment options. As the liver secretes most of the blood plasma proteins, liver disease may affect the plasma proteome. Plasma proteome profiling of 48 patients with and without cirrhosis or NAFLD revealed six statistically significantly changing proteins (ALDOB, APOM, LGALS3BP, PIGR, VTN, and AFM), two of which are already linked to liver disease. Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) was significantly elevated in both cohorts by 170% in NAFLD and 298% in cirrhosis and was further validated in mouse models. Furthermore, a global correlation map of clinical and proteomic data strongly associated DPP4, ANPEP, TGFBI, PIGR, and APOE with NAFLD and cirrhosis. The prominent diabetic drug target DPP4 is an aminopeptidase like ANPEP, ENPEP, and LAP3, all of which are up-regulated in the human or mouse data. Furthermore, ANPEP and TGFBI have potential roles in extracellular matrix remodeling in fibrosis. Thus, plasma proteome profiling can identify potential biomarkers and drug targets in liver disease.

### Keywords
Biomarker discovery, Plasma proteome profiling, Nafld, Nash, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark  Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Lili Niu

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark  Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


