### Accession
PXD043056

### Title
Siderophore specifities of ChtA and ActA, two TonB-dependent transporters of Pseudomonas

### Description
Iron is an essential nutrient for the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa, as for almost all living organisms. To access this element, the pathogen is able to express at least 15 different iron-uptake pathways, the vast majority involving small iron chelators called siderophores. Indeed, P. aeruginosa produces two siderophores, pyoverdine and pyochelin, but can also use many produced by other microorganisms. This implies that the bacterium expresses appropriate TonB-dependent transporters (TBDTs) at the outer membrane to import the ferric form of each of the siderophores used. These transporters are highly selective for a given ferri-siderophore complex or for siderophores with similar chemical structures. Here, we show that P. aeruginosa can also use rhizoferrin, staphyloferrin A, aerobactin, and schizokinen as siderophores to access iron. Growth assays in iron-restricted conditions and 55Fe uptake assays showed that the two alpha-carboxylate type siderophores rhizoferrin-Fe and staphyloferrin A-Fe are transported into P. aeruginosa cells by the TBDT ActA (PA3268). Among the mixed alpha-carboxylate/hydroxamate type siderophores, we found aerobactin-Fe to be transported by ChtA (as previously described) and schizokinen-Fe by ChtA and another unidentified TBDT.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa ∆pvdF∆pchA cells were consecutively grown overnight in LB and then CAA medium. Bacteria were then pelleted and diluted again in CAA medium at an OD600 nm of 0.1 and grown for 8 h with or without 10 µM xenosiderophores at 30°C. The cells (5 x 108) were harvested and used for proteomic analysis. A biological triplicate was prepared for each sample for each cell-culture condition. Cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL lysis buffer (UTCT buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, and 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) supplemented with nuclease and DNase. Protein concentrations were determined with the Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as the standard. Proteins were further precipitated overnight with glacial 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol (5 volumes, - 20°C). After centrifugation at 12,000 x g and 4°C for 15 min, the resulting pellets were washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and further dried under vacuum (Speed-Vac concentrator). Pellets were resuspended in 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 95°C, 10 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature, 20 min). Proteins were finally digested overnight with 150 ng sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). The proteomic data sets were obtained by injecting 1000 ng of each peptide mixture into a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) coupled to an U3000-RSLC liquid chromatography (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), as described previously (Perraud et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
For both differential proteomic analyses, data were searched against the P. aeruginosa UniprotKB sub-database (UniprotKB release 2016_12, taxon 208964, P. aeruginosa strain PAO1, 5564 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified using the Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were used: (i) Trypsin/P was selected as the enzyme, (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed, (iii) methionine oxidation and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, (iv) mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Mascot data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (Bouyssié et al., 2020). Proteins were validated against a Mascot pretty rank equal to 1 and a 1% FDR for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). All MS/MS fragmentation spectra were used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates: this “BasicSC” value, calculated by Proline, included all PSMs of all peptides, including modified peptides (3 fixed and variable modifications) and the peptides shared by different protein sets. After column-wise normalization of the data matrix, the “BasicSC” spectral count values were subjected to a negative-binomial test using edgeR GLM regression of R (R v3.2.5) through the IPinquiry package (Kuhn et al., 2023). The statistical test was based on the published msmsTests R package available in Bioconductor to process label-free LC-MS/MS data by spectral counts (Gregori et al., 2019). For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value (adjp), corrected by the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure, was calculated, as well as the protein fold-change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acta, Chta, Siderophore, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
CNRS, University of Strasbourg, UMR7242, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Schalk
CNRS, University of Strasbourg, UMR7242, UMR7242, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France


