### Accession
PXD020244

### Title
Ulcerative Colitis-Derived Colonoid Culture: 2 A multi-mineral-approach to improve barrier protein expression

### Description
Background. Recent studies demonstrated that Aquamin®, a calcium-, magnesium-, and multiple trace element-rich natural product, improves barrier structure and function in colonoids obtained from the tissue of healthy subjects.  The goal of the present study was to determine if the colonic barrier could be improved in tissue from subjects with ulcerative colitis (UC).   Methods. Colonoid cultures were established with colon biopsies from 9 individuals with UC.  The colonoids were then incubated for a 2-week period under control conditions (i.e., in culture medium with a final calcium concentration of 0.25 mM) or in the same medium supplemented with Aquamin® to provide 1.5 – 4.5 mM calcium.  Effects on differentiation and barrier improvement were determined using several approaches: phase-contrast & scanning electron microscopy, quantitative histology & immunohistology, mass spectrometry-based proteome assessment and transmission electron microscopy.  Results. While there were no gross changes in colonoid appearance, there was evidence of increased differentiation (larger lumen diameter and wall thickness) and greater expression of cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and lesser expression of Ki67 with the intervention. Aquamin®-treated colonoids demonstrated a modest up-regulation of tight junctional proteins but stronger induction of adherens junction proteins and desmosomal proteins.  Increased desmosomes were seen at the ultrastructural level.  Proteomic analysis also demonstrated increased expression of basement membrane proteins and hemidesmosomal components.  Proteins expressed at the apical surface (mucins and trefoils) were also increased as were several additional proteins with anti-microbial activity or that modulate inflammation. Similarly, growth and cell cycle regulatory proteins (e.g., Ki67, nucleophosmin, and stathmin) were significantly down-regulated. Laminin interactions, fibronectin matrix formation and extracellular matrix organization were the top three up-regulated pathways with the intervention.  Conclusion. A majority of individuals including patients with UC do not reach the recommended daily intake for calcium and other minerals. To the extent that such deficiencies might contribute to the weakening of the colonic barrier, the findings employing UC tissue-derived colonoids here suggest that adequate mineral intake might improve the colonic barrier

### Sample Protocol
Colonoids were isolated from Matrigel using 2mM EDTA for 15 minutes and then exposed to Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) - lysis and extraction buffer (Pierce, # 89901; ThermoFisher Scientific) for protein isolation, as described in our previous reports [13, 15]. Proteomic experiments were carried out in the Proteomics Resource Facility (PRF) in the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan, employing mass spectrometry-based Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, ThermoFisher Scientific). For this, three subjects were assessed separately using TMT sixplex kit for each subject. Fifty micrograms of colonoid protein from each condition was digested separately with trypsin and individual samples labeled with one of 6 isobaric mass tags following the manufacturer’s protocol.  After labeling, equal amounts of peptide from each condition were mixed together.  In order to achieve in-depth characterization of the proteome, the labeled peptides were fractionated using 2D-LC (basic pH reverse-phase separation followed by acidic pH reverse phase) and analyzed on a high-resolution, tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid, ThermoFisher Scientific) using conditions optimized at the PRF.  MultiNotch MS3 analysis was employed to obtain accurate quantitation of the identified proteins/peptides

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.3, ThermoFisher Scientific).  MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt human protein database (20353 sequences; downloaded on 06/20/2019) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤2% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of detection.  Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 9 and <40% isolation interference).  Differential protein expression between conditions, normalizing to control (0.25mM calcium) for each subject’s specimens separately was established using edgeR. Then, resulting data from the three data sets were combined.  Proteins names were retrieved using Uniprot.org, and Reactome v70 (reactome.org) was used for pathway enrichment analyses. Only Proteins with a ≤2% FDR confidence of detection were included in the analyses. String database - v11 (string-db.org) was used for additional enrichment analyses and to detect protein-protein interactions. The initial analysis was targeted towards differentiation, barrier-related, cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion proteins. Follow-up analysis involved an unbiased proteome-wide screen of all proteins modified by intervention in relation to control.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
29 proteomics, Calcium, Cell barrier, Colonoid, Desmosome, Basement membrane, Ulcerative colitis

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America

### Submitter
Muhammad Aslam

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Nadeem Aslam
Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America


