### Accession
PXD037325

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of ADNP-mutant mice

### Description
We report age-differential synaptic plasticity deficits associated with cognitive inflexibility and CaMKIIa hyperactivity in Adnp-mutant mice. These mice show impaired and inflexible contextual learning and memory along with social and anxiety-related deficits in adults, long after the juvenile-stage decrease of ADNP protein levels to ~10% of the newborn level. Adnp-mutant mice show abnormally enhanced long-term potentiation in adults but not in juveniles. This is accompanied by CaMKIIa hyperactivity involving increased baseline autophosphorylation and altered phosphorylation of CaMKIIa substrates, as revealed by unbiased proteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Post-translational modification of WT and Adnp HT brain samples were obtained via the IMAC (Immobilized metal affinity chromatography) services offered by Cell Signaling Technology. Brain samples from three different mice were pooled to make n number of one. Briefly, mouse brain samples containing the hippocampus were dissected on the ice and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Then brain samples were protease-digested and fractionated by solid-phase extraction. Digested phosphorylated peptides were enriched by IMAC and analyzed by LC-MS/MS (Ficarro et al., 2002; Gruhler et al., 2005). IMAC service uses positively charged ions, commonly Fe3+, to capture negatively charged phosphor-peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using the SEQUEST and the Core platform from Harvard University. Assignment and relative quantification of the sequences to the MS/MS spectra was done with the Sorcerer program (Sage-N). Finally, the peptide sequence assignment was linked to parent ion peak intensities to measure approximate fold-changes in validated peptides between paired samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Autism spectrum disorder, Adnp syndrome

### Affiliations
Korea Basic Science Institute
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute for Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Korea

### Submitter
Yeji Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Eunjoon Kim
Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute for Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Korea


