### Accession
PXD028365

### Title
2′ ,3′-cAMP treatment mimics abiotic stress response

### Description
For many years, 2′,3′-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (2′,3′-cAMP), a positional isomer of the second messenger 3′,5′-cAMP, has not received enough attention. Recent studies have reported that 2′,3′-cAMP exists in plants and might be involved in stress signaling because 1) its level increases upon wounding and 2) it was shown to participate in stress granule formation. Although 2′,3′-cAMP is known as RNA-degradation product, the effect of its accumulation in the cell remains unknown. Here, we unprecedentedly evaluate responses at the transcriptome, metabolome, and proteome levels to the accumulation of 2′,3′-cAMP in Arabidopsis plants. Data revealed that 2′,3′-cAMP is metabolized into adenosine, suggesting that a well-known cyclic nucleotide - adenosine pathway from human cells might exist also in plants. However, the control transcriptomic data indicated that, despite fewer overlaps, responses to 2′,3′-cAMP and to adenosine differ. Analysis of the transcriptome and proteome in response to 2′,3′-cAMP showed similar changes, known as signatures for abiotic stress response. This is further supported by the fact that adding to the role in facilitating of stress granules (SGs) formation, 2′,3′-cAMP induces changes at the level of proteins known as key components of SGs and can also induce movement of processing bodies (PBs) in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets formed in the MTBE-based extraction method were solubilized in 100 μl of urea–thiourea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Protein content was determined using a Bradford assay (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany). 40 µg of protein was treated with 5 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at RT followed by cysteine alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at RT in the dark. Next, enzymatic digestion of proteins using LysC/Trypsin Mix (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) was performed according to the technical manual. After digestion, samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH < 2. Peptides were desalted using C18 Empore® extraction discs (3M, Maplewood, MN) STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) and dried to approximately 4 µl using a centrifugal evaporator. Samples were stored at ‒80°C until measurement.

### Data Protocol
Dried peptides were solubilized in loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.2% TFA), and an equivalent of 0.8–1.0 µg of peptides was separated using a reversed-phase column and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus or Q-Exactive HF spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and its build-in search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) were used to analyze the raw proteomic data. For protein annotation, the A. thaliana TAIR10 annotations (Arabidopsis TAIR database Version 10, The Arabidopsis Information Resource,www.Arabidopsis.org (update in December 2017) in combination with the search engine Andromeda  was used. Search included also a contaminant database that can be found in any MaxQuant installation folder or directly downloaded from official website of the developer. Contaminants and decoy hits were removed from each dataset. The settings for MaxQuant analysis were set as follows: trypsin and lysine selected as digesting enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification.   Spectra  were  also  searched  against  a  decoy  database  of  the A.  thaliana proteome and results were filtered to obtain a FDR below 1% on the protein level. The “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” options were selected. A minimum peptide length of six amino acids was used. The quantification was performed for proteins with a minimum of one unique and one razor peptide. Known contaminants, such as keratins were removed from further analysis.  Furthermore, at least two unique peptides were required per protein group. Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used in all analysis performed in this manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
The role of the RNA degradation product 2',3'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (2',3'-cAMP) is poorly understood. Recent studies have identified 2',3'-cAMP in plant material and determined its role in stress signaling. The level of 2',3'-cAMP increases upon wounding, in the dark, and under heat, and 2',3'-cAMP binding to an RNA-binding protein, Rbp47b, promotes stress granule (SG) assembly. To gain further mechanistic insights into the function of 2',3'-cAMP, we used a multi-omics approach by combining transcriptomics, metabolomics, and proteomics to dissect the response of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) to 2',3'-cAMP treatment. We demonstrated that 2',3'-cAMP is metabolized into adenosine, suggesting that the well-known cyclic nucleotide-adenosine pathway of human cells might also exist in plants. Transcriptomics analysis revealed only minor overlap between 2',3'-cAMP- and adenosine-treated plants, suggesting that these molecules act through independent mechanisms. Treatment with 2',3'-cAMP changed the levels of hundreds of transcripts, proteins, and metabolites, many previously associated with plant stress responses, including protein and RNA degradation products, glucosinolates, chaperones, and SG components. Finally, we demonstrated that 2',3'-cAMP treatment influences the movement of processing bodies, confirming the role of 2',3'-cAMP in the formation and motility of membraneless organelles.

### Keywords
2′, 3′-camp, Abiotic stress, Processing bodies, Stress response, Stress granules

### Affiliations
Celon Pharma
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, 14476 Potsdam, Germany

### Submitter
Michał Górka

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirycz
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, 14476 Potsdam, Germany


