### Accession
PXD023984

### Title
ER-associated degradation of Eag1 potassium channels by the RING E3 ubiquitin ligase MKRN1: the presence of a dual ubiquitination system

### Description
Mutations in the human gene encoding the neuron-specific Eag1 voltage-gated K+ channel are associated with neurodevelopmental diseases, indicating an important role of Eag1 during brain development. A disease-causing Eag1 mutant channel is linked to defective protein stability that involves enhanced protein degradation by the E3 ubiquitin ligase cullin 7 (CUL7). The detailed mechanisms governing protein homeostasis of plasma membrane- and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized Eag1 K+ channels, however, remains unclear. By using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified another E3 ubiquitin ligase, makorin ring finger protein 1 (MKRN1), as a novel binding partner primarily interacting with the carboxyl-terminal region of Eag1. MKRN1 mainly interacts with ER-localized immature core-glycosylated, as well as nascent non-glycosylated, Eag1 proteins. MKRN1 promotes polyubiquitination and ER-associated proteasomal degradation of immature Eag1 proteins. Although both CUL7 and MKRN1 contribute to ER quality control of immature core-glycosylated Eag1 proteins, MKRN1, but not CUL7, associates with and promotes degradation of nascent, non-glycosylated Eag1 proteins at the ER. In direct contrast to the role of CUL7 in regulating both ER and peripheral quality controls of Eag1, MKRN1 is exclusively responsible for the early stage of Eag1 maturation at the ER. We further demonstrated that both CUL7 and MKRN1 contribute to protein quality control of additional disease-causing Eag1 mutants associated with defective protein homeostasis. Our data suggest that the presence of this dual ubiquitination system differentially maintains Eag1 protein homeostasis and may ensure efficient removal of disease-associated misfolded Eag1 mutant channels.

### Sample Protocol
Three 10-cm petri dishes of HEK293T cells (~1.5x107 cells per dish) were transfected with the Eag1 plasmid. 42 hours after transfection, cells were treated with 10 μM MG132 for 6 hours to induce the accumulation of Eag1 band c, followed by immunoprecipitation with the anti-Eag1 antibody. The immunoprecipitates were eluted with 150 µl 0.5% SDS, 40mM DTT at 95 °C for 15 min. One third of the eluent (50 µl) was digested with PNGase F at 37°C for four hours. The eluents with or without PNGase F digestion were concentrated with a centrifugal filter at 10,000 xg for 20-40 min. Eluted complexes were resuspended in 2X Laemmli buffer and subject to SDS-PAGE separation for immunoblotting or silver staining. Gel sections of Eag1 bands a, b, c, and PNGase F-treated Eag1 (band d) were diced into small pieces (1×1 mm). Each gel piece was placed into a 2-ml tube and dehydrated with 25mM NH4HCO3 and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (1:1). After drying in a Speed-Vac (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA), gel pieces were rehydrated with 25mM NH4HCO3 and 1% β-mercaptoethanol in dark for 20 min at 56°C, followed by an incubation in a solution containing 5% 4-vinylpyridine in 25mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile (1:1) for 20 min at room temperature. Protein digestions were performed with trypsin in 10 μl formic acid (0.1%, v/v) at 37 °C overnight.

### Data Protocol
Digested proteins were then desalted for nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS) analysis, using a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), at the Metabolomics-Proteomics Research Center, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan. Peptides for analysis were loaded via a BEH C18 column (25 cm × 75 µm , Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using mobile phase acetonitrile with the addition of 0.1% formic acid in a gradient of 5–35% over 120 min. Eluted peptides were examined with a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer using a spray voltage of +1.7 kV. The mass spectrometer was conducted in the positive ion mode and on the basis of a data-dependent acquisition method (isolation width: 2.0 Da). The resolution of full MS was set to 30,000 with the m/z range of 400. Mass spectrum data of the peptides were obtained using a full spectrometer survey scan (m/z range of 350-1600).  According to the data-dependent acquisition method, the 10 most intense multiply charged ions (2+ and 3+) were selected for MS/MS scan. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) was confirmed for MS/MS. The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed by Peaks7.5 Studio software for Proteomics (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) via searching the UniProt rat protein database. Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; precursor ion mass tolerance, 50 ppm; fragment ion mass error tolerance, 0.8 Da; precursor mass search type, monoisotopic; maximum missed cleavages allowed 2; and oxidation on methionine (+15.99 Da) and S-pyridylethylation on cysteine (+105.06 Da) for variable modifications. The average local confidence was established as over 80%. A decoy database was used to calculate the false discovery rate, which was set as below 0.1%. A protein was identified when at least one unique peptide was matched.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the human gene encoding the neuron-specific Eag1 voltage-gated K<sup>+</sup> channel are associated with neurodevelopmental diseases, indicating an important role of Eag1 during brain development. A disease-causing Eag1 mutation is linked to decreased protein stability that involves enhanced protein degradation by the E3 ubiquitin ligase cullin 7 (CUL7). The general mechanisms governing protein homeostasis of plasma membrane- and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized Eag1 K<sup>+</sup> channels, however, remain unclear. By using yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified another E3 ubiquitin ligase, makorin ring finger protein 1 (MKRN1), as a novel binding partner primarily interacting with the carboxyl-terminal region of Eag1. MKRN1 mainly interacts with ER-localized immature core-glycosylated, as well as nascent nonglycosylated, Eag1 proteins. MKRN1 promotes polyubiquitination and ER-associated proteasomal degradation of immature Eag1 proteins. Although both CUL7 and MKRN1 contribute to ER quality control of immature core-glycosylated Eag1 proteins, MKRN1, but not CUL7, associates with and promotes degradation of nascent, nonglycosylated Eag1 proteins at the ER. In direct contrast to the role of CUL7 in regulating both ER and peripheral quality controls of Eag1, MKRN1 is exclusively responsible for the early stage of Eag1 maturation at the ER. We further demonstrated that both CUL7 and MKRN1 contribute to protein quality control of additional disease-causing Eag1 mutants associated with defective protein homeostasis. Our data suggest that the presence of this dual ubiquitination system differentially maintains Eag1 protein homeostasis and may ensure efficient removal of disease-associated misfolded Eag1 mutant channels.

### Keywords
Ring e3, Mkrn1

### Affiliations
National Yang-Ming University, Proteomics Research Center, Taipei City, Taiwan
Proteomics Research Center,National Yang-Ming University

### Submitter
Chen-Chung Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen-Chung Liao
National Yang-Ming University, Proteomics Research Center, Taipei City, Taiwan


