### Accession
PXD028937

### Title
Pfcerli2, a duplicated gene in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum essential for invasion of erythrocytes as revealed by phylogenetic and cell biological analysis.

### Description
Merozoite invasion of host red blood cells (RBCs) is essential for survival of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Proteins involved with RBC binding and invasion are secreted from dual-club shaped organelles at the apical tip of the merozoite called the rhoptries. Here we characterise P. falciparum Cytosolically Exposed Rhoptry Leaflet Interacting protein 2 (PfCERLI2), as a rhoptry bulb protein that is essential for merozoite invasion. Phylogenetic analyses show that cerli2 arose through an ancestral gene duplication of cerli1, a related cytosolically exposed rhoptry bulb protein. We show that PfCERLI2 is essential for blood-stage growth and localises to the cytosolic face of the rhoptry bulb. Inducible knockdown of PfCERLI2 led to a proportion of merozoites failing to invade after formation of the tight junction. PfCERLI2 knockdown was associated with inhibition of rhoptry antigen processing and a significant elongation of the rhoptries, suggesting that the inability of merozoites to invade is caused by aberrant rhoptry function due to PfCERLI2 deficiency. These findings identify PfCERLI2 as a protein that has key roles in rhoptry biology during merozoite invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for DiQ-BioID Early PfCERLI1DiQ-BioID and PfCERLI2DiQ-BioID  schizonts (36 hours old) were treated with 150 M biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) and with or without rapalog A/C heterodimerizer (AP21967, Takara) for a total of 8 hours total, where E64 was added at 4 hours into treatment. Once mature schizonts had formed, dimerisation between the bait protein and BirA was confirmed by live cell microscopy, and biotinylation confirmed by fixed cell IFA and western blot using a streptavidin-conjugated AlexaFluor488 and streptavidin-conjugated IRDye800 respectively. The remaining culture was centrifuged at 550 rcf, washed twice in PBS before being saponin lysed.  Saponin pellets were further lysed in 1.5 mL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 500 nM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, Sigma-Aldrich) with CØmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche)) and sonicated  three times for 30 seconds at a time.  Samples were centrifuged at max speed, and supernatants were incubated with magnetic streptavidin beads (Pierce) at 4 oC O/N to enrich for biotinylated proteins. The next day, the beads were separated on a magnetic separation rack, and flowthrough was discarded. Beads were washed three times in 1 mL lysis buffer, and six times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). Washed beads were then resuspended in 200 L ammonium bicarbonate containing 1 g equivalent of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and incubated O/N at 37 oC with gentle shaking. The following morning, an additional 0.5 g of sequencing-grade trypsin was added to each sample, and incubated for another 4 hours at 37 oC.  Beads were magnetised, and supernatant containing peptides was collected. Residual peptides on the beads were collected with two rinses of 150 L ddH2O and supernatants were pooled. The pooled supernatant was centrifuged at max speed to remove any residual beads and collected in a new tube. The final supernatant was acidified to 0.5% v/v formic acid (Thermofisher) to inactivate trypsin, before being sent for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometryic instrumentation and data acquisition  Mass spectromtery acquisition and NanoLC-MS/MS was carried out as described previously, with minor modifications. Samples were loaded at a flow rate of 15 μl/min onto a reversed-phase trap column (100 μm × 2 cm), Acclaim PepMap media (Dionex) and maintained at a temperature of 40°C. Peptides were eluted from the trap column at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min through a reversed-phase capillary column (75 μm × 50 cm) (LC Packings, Dionex). For acquisition by HPLC, a 158 min gradient was set using an incremental gradient that reached 30% ACN after 123 min, 34% ACN after 126 min, 79.2% ACN after 131 min and 2% ACN after 138 min for a further 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-independent mode where a 43-fixed-window setup of 14 m/z effective precursor isolation over the m/z range of 376-967 Da was applied. For analysis, raw files were processed using SpectronautTM (version 13.0) against the in-house generated P. falciparum spectral library containing 44,449 peptides corresponding to 4,730 proteins (parasite and human). For processing, raw files were loaded in Spectronaut, the ideal mass tolerances for data extraction and scoring were calculated on its extensive mass calibration with a correction factor of 1. Both at precursor and fragment level, the highest data-point within the selected m/z tolerance was chosen. Identification of peptides against the library was based on default Spectronaut settings (Manual for Spectronaut 13.0, available on Biognosis website). Briefly, precursor Qvalue Cut-off and Protein Qvalue Cut-off were as per default at 1% and therefore only those that passed this cut-off were considered as identified and used for subsequent processing. Retention time (RT) prediction type was set to dynamic indexed RT. Interference correction was performed at the MS2 level. For quantification, interference correction was activated and cross run normalisation was performed using the total peak area at a significance threshold of 0.01. Statistical analysis was performed in excel using relative protein and student t-test as described previously.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Human red blood cells

### Affiliations
Monash University
Research Centre for Infectious Diseases, School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, Australia

### Submitter
Ghizal Siddiqui

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Wilson
Research Centre for Infectious Diseases, School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, Australia


