### Accession
PXD043723

### Title
A bespoke analytical workflow for the identification of sulfopep-tides and confident discrimination from phosphopeptides_C4PR_LIV

### Description
Protein tyrosine sulfation (sY) is a post-translational modification (PTM) catalysed by Golgi-resident Tyrosyl Protein Sul-foTransferases (TPSTs). Information on protein tyrosine sulfation is currently limited to ~50 human proteins with only a handful of those having verified sites of sulfation. The contribution of this chemical moiety for the regulation of biological processes, both inside and outside the cell, remains poorly defined in large part due to analytical limitations. Mass spectrom-etry-based proteomics is the method of choice for PTM analysis, but has yet to be applied for the systematic investigation of biological sulfation (the ‘sulfome’), primarily due to issues associated with discrimination of sY- from phosphotyrosine (pY)-containing peptides. In this study, we developed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based workflow centred on the characteri-zation of sY-peptides, incorporating optimised Zr4+-IMAC and TiO2 enrichment strategies. Extensive characterization of a panel of sY- and pY-peptides using an array of MS fragmentation regimes (CID, HCD, EThcC, ETciD, UVPD) highlights differences in the ability to generate site-determining product ions, which can be exploited to differentiate sulfated peptides from nominally isobaric phosphopeptides based on precursor ion neutral loss at low collision energy. Application of our ana-lytical workflow to the HEK-293 cell extracellular secretome facilitated identification of 23 new sulfotyrosine-containing peptides, several of which we validate enzymatically  using in vitro sulfation assays. Our study demonstrates the applicabil-ity of this strategy for confident, high-throughput, ‘sulfomics’ studies.

### Sample Protocol
Adherent HEK293T cells were grown ~80% confluent (~2x108 cells). Cells were washed 2x in 10 ml of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) before incubation for 18 hr in serum-free growth medium. The HEK293 ‘secretome’ was collected and centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min, collecting the cleared supernatant. Secreted proteins were captured by addition of 100:1 (v/v) sectretome:Strataclean resin (Agilent Technologies) and incubated at room temperature with end over end rotation for 2 h. Resin-protein complexes were centrifuged at 500 g for 2 min and supernatant removed. Complexes were washed twice in an equal volume of PBS, resuspended in 1 ml PBS and transferred to a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube and washed (3x) 1 ml PBS. Proteins were eluted in 1 ml of 5% (w/v) SDS, 500 mM NaCl and 50 mM Tris (pH 8) at 80 °C for 10 min, followed by centrifugation at 13000 g for 10 min. Samples were reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide. A 1:1 mixture of magnetic hydrophobic and hydrophilic Seramag speedbeads (MERCK) were added at a 2:1 (w/w) ratio of beads : protein and ACN was added to a final concentration of 80% (v/v), and incubated at 25 °C, shaking (1,500 rpm) for 30 min. The supernatant was discarded and beads washed (3x) in 200 μl of 100% ACN. Beads were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended by water bath sonication for 2 min in 1 ml 100 mM ammonium acetate pH 8. Trypsin Gold (Promega) was added at a 33:1 (w/w) protein:trypsin ratio and incubated overnight at 37 °C with 1,500 rpm shaking. The peptide containing supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, and the remaining beads were then washed with a 2x volume of 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium acetate pH 8 for 30 min with 1,500 rpm shaking, before the supernatants were combined. The sample was incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4 oC and cleared supernatant collected. Samples were λ phosphatase-treated prior to adding a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) TFA, and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min and  4 °C for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged at 13000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the cleared supernatants collected. Samples were split 1:33:33:33, for total protein, agarose coated IMACZr4+, BioResyn IMACZr4+ HP or TiO2 sY enrichment protocols respectively, prior to drying to completion by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were resuspended in 3% (v/v) ACN + 0.1% TFA by water bath sonication for 10 min, followed by centrifugation at 13000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the cleared supernatant collected. For cell-based studies, peptides were separated and acquired as before with either of the following adaptions: 1) a 60 min gradient and higher-energy Ctrap dissociation (HCD) set at 32% normalized collision energy (NCE). 2) For neutral loss triggered methods, HCD set at 10% NCE, MS2 acquired in the Orbitrap [15K resolution at 200 m/z] and targeted loss continuation trigger for m/z values equivalent to 13 sulfation PTMs (79.9568) at charge states 2+ to 5+ (25 ppm mass tolerance). Continuation of trigger was performed for neutral loss ions with at least 10% relative intensity for correct charge state assigned losses. Triggered scans were acquired in the Orbitrap [30K resolution at 200 m/z], HCD set to 32% NCE, AGC target = standard and maximum injection time = auto. The cytoplasmic regions of human HS6ST137410, HS6ST228605, and HS6ST328471 were cloned into pcDNA3 to express recombinant proteins with a 3Cprotease cleavable, N-terminal, tandem StrepTag. HEK293T cells were transfected at ~40 % confluency using a 3:1 polyethylenimine (branched, average Mw ~25,000 Da; Merck) to DNA ratio (30:10 μg, for a single 10cm culture dish). 48 h post transfection in lysis buffer (150 µl per dish) containing 50 mM trisHCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) Triton X100, 2 mM CaCl2, 10 mM MgCl2 and 20% (v/v) glycerol and supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Lysates were sonicated briefly on ice and clarified by centrifuged at 20,817g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the resulting supernatants were incubated with 15 µl StrepTactin sepharose resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 h with gentle end over end mixing at 4 °C. Sepharose beads containing bound protein were collected and washed three times in 50 mM trisHCl (pH 7.4) and 500 mM NaCl and then equilibrated in storage buffer (50 mM TrisHCl (pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, and 5% (v/v) glycerol). HS6STs were then proteolytically eluted from the beads over a 2 h period using 3C protease (0.5 μg) at 4 °C with gentle agitation. Purified HS6STs (10 µl of the 35 µl elution volume) were sulfated with TPST1, TPST2 or TPST1 and 2 (as described above) for 18 h at 20 °C.

### Data Protocol
heparan-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase 1/2 in vitro assays were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) in conjunction with MASCOT 59 against a custom database of all (12) peptides, BSA and Casein (αS1, αS2, β) isoforms only. Da-ta was imported into Skyline for calculating charge state distributions and retention time shifts based off m/z values from Proteome Discoverer 2.4 analysis. Secretome data was converted into MZML format using MSConvert60 with peak picking “2-“ filter applied. For neutral loss datasets, an additional filtering parameter of “HCD energy 32” was applied. MZML datafiles were searched using PEAKS11 against the UniProt Human reviewed database (updated 14/06/2022).  All data was searched using trypsin (K/R, unless followed by P) with 2 miscleaves permitted and constant modifications = carbamidomethylation (C), variable modification = oxidation (M), sulfation (STY), phosphorylation (STY). Neutral loss triggered methods were additionally searched using semi-specific trypsin and the additional variable modification of deamidation (NQ). MS1 mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS2 mass tolerance = 0.01 Da, instrument type = electrospray ionisation Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance (ESI-FTICR) with inter-nal ions between m/z 200-2000. All data was filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Protein tyrosine sulfation (sY) is a post-translational modification (PTM) catalyzed by Golgi-resident tyrosyl protein sulfo transferases (TPSTs). Information on sY in humans is currently limited to &#x223c;50 proteins, with only a handful having verified sites of sulfation. As such, the contribution of sulfation to the regulation of biological processes remains poorly defined. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics is the method of choice for PTM analysis but has yet to be applied for systematic investigation of the "sulfome", primarily due to issues associated with discrimination of sY-containing from phosphotyrosine (pY)-containing peptides. In this study, we developed an MS-based workflow for sY-peptide characterization, incorporating optimized Zr<sup>4+</sup> immobilized metal-ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) and TiO<sub>2</sub> enrichment strategies. Extensive characterization of a panel of sY- and pY-peptides using an array of fragmentation regimes (CID, HCD, EThcD, ETciD, UVPD) highlighted differences in the generation of site-determining product ions and allowed us to develop a strategy for differentiating sulfated peptides from nominally isobaric phosphopeptides based on low collision energy-induced neutral loss. Application of our "sulfomics" workflow to a HEK-293 cell extracellular secretome facilitated identification of 21 new sulfotyrosine-containing proteins, several of which we validate enzymatically, and reveals new interplay between enzymes relevant to both protein and glycan sulfation.

### Keywords
Tyrosine-o-sulfation, Sulfotyrosine, Sulfation

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, U.K

### Submitter
leonard daly

### Lab Head
Dr Claire eyers
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular & Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, U.K


