### Accession
PXD000006

### Title
Identification of 15d-PGJ2 target proteins

### Description
15-deoxy-delta12,14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) is an endogenous anti-inflammatory lipid derived from PGD2. One potential mechanism for its activity is the covalent modification of cellular proteins, via a reactive alpha,beta-unsaturated carbonyl group in its cyclopentenone ring, which in turn alters protein function. In order to identify the target proteins covalently modified by 15d-PGJ2 in human aortic endothelial cell (EC), EC were treated with biotinylated-15d-PGJ2, the modified proteins extracted by Neutravidin affinity-purification and the proteins were identified by LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
15-Deoxy-delta12, 14-prostaglandin J(2) (15d-PGJ(2)) is an endogenous anti-inflammatory lipid derived from PGD(2). One potential mechanism for its activity is the covalent modification of cellular proteins, via a reactive &#x3b1;,&#x3b2;-unsaturated carbonyl group in its cyclopentenone ring, which in turn alters protein function. In order to identify the candidate target proteins covalently modified by 15d-PGJ(2) in human aortic endothelial cell (EC), EC was treated with biotinylated-15d-PGJ(2), the modified proteins extracted by Neutravidin affinity-purification and the proteins identified by LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Classification of the 358 identified proteins was performed using PANTHER classification system (www.pantherdb.org), showing that the proteins mapped to metabolic process, cellular process, and transport activity. This protein data set highlights the potential for 15d-PGJ(2) to covalently modify cellular proteins and provides a source of data that will aid further studies on the mechanism of action of this endogenous regulator of inflammation.

### Keywords
Covalent modification of proteins, Endothelial cell, 15d-pgj2

### Affiliations
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Simone Marcone

### Lab Head


