### Accession
PXD010358

### Title
Lung proteome analysis of highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (H5N1) infection progression in chicken

### Description
This study is planned to characterize the proteome profile of HPAI H5N1 virus infected chicken lung tissues to identify the molecular pathogenesis and proteomic determinant associate with disease progression in susceptible host.

### Sample Protocol
The chickens were infected with 2X106 EID50 of A/duck/India/02CA10/2011/Agartala influenza virus and lung tissues were collected at different time interval (12hrs, 24hrs and 48hrs in chicken; 12hrs, 48hrs and 5days in ducks). The total lung protein was extracted by SDS based method. After quality checking of protein extract, best three sample from each condition were selected for further proteomic sample preparation step. The protein samples were labelled by isobaric labelling method (iTRAQ) for peptide/protein quantification purpose. The 4plex isobaric labelled chicken samples were pooled and mass spectrometry analysis done in WATERS Q-TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The WATRES specific raw data set files were converted to proteomics standard format mzXML format by proteowizard tool MSconvert with default parameters option. mzXML data files were further processed for database search and other downstream analysis in Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP). MS/MS ion spectra were searched against chicken uniport reference database using comet search engine. The following parameters were used for database search, precursor/peptide mass tolerance- 1.8Da, fragment tolerance -1.6Da, fixed modification – carboxamidomethylation for cys (C) and iTRAQ –N terminal, Variable modification- oxidation (M) and phosphorylation of (STY), and number of missed cleavage 2. The Peptide-Spectrum assignments of comet search engine were validated with PeptideProphet and iProphet tool of TPP. Protein identifications were validated with ProteinProphet tool of TPP, and are based on PeptideProphet or iProphet results. Proteins identified from ProteinProphet result were filtered based on protein probability above 0.95 and contained at least 1 unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Elucidation of the molecular pathogenesis underlying virus-host interactions is important for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies against highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus infection in chickens. However, the pathogenesis of HPAI virus in chickens is not completely understood. To identify the intracellular signaling pathways and critical host proteins associated with influenza pathogenesis, we analyzed the lung proteome of a chicken infected with HPAI H5N1 virus (A/duck/India/02CA10/2011/Agartala). Mass spectrometry data sets were searched against the chicken UniProt reference database. At the local false discovery rate level of 5%, a total of 3313 proteins with the presence of at least one unique peptide were identified in the chicken lung proteome datasets. Differential expression analysis of these proteins showed that 247 and 1754 proteins were downregulated at 12 h and 48 h postinfection, respectively. We observed expression of proteins of the predominant signaling pathways, including Toll-like receptors (TLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptors (RLRs), NOD-like receptors (NLRs), and JAK-STAT signaling. Activation of these pathways is associated with the cytokine storm effect and thus may be the cause of the severity of HPAI H5N1 infection in chickens. We also observed the expression of myeloid differentiation primary response protein (MyD88), inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B kinase subunit beta (IKBKB), interleukin 1 receptor associated kinase 4 (IRAK4), RELA proto-oncogene NF-&#x3ba;B subunit (RELA), and mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS), which are involved in critical signaling pathways, as well as other, less-commonly identified proteins such as hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A), ELAV-like RNA binding protein 1 (ELAVL1), fibronectin 1 (FN1), COP9 signalosome subunit 5 (COPS5), cullin 1 (CUL1), breast cancer type 1 susceptibility protein (BRCA1), and the FYN proto-oncogene Src family tyrosine kinase (FYN) as main hub proteins that might play important roles in influenza pathogenesis in chickens. In summary, we identified the signaling pathways and the proteomic determinants associated with disease pathogenesis in chickens infected with HPAI H5N1 virus.

### Keywords
Avian influenza, Lc-ms, Pathogenesis, Lung tissues, Chicken

### Affiliations
Pathogenomics laboratory, ICAR-National Institute of High Security Animal Disease, Bhopal, India
Scientist,
ICAR-National Institute of High Security Animal Diseases

### Submitter
Anamika Mishra

### Lab Head
Dr Anamika Mishra
Pathogenomics laboratory, ICAR-National Institute of High Security Animal Disease, Bhopal, India


