### Accession
PXD029396

### Title
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 2 exoproteome LF-LC-MS/MS

### Description
Porcine pleuropneumonia caused by Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae affects pig health status and the swine industry worldwide. Despite of the extensive number of studies focused on A. pleuropneumoniae infection and vaccine development, its exoproteome is still rather unexplored. By combining high-throughput mass spectrometry and immunoproteomic approaches, with our current work we provide an in-depth characterisation of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 2 exoproteome. Label-free liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) combined with a comprehensive bioinformatics analysis revealed 484 secreted proteins, of which 84 were predicted to be virulence factors and 142 to be exported via different export mechanisms. The RTX toxins ApxIIA, ApxIIIA and ApxIVA were found to be the most abundant proteins in the A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 2 exoproteome, although ApxIVA is commonly assumed to be expressed exclusively in vivo. Immunoproteomic approaches coupled to LC-MS/MS analysis allowed to portray the immunogenic proteins within the bacterial exoproteome to identify potential vaccine candidates. Using serum pools from uninfected, acutely infected and chronically infected animals, we were able to monitor the seroconversion during disease progression. Overall, our work is expected to contribute to the understanding of the complex pathogenic mechanisms and to facilitate the discovery of potential antimicrobial agents for controlling porcine pleuropneumonia.

### Sample Protocol
30 µg of protein samples were reduced with 200 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min, alkylated with 500 mM IAA at 37°C for 30 min, washed twice with 50 mM TRIS, followed by an overnight digestion using Trypsin/LysC Mix in a ratio of 1:25 (Protease: Protein). The digested peptides were recovered with 50 mM TRIS, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), desalted and cleaned up using C18 spin columns and finally redissolved in 0.1%TFA. Peptides were analysed with a high-resolution Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, United States).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer software with peptide and fragment accuracy of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Protein search was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software 2.3.0.523 against UP_ActinoBac_Pleuro_tx715.fasta, UP_Bovine_tx9913.fasta, UP_Yeast_tx4932.fasta databases. Protein analysis was performed using dedicated algorithms (Wiśniewski, 2016) including four biological and three technical replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Porcine pleuropneumonia caused by Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae affects pig health status and the swine industry worldwide. Despite the extensive number of studies focused on A. pleuropneumoniae infection and vaccine development, a thorough analysis of the A. pleuropneumoniae exoproteome is still missing. Using a complementary approach of quantitative proteomics and immunoproteomics we gained an in-depth insight into the A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 2 exoproteome, which provides the basis for future functional studies. Label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) revealed 593 exoproteins, of which 104 were predicted to be virulence factors. The RTX toxins ApxIIA and ApxIIIA -were found to be the most abundant proteins in the A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 2 exoproteome. Furthermore, the ApxIVA toxin was one of the proteins showing the highest abundance, although ApxIVA is commonly assumed to be expressed exclusively in vivo. Our study revealed several antigens, including proteins with moonlight functions, such as the elongation factor (EF)-Tu, and proteins linked to specific metabolic traits, such as the maltodextrin-binding protein MalE, that warrant future functional characterization and might present potential targets for novel therapeutics and vaccines. Our Ig-classes specific serological proteome analysis (SERPA) approach allowed us to explore the development of the host humoral immune response over the course of the infection. These SERPAs pinpointed proteins that might play a key role in virulence and persistence and showed that the immune response to the different Apx toxins is distinct. For instance, our results indicate that the ApxIIIA toxin has properties of a thymus-independent antigen, which should be studied in more detail.

### Keywords
Exoproteome, Porcine pleuropneumonia, Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria 
Institute of  Microbiology Department of Pathobiology University of Veterinary Medicine Veterinaerplatz 1 1210 Vienna Austria

### Submitter
Stelli Stancheva

### Lab Head
Dr Monika Ehling-Schulz
Institute of  Microbiology Department of Pathobiology University of Veterinary Medicine Veterinaerplatz 1 1210 Vienna Austria


