### Accession
PXD023873

### Title
AMPylation profiling during neuronal differentiation reveals extensive variation on lysosomal proteins

### Description
Protein AMPylation is a prevalent posttranslational modification with an emerging role in neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration. Although in metazoans the two highly conserved protein AMP-transferases together with diverse group of AMPylated proteins have been identified using chemical proteomics and biochemical techniques the function of this modification remains largely unknown. Particularly problematic is a localisation of thus far identified AMPylated proteins and putative AMP-transferases. Here, we uncover protein AMPylation as a novel lysosomal protein posttranslational modification characteristic for differentiating neurons. The AMPylated soluble form of exonuclease PLD3 localised in lysosomes shows dramatic increase during the differentiation of neuronal cell lineages. Similar AMPylation pattern has been observed for a lysosomal acid phosphatase ACP2. Our discovery was enabled by combination of chemical proteomics and novel gel-based separation technique of modified and non-modified proteins. Together, our findings expose further the connection between the protein AMPylation and neurodevelopment and reveal a novel lysosomal posttranslational modification.

### Sample Protocol
400 µg iNGN cell lysates from different time points in a total volume of 970 µL 0.2% (w/v) SDS in PBS were supplemented with 10 µL biotin azide (10 mM in DMSO), 10 μL TCEP (100 mM in ddH2O) and 1.2 μL TBTA (83.5 mM in DMSO). Samples were gently vortexed and the click reaction was initiated by the addition of 20 μL CuSO4 solution (50 mM in ddH2O). The mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 1.5 h. Afterwards, proteins were precipitated by the addition of 4 mL acetone and incubation for at least 1 h at -20 °C. Protein pellets were washed 2 times with cold methanol and then dissolved in 1 mL 0.2% (w/v) SDS in PBS. Dissolved protein pellet was spinned down 2 min at maximum speed and the supernatant was loaded on 50 µL equilibrated avidin agarose beads. After 1 h of incubation under continuous mixing, the beads were washed 3 times with 1 mL 0.2 % SDS in PBS, 2 times with 1 mL 6 M urea in H2O and 3 times with 1 mL PBS. Enriched proteins were on beads digested in 200 μL digestion buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea). Proteins were reduced (0.2 μL 1 M DTT, 45 min, 25 °C) and alkylated (2 μL 550 mM IAA, 30 min, 25 °C, in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of 0.8 μL 1 M DTT and incubation for 30 min at 25 °C. 600 μL 50 mM TEAB buffer was added and the proteins were digested overnight with 1.5 μL sequencing grade trypsin (0.5 mg/mL, Promega) at 37 °C. The following day the beads were settled and the supernatant was acidified with 4 μL formic acid to a pH of 2 – 3. Peptides were desalted and dried by lyophilization. Peptides were reconstituted in 30 μL 1% (v/v) formic acid and measured. MS-measurements were performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMateTM 3000 Nano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an EASY-SprayTM source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). First, peptides were loaded on a Acclaim PepMap 100 µ-precolumn cartridge (5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm ID × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, peptides were separated at 40 °C on a PicoTip emitter (noncoated, 15 cm, 75 µm ID, 8 µm tip, New Objective) that was in house packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ material (1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr. A. Maisch GmbH). The gradient was run from 1-36 % ACN supplemented with 0.1% FA during a 120 min method (0-5 min 1 %; 5-8 min to 6 %; 8-98 min to 36 %; 98-100 min to 85 %; 100-105 min wash with 85 %; 105-110 min to 1 %, 110-120 min with 1 %) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. For measurements of chemical-proteomic samples on Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, the following settings were used: The Q Exactive HF was operated in dd-MS² mode with the following settings: Polarity: positive; MS1 resolution: 120k; MS1 AGC target: 3e6 charges; MS1 maximum IT: 20 ms; MS1 scan range: m/z 300 – 1750; MS² resolution: 15k; MS² AGC target: 2e5 charges; MS² maximum IT: 100 ms; Top N: 20; isolation window: m/z 1.6; isolation offset: m/z 0.2; HCD stepped normalised collision energy: 28 %; intensity threshold: 5e4 counts; charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 7, 8, >8; peptide match: off; exclude isotopes: on; dynamic exclusion: 90 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant. Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant software 1.6.12.0 with the Andromeda search engine. Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, March 2020). At least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1 % FDR both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels. LFQ quantification was used as described for each sample. Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant result table proteinGroups.txt was done with Perseus 1.6.10.43. Putative contaminants and reverse hits were removed. Normalized LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, hits with less than 3 valid values in each group were removed and missing values were replaced from normal distribution. The -log10(p-values) were obtained by a two-sided one sample Student’s t-test over replicates with the initial significance level of p = 0.05 adjustment by the multiple testing correction method of Benjamini and Hochberg (FDR = 0.05) using the volcano plot function.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysosome, Ampylation

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Junior Group Dr. Kielkowski
LMU Munich, Department of Chemistry

### Submitter
Tobias Becker

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Pavel Kielkowski
LMU Munich, Department of Chemistry


