### Accession
PXD031705

### Title
Proteomic characterization of metastatic colorectal cancer

### Description
To characterize metastatic progression of colorectal cancer, we performed mass spectrometry-based proteome analysis using large clinical cohort samples.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue was cryopulverized and lysed with a buffer containing 8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, phosphatase inhibitors, and protease inhibitors. The tissue mixture was homogenized with sonication. After centrifugation, the supernatant containing all soluble proteins was collected. The protein concentration was determined by a BCA assay. Aliquots of 50 µg of the extracted proteomes were reduced, alkylated, and then digested with trypsin and Lys-C. The digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid. After centrifugation, clear supernatant was collected and desalted on a lab-made C18 StageTip. Desalted peptides was injected into a 50-cm C18 capillary column mounted to an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted over a 200-min gradient in 2-35% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 99.9% (v/v) acetonitrile) and buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 99.9% (v/v) HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z with an ion target value of 5×104, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and dynamic exclusion for 15 s in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification was carried out with MaxQuant with human Uniprot fasta (2018.Sep downloaded). “Match between runs” option of MaxQuant was used and NQ-deamidation was added to default variable modifications for frozen sample analysis because we used urea-based lysis buffer for protein extraction of frozen tissue. A minimum of 1 peptide was required for protein identification, but 2 peptides were required to calculate a protein level ratio. After quantification, protein expression data was processed by Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Adenocarcinoma, Colorectal cancer, Liver metastasis

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center

### Submitter
Atsushi Tanaka

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Roehrl
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center


