### Accession
PXD001123

### Title
ZNF322A_lung cancer_iTRAQ_LC-MSMS

### Description
ZNF322A, a transcription factor, has been identified as a novel putative oncogene in lung cancer. There are over 50% of amplification rates in both Asia and Caucasian lung cancer patients. This study is to use proteomics approach to establish the protein interaction network of ZNF322A.

### Sample Protocol
To identify downstream signals of ZNF322A, proteins were extracted from A549 cells treated with negative control siRNA (Sigma) as control sample, or with ZNF322A-specific siRNA (Sigma) as knockdown ZNF322A sample. Proteins were processed through reduction, alkylation, and gel-assisted trypsin digestion overnight to yield peptides, which were later extracted from the gels. Equivalent amounts of peptides in control and treated sample were labeled by different iTRAQ reagents (AB SCIEX) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Peptides were mixed and dried with a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000; Eyela, Tokyo, Japan) and fractioned by strong cation exchange chromatography. iTRAQ-labeled peptides were desalted and analyzed by LC-ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometry (Waters SYNAPT® G2 HDMS; Waters Corp.) and further injected into a 180 μm × 2 cm capillary trap column and separated by a 75 μm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY UPLC™ 1.7 μm Ethylene Bridged Hybrid C18 column using a nanoACQUITY Ultra Performance LC™ System (Waters Corp.). The mass spectrometry (MS) was operated in electrospray ionization sensitivity mode. NanoLockSprayTM source (Waters Corp.) was used for accurate mass measurements. The mass spectrometer was calibrated with a synthetic human [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (Sigma-Aldrich) delivered through the NanoLockSpray source. Data acquisition was operated in the data directed analysis (DDA). The DDA method included one full MS scan (m/z 350-1700, 1 s) and three MS/MS scans (m/z 100-1990. 1.5 s for each scan) sequentially on the three most intense ions present in the full scan mass spectrum. Each sample was analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
The peak list resulting from MS/MS spectra was exported to mgf format by Mascot Distiller v2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) with charge state set to 2+, 3+, 4+, 5+, and other default parameters. Data files were merged and searched against the combined sequence database (containing 36,774 sequence entries) of the Swiss-Prot human database and the Swiss-Prot mouse database using Mascot search engine v2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom). Search parameters for peptide ( tolerance: 0.3 Da) and MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.2 Da with allowance for two missed cleavages made from the trypsin digestion. Variable modifications of deamidated (NQ), oxidation (M), iTRAQ4plex (K), iTRAQ4-plex (N-term), and methylthio (C) were selected and none of the fixed modifications was selected. Peptide charge was set to Mr, instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and decoy database was searched. Mascot search results were filtered using "Significance threshold" set at P<0.05 and "Ions score or expect cut-off" set at 0.05. Only peptides with ion scores higher than the Mascot identity score (P<0.05) were confidently assigned.

### Publication Abstract
ZNF322A encoding a classical Cys2His2 zinc finger transcription factor was previously revealed as a potential oncogene in lung cancer patients. However, the oncogenic role of ZNF322A and its underlying mechanism in lung tumorigenesis remain elusive. Here we show ZNF322A protein overexpression in 123 Asian and 74 Caucasian lung cancer patients. Multivariate Cox regression analysis indicated that ZNF322A was an independent risk factor for a poor outcome in lung cancer, corroborating the Kaplan-Meier results that patients with ZNF322A protein overexpression had significantly poorer overall survival than other patients. Overexpression of ZNF322A promoted cell proliferation and soft agar growth by prolonging cell cycle in S phase in multiple lung cell lines, including the immortalized lung cell BEAS-2B. In addition, ZNF322A overexpression enhanced cell migration and invasion, whereas knockdown of ZNF322A reduced cell growth, invasion and metastasis abilities in vitro and in vivo. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed potential ZNF322A-regulated downstream targets, including alpha-adducin (ADD1), cyclin D1 (CCND1), and p53. Using luciferase promoter activity assay combined with site-directed mutagenesis and sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR assay, we found that ZNF322A could form a complex with c-Jun and cooperatively activate ADD1 and CCND1 but repress p53 gene transcription by recruiting differential chromatin modifiers, such as histone deacetylase 3, in an AP-1 element dependent manner. Reconstitution experiments indicated that CCND1 and p53 were important to ZNF322A-mediated promotion of cell proliferation, whereas ADD1 was necessary for ZNF322A-mediated cell migration and invasion. Our results provide compelling evidence that ZNF322A overexpression transcriptionally dysregulates genes involved in cell growth and motility therefore contributes to lung tumorigenesis and poor prognosis.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Znf322a, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
ntu

### Submitter
Li-Ling Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan


