### Accession
PXD018510

### Title
Hydrogen Deuterium Exchange Mass Spectrometry implicates dynamic CD20 antigen binding to two discontinuous CDR regions in the NCD1.2 monoclonal antibody

### Description
A comparative canine-human therapeutics model is being developed in B-cell lymphoma through the generation of a hybridoma cell that produces a murine monoclonal antibody specific for canine CD20. The hybridoma cell produces two light chains, light chain-3 and light chain-7. However, the contribution of either light chain to the authentic full-length hybridoma derived IgG is undefined.  Mass spectrometry was used to identify only one of the two light chains, light chain-7, as predominating in the full-length IgG. Gene synthesis created a recombinant murine-canine chimeric monoclonal antibody expressing light chain-7 that reconstituted the IgG binding to CD20. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to define two stages in the mode of binding of the CD20 epitope the antibody. In the early stage of the reaction, the antigen interacted with CDR3 (VH). In the equilibrium stages, stable binding occurred to CDR2 (VH) and CDR2 (VL), without any detectable CDR3 (VH) interactions. These data suggest that CDR3 (VH) functions as a transient antigen docking motif to nucleate the peptide into the antibody active site which resolves into antigen binding with the heavy and light chain CDR2 domains.  These approaches define a methodology for fine mapping of CDR contacts using nested enzymatic reactions and hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry to map the kinetic mode of antigen binding. These data support the further development of an engineered synthetic antibody for use as a canine lymphoma therapeutic that mimics the human anti-CD20 antibody therapeutic.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography on Orbitrap Elite system. Sample from in-solution digestion was injected using a robotic system based on the HTS-XT platform (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). onto an immobilized nepenthesin enzymatic column (AffiPro, CZ) 15 µl bed volume, flow rate 20 µl/min, 2% acetonitrile (ACN) / 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were trapped and desalted on-line on a peptide microtrap (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) for 3 min at flow rate 20 µl/min. Next, the peptides were eluted onto an analytical column (Jupiter C18, 1.0 x 50 mm, 5 µm, 300Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) and separated using a linear gradient elution of 10 % B in 2 min, followed by 31 min isocratic elution at 40 % B. Solvents were: A – 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, B – 80% ACN / 0.08% FA. The immobilized nepenthesin column, trap cartridge and the analytical column were kept at 1°C and flow rates were directed by nano- and loading- pumps from LC-system (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific, Dionex, Massachusetts, USA). Mass spectrometric analysis. Mass spectrometric analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) with ESI ionization on-line connected with The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode for peptide mapping (LC-MS/MS). Each MS scan was followed by MS/MS scans of the top three most intensive ions from both CID and HCD fragmentation spectra. Liquid chromatography on TripleTOF 5600+ system. Samples were separated on Eksigent Ekspert nanoLC 400 system (SCIEX, Dublin, California) liquid chromatograph. Output from the separation column was coupled to nano-electrospray source TripleTOF 5600+ (SCIEX, Toronto, Canada). Nitrogen was used as a drying and nebulizing gas and temperature and flow of drying gas were set to 150 °C and 12 psi. Capillary voltage was 2.65 kV. Peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with a particle size 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm x 5 mm. 10 min washing with a solvent consisting of 2% ACN and 0.05% TFA(v/v) was followed by peptide elution to an analytical column. Analytical separation was performed on PicoTip emitter 75 μm × 210 mm (New Objective, Woburn, USA) self-packed with ProntoSIL 120-3-C18 AQ sorbent (3 μm particles, Bischoff, Leonberg, Germany). Mobile phase A was composed of 0.1% FA in water (v/v), and mobile phase B of 0.1% FA in ACN (v/v). The elution gradient started at 5% mobile phase B for the first 30 min. Percentage of mobile phase B then increased linearly to 40% B in the next 120 min and then up to 80% B in 5 min, continued at 80% B for 5 min. Next, it was decreased to 2% B in 2 min and kept at 2% B for next 28 min. Information dependent acquisition on TripleTOF 5600+. TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer was operated in information dependent mode (IDA). TOF-MS spectrum (250 ms accumulation time) was measured in each cycle followed by fragmentation of 15 the most intense precursor ions and their MS/MS spectra measurement. Minimum precursor ion intensity was 100 cps, accumulation time was 75 ms and cycle time of IDA method was 1425 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database search of LC-MS/MS data Orbitrap. Tandem mass spectra were searched using SequestHT against the cRap protein database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) containing the sequence of the CD20 ScFv antibody with the following search settings: mass tolerance for precursor ions of 10 ppm, mass tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da, no enzyme specificity, two maximum missed cleavage sites and no-fixed or variable modifications were applied. The false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide identification level was set to 1%. Sequence coverage was analysed with Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). Database search of LC-MS/MS data TripleTOF 5600+. Shotgun data were searched using ProteinPilot™ version 5.0.1 (SCIEX, Canada) against custom made reference protein database with inserted sequence of the CD20 ScFv antibody with unknowing amino acid sequences at the CDR1 region of light chain (HRNGFTYL) and the CDR1 and the FR2 regions of heavy chain (FMSWV). ProteinPilot™ 5.0.1 settings were as follows: digestion criteria were set with the agent as trypsin and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Samples were searched both with and without additional ID focuses of variants: Empirical Swiss-Prot, SNP-derived, Zhang Misincorporations, and amino acid substitutions. A FDR was produced with an error rate of 0.05 (10%).

### Publication Abstract
A comparative canine-human therapeutics model is being developed in B-cell lymphoma through the generation of a hybridoma cell that produces a murine monoclonal antibody specific for canine CD20. The hybridoma cell produces two light chains, light chain-3, and light chain-7. However, the contribution of either light chain to the authentic full-length hybridoma derived IgG is undefined. Mass spectrometry was used to identify only one of the two light chains, light chain-7, as predominating in the full-length IgG. Gene synthesis created a recombinant murine-canine chimeric monoclonal antibody expressing light chain-7 that reconstituted the IgG binding to CD20. Using light chain-7 as a reference sequence, hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to identify the dominant CDR region implicated in CD20 antigen binding. Early in the deuteration reaction, the CD20 antigen suppressed deuteration at CDR3 (VH). In later time points, deuterium suppression occurred at CDR2 (VH) and CDR2 (VL), with the maintenance of the CDR3 (VH) interaction. These data suggest that CDR3 (VH) functions as the dominant antigen docking motif and that antibody aggregation is induced at later time points after antigen binding. These approaches define a methodology for fine mapping of CDR contacts using nested enzymatic reactions and hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. These data support the further development of an engineered, synthetic canine-murine monoclonal antibody, focused on CDR3 (VH), for use as a canine lymphoma therapeutic that mimics the human-murine chimeric anti-CD20 antibody Rituximab.

### Keywords
Human, Cd20, Phage display, Adept, Lc-ms/ms, Monoclonal antibody, Lymphoma, Hdx, Comparative medicine

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, EH4 2XR
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Lenka Hernychova

### Lab Head
Dr Ted Hupp
University of Edinburgh, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom, EH4 2XR


