### Accession
PXD028848

### Title
i.e.Human Veinou malformation.iTraq/TMT

### Description
Proteomics and high connotation functional gene screening (HCS) were used to screen key functional genes that play important roles in the pathogenesis of venous malformation.

### Sample Protocol
Each of the control and experimental groups contained three tissue samples that were labeled as A1, A2, and A3 and B1, B2, and B3, respectively. An appropriate amount of SDS Lysis Buffer was added to the samples and transferred to the Lysing Matrix A tube for homogenization with MP homogenizer (24.2, 6.0 M/S, 60 s, twice). After sonication (100 W, 10 s, 10 times), samples were heated in a boiling water bath for 10 min. After centrifugation at 14000 × g for 15 min, the supernatant was filtered using a 0.22 µm centrifuge tube, and the filtrate was collected. Protein quantification was performed by the BCA method. The samples were aliquoted and stored at −20 °C. Then, 100-200 µg of each sample was retrieved and underwent proteolysis by the filter-aided sample preparation method [11], and peptides were quantified by measuring the OD280 on the Nanodrop.

### Data Protocol
Samples were separated using the nanoliter flow rate EASY-nLC System (Thermo, USA). Samples were loaded by autosampler onto an analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim PepMap RSLC 50 μm × 15 cm, nano viper, P/N164943) for detection and analysis. After separation by chromatography, samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive™ plus mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). The raw data for mass spectrometry analysis were retrieved as raw files, and the software Mascot 2.6 and Proteome Discoverer 2.15 (Thermo, USA) were used for library identification and quantitative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objectives:</b> Proteomics and high connotation functional gene screening (HCS) were used to screen key functional genes that play important roles in the pathogenesis of venous malformation. Furthermore, this study was conducted to analyze and explore their possible functions, establish a gene mutation zebrafish model, and perform a preliminary study to explore their possible pathogenic mechanisms in venous malformation. <b>Methods:</b> Pathological and normal tissues from patients with disseminated venous malformation were selected for Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) proteomics analysis to identify proteins that were differentially expressed. Based on bioinformatics analysis, 20 proteins with significant differential expression were selected for HCS to find key driver genes and characterize the expression of these genes in patients with venous malformations. <i>In vitro</i> experiments were then performed using human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1). A gene mutant zebrafish model was also constructed for <i>in vivo</i> experiments to explore gene functions and pathogenic mechanisms. <b>Results:</b> The TMT results showed a total of 71 proteins that were differentially expressed as required, with five of them upregulated and 66 downregulated. Based on bioinformatics and proteomics results, five highly expressed genes and 15 poorly expressed genes were selected for functional screening by RNAi technology. HCS screening identified ACTA2 as the driver gene. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and western blot were used to detect the expression of ACTA2 in the pathological tissues of patients with venous malformations and in control tissues, and the experimental results showed a significantly lower expression of ACTA2 in venous malformation tissues (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). Cell assays on the human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) model showed that cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and angiogenic ability were all significantly increased in the ACTA2 over-expression group (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05), and that overexpression of ACTA2 could improve the inhibitory effect on vascular endothelial cell proliferation. We constructed an ACTA2-knockdown zebrafish model and found that the knockdown of ACTA2 resulted in defective vascular development, disruption of vascular integrity, and malformation of micro vein development in zebrafish. Further qPCR assays revealed that the knockdown of ACTA2 inhibited the Dll4/notch1 signaling pathway, Ephrin-B2 signaling pathway, and vascular integrity-related molecules and activated the Hedgehog signaling pathway. <b>Conclusion:</b> This study revealed that ACTA2 deficiency is an important factor in the pathogenesis of venous malformation, resulting in the disruption of vascular integrity and malformed vascular development. ACTA2 can be used as a potential biomarker for the treatment and prognosis of venous malformations.

### Keywords
I.e.human, Itraq/tmt, Vein

### Affiliations
shandong provical hospital
shandong provincial hospital

### Submitter
Song Wang

### Lab Head
Dr i.e.Jianhai Bi
shandong provical hospital


