### Accession
PXD009332

### Title
An alliance of gel-based and gel-free proteomic techniques displays substantial insight into the proteome of a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain

### Description
The current work aimed to detect and identify significant differentially expressed proteins between a virulent and an attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strain which was in vitro co-cultivated with Escherichia coli DH5alpha. This was done by applying 2D-DIGE and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra (SWATH) MS as tools on the two well-defined strains. In the gel-based experiments, 49 identified protein spots were found to be differentially expressed, of which 37 belonged to the in vitro cultivated virulent strain and 12 to the attenuated one. The most frequently identified proteins in the virulent strain take part in cytoskeleton formation, carbohydrate metabolism and adaptation to stress. However, post-translationally modified or truncated ubiquitous cellular proteins such as actin and GAPDH were identified as upregulated in multiple gel positions. This indicated their contribution to processes not related to cytoskeleton and carbohydrate metabolism, such as fibronectin or plasminogen binding. On the other hand, proteins involved in cytoskeleton, cell division and cytoskeleton organization were frequently observed in the attenuated strain. The findings of the gel-based studies were supplemented by the gel-free SWATH MS analysis, which identified and quantified 42 significantly differentially regulated proteins. In this case proteins with peptidase activity, metabolic proteins and actin-regulating proteins were the most frequent findings in the virulent strain, while proteins involved in hydrogenosomal carbohydrate metabolism dominated the results in the attenuated one.

### Sample Protocol
Significantly differentially abundant protein spots that could be located on silver-stained fluorescent 2D-DIGE gels were excised and processed for identification. Protein spots were pooled from two or more gels to obtain sufficient material for mass spectrometric analysis. After washing and de-staining, reduction of spots with DTT and alkylation with IAA was conducted (Gharahdagi et al., 1999, Electrophoresis 20, 601-605; Jiménez et al., 2001, Current Protocols in Protein Science, p 16.4.1-16.4.5). Consequently, in-gel digestion with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, Madison, USA) was performed according to (Shevchenko et al., 1996, Anal. Chem. 68, 850-858). The peptides were then extracted and dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Afterwards, de-salting and concentrating of tryptic peptides was performed to increase the sensitivity of MS using μ-Zip Tips C18 (Millipore, Billerica, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A 0.5 μl aliquot of de-salted peptides was added to 0.5 μl of the matrix solution (alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, saturated in acetonitrile - 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (30:70, v/v)) and 1 μl of the resulting mixture was spotted on a ground steel MALDI target plate (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) and allowed to dry at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
Spectra data were acquired in MS and MS/MS modes by performing MALDI-TOF/TOF MS (Ultraflex II, Bruker Daltonics). FlexAnalysis 3.0 and Biotools 3.2 software (Bruker Daltonics) were used for spectra processing and peak annotation. Processed spectra were submitted to an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, Boston, USA) using the ProteinScape 2.1 software (Bruker Daltonics). Subsequent searches were performed in an amino acid database of E. coli proteins (UnitProt DB, taxonomy 562 EcolX; http://www.uniprot.org/) combined with a database containing conceptually translated contigs from the H. meleagridis reference transcriptome (size: 3356 unique contigs; study accession number PRJEB19109; http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/view/PRJEB19109) (Mazumdar et al., 2017, Protist 168, 663-685) and common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). The H. meleagridis contigs were annotated based on their homology to known genes (Mazumdar et al., 2017, Protist 168, 663-685). The parameters for the search were: fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation (C); variable modifications = oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), pyroglutamic acid formation; enzyme specificity = trypsin; charge state (Z) = +1; maximum missed cleavages allowed = 2; peptide mass tolerance= 100 ppm (150 ppm in some cases); fragment mass tolerance = 1.0 Da. Mascot identifications having at least one peptide with a Mascot score ˃20 were regarded as statistical significant (P ˂0.05), while in ProteinScape 2.1 software, protein scores ˃80 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
The unicellular protozoan <i>Histomonas meleagridis</i> is notorious for being the causative agent of histomonosis, which can cause high mortality in turkeys and substantial production losses in chickens. The complete absence of commercially available curative strategies against the disease renders the devising of novel approaches a necessity. A fundamental step toward this objective is to understand the flagellate's virulence and attenuation mechanisms. For this purpose we have previously conducted a comparative proteomic analysis of an <i>in vitro</i> cultivated virulent and attenuated histomonad parasite using two-dimensional electrophoresis and MALDI-TOF/TOF. The current work aimed to substantially extend the knowledge of the flagellate's proteome by applying 2D-DIGE and sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) MS as tools on the two well-defined strains. In the gel-based experiments, 49 identified protein spots were found to be differentially expressed, of which 37 belonged to the <i>in vitro</i> cultivated virulent strain and 12 to the attenuated one. The most frequently identified proteins in the virulent strain take part in cytoskeleton formation, carbohydrate metabolism and adaptation to stress. However, post-translationally modified or truncated ubiquitous cellular proteins such as actin and GAPDH were identified as upregulated in multiple gel positions. This indicated their contribution to processes not related to cytoskeleton and carbohydrate metabolism, such as fibronectin or plasminogen binding. Proteins involved in cell division and cytoskeleton organization were frequently observed in the attenuated strain. The findings of the gel-based studies were supplemented by the gel-free SWATH MS analysis, which identified and quantified 42 significantly differentially regulated proteins. In this case proteins with peptidase activity, metabolic proteins and actin-regulating proteins were the most frequent findings in the virulent strain, while proteins involved in hydrogenosomal carbohydrate metabolism dominated the results in the attenuated one.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Protozoa, Attenuation., Virulence factors, Lc-ms/ms, Swath ms, 2d-dige, Maldi-tof/tof, Histomonas meleagridis

### Affiliations
Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ivana BILIC

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ivana Bilic
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


