### Accession
PXD015389

### Title
Sialic acid-mediated mechanical activation of β2 adrenergic receptors by bacterial pili

### Description
Meningococcus utilizes β-arrestin selective activation of endothelial cell β2 adrenergic receptor (β2AR) to cause meningitis in humans. Molecular mechanisms of receptor activation by the pathogen and of its species selectivity remained elusive. We report that β2AR activation requires two asparagine-branched glycan chains with terminally exposed N-acetyl neuraminic acid (sialic acid, Neu5Ac) residues located at a specific distance in its N34 terminus, while being independent of surrounding amino-acid residues. Meningococcus triggers receptor signaling by exerting direct and hemodynamic-promoted traction forces on β2AR glycans. Similar activation is recapitulated with beads coated with Neu5Ac-binding lectins, submitted to mechanical stimulation. This previously unknown glycan-dependent mode of allosteric mechanical activation of a G protein-coupled receptor contributes to meningococcal species selectivity, since Neu5Ac is only abundant in humans due to the loss of CMAH, the enzyme converting Neu5Ac into N-glycolyl-neuraminic acid in other mammals. It represents an additional mechanism of evolutionary adaptation of a pathogen to its host.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin shaving and immunoprecipitation of wt and mutant β2AR N-terminal fragments: HEK-239 cells were transfected with the indicated plasmids and cultivated for 36 hours. The cells were harvested in PBS-EDTA (0.5 μM EDTA in PBS) and digested with trypsin (1 μg/ml) (Promega, Catalog# V511A) according to manufacturer’s protocol at 37°C for 1 hour. Following the trypsin digestion, the cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 250 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 10% glycerol and complete protease inhibitor (Roche)) on ice for 30 minutes. Cell lysates were then centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred to a fresh tube and the presence of cleaved receptor N244 termini verified by western blot. Proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE on a 10% (w/v) polyacrylamide resolving gel. The proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were blocked with 5% skimmed milk in 0.1% TBST (Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% tween 20 (Sigma)) for 1 hour and room temperature. The membranes were incubated with primary antibodies anti-HA (Cell Signalling) (1:1000) and anti-Vinculin (1:5000) (Sigma) overnight at 4°C. The following day the membranes are washed three times with 0.1% TBST and incubated with secondary antibodies IRDye® 800 CW Donkey anti251 Rabbit and IRDye® 680 CW Donkey anti-Mouse (LI-COR) (1:10000). The blots were washed two times with 0.1% TBST and one time with TBS and were developed using Odyssey® CLx (LI-COR). The trypsin digested supernatant was immunoprecipitated using anti-HA beads (EZviewTM 254 Red HA Agarose beads, Sigma) overnight at 4°C. The beads were washed 3 times with PBS and further subjected to mass spectrometry analysis or sialic acid detection.  Mass spectrometry analysis of HA-purified peptides : Trypsin-cleaved N-termini of wt and mutant β2AR bound to HA beads were submitted to on260 beads PNGase digestion (0.5 µl, Fast PNGase F, New England Bbiolabs) in a final volume of 15μl of PNGase F denaturing and reducing buffer for 10 min at 50°C on a thermomix (eppendorf). Supernatants were then collected and diluted to a 50µl final volume with 50 mM (NH4)2CO3 Worthington’s TLCK-treated Chymotrypsin (125ng) was used to digest the eluted deglycosylated N-terminal peptides in solution at 37°C for 45min. Resulting products were analyzed by nano liquid chromatography hyphenated to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) operating in data dependent scheme with an inclusion list containing 12 m/z for peptides of interest. Briefly, peptides loaded on the chromatography were trapped and washed with 0.1% TFA 2% Acetonitrile in milliQH2O on a C18 reverse phase pre-column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 Angstroms pores, 5µm particles, 2cm long, 75µm inner diameter) for 3 minutes at 5µL/min. Trapped peptides were then separated on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length) with a 1.5 hours gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQH2O and ending in 40% of solvent B containing 80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid in milliQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process. The MS scans spanned from 400 to 2000 Th with AGC target 1.106 276 with 100ms MIIT and resolution of 70 000. HCD fragmentations were performed on the 10 most abundant ions with a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s. Precursor selection window was set at 4Th. HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) was set at 30% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500 with AGC target 1.105 279 within 100ms MIIT. Spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.5.1 (www.matrixscience.com). The database used was a concatenation of all human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (release 2019-02, 20492 sequences) and a customized database of 70 modified sequences including the four ADRB2 mutated HA284 tagged sequences (WT, N6A, +11 and N15A), and a list of in-house and common contaminant sequences (292 sequences mixed from Maxquant "contaminants.fasta" and the "GPM crap list" ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/crap/ and a custom list of contaminant (e.g. Hevea braziliensis rubber protein, mouse kappa IgG and PNGase F among others ). Cystein carbamidomethylation was set as constant modification, Asparagine deamidation was set as variable modification to allow detection of peptide modified by PNGase-F enzymatic. The enzyme causes deglycosylation of asparagine-linked glycan and converts it to Aspartic acid ("de"-marked N residue on figure 4). Several dataset matches were found (5-7 times) for each sample carrying asparagine on N6 (WT, +11 or N15A), each time with a low number of high intensity matching peaks.  This is explained by the presence of prolines (aka « proline effect ») known to cause increased peptide fragility on Proline’s N-term side during Collisionnal-Induced Decay (CID) as described by Breci et al. (ref : https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ac026359i ), thus the canonical b/y-ion series only led to few and weaker assignated peaks. Knowing the sequence, and the potential proline effect, use of internal peptide fragmentation option in Mascot increased dramatically the yield of matching peaks. Indicated matched internal fragments specifically corresponds to higher intensity peaks and mostly with Proline-starting fragments as described by Michalsky et al. ( https://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/pr3007045 ) in such HCD type high resolution mass spectrometer. Spectrum annotation (b and y-ions series) was done according to nomenclature of peptide fragmentation proposed by Roepstorff and Fohlman ( https://doi.org/10.1002/bms.1200111109 ). Internal fragments labels were Mascot’s matching sequence propositions. Efficient glycosylation removal by PNGase F was assessed by the MS detection of mouse kappa IgG chain peptides bearing Asn converted to Asp originating from the mAb directed against the HA tag. Efficient Chymotrypsin activity was assessed by interrogating the dataset with the « no enzyme » option, leading mostly to identification of peptides with chymotrypsin-specific type of cleavage, on N-termini of F / W residues.

### Publication Abstract
Meningococcus utilizes &#x3b2;-arrestin selective activation of endothelial cell &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> adrenergic receptor (&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR) to cause meningitis in humans. Molecular mechanisms of receptor activation by the pathogen and of its species selectivity remained elusive. We report that &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR activation requires two asparagine-branched glycan chains with terminally exposed N-acetyl-neuraminic acid (sialic acid, Neu5Ac) residues located at a specific distance in its N-terminus, while being independent of surrounding amino-acid residues. Meningococcus triggers receptor signaling by exerting direct and hemodynamic-promoted traction forces on &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR glycans. Similar activation is recapitulated with beads coated with Neu5Ac-binding lectins, submitted to mechanical stimulation. This previously unknown glycan-dependent mode of allosteric mechanical activation of a G protein-coupled receptor contributes to meningococcal species selectivity, since Neu5Ac is only abundant in humans due to the loss of CMAH, the enzyme converting Neu5Ac into N-glycolyl-neuraminic acid in other mammals. It represents an additional mechanism of evolutionary adaptation of a pathogen to its host.

### Keywords
Pilin, Q-exactive, Internal fragments, Blood-brain barrier, Proline effect, Human β-adrenergic receptor, N-glycan

### Affiliations
Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, Inserm, U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Paris, France
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Stephano Marullo M.D. Ph.D.
Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, Inserm, U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Paris, France


