### Accession
PXD022413

### Title
An early endosomal network participates to enterocyte functions and intestinal  homeostasis

### Description
Membrane trafficking is defined as the vesicular transport of molecules throughout the cell. In intestinal enterocytes, defects in endocytic/recycling pathways impair their function and are linked to genetic diseases. How does trafficking regulate intestinal tissue homeostasis is poorly understood. Using the Drosophila intestine as an in vivo model system, we investigated enterocyte-specific functions for early endosomal trafficking in gut homeostasis. We focused on the small GTPase Rab21 that regulates specific early endosomal trafficking steps. Rab21-depleted guts showed severe intestinal morphology abnormalities, with deregulated homeostasis associated with a gain in mitotic cells and increased cell death. Increased in both apoptosis and Yki signaling were responsible for compensatory proliferation and tissue inflammation. Using a RNAi screen, we identified autophagy and specific membrane trafficking regulators phenocopying Rab21 loss. We further showed that Rab21-induced hyperplasia was rescued by inhibition of Egfr signaling, and we identified improperly trafficked cargoes in enterocytes depleted of Rab21. Our data shed light on an important role for the early endosomal protein Rab21, and early endosomal trafficking in enterocytes-mediated intestinal homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Gut proteins were extracted has described above using the same lysis buffer. Following gut dissection and protein extraction, biological replicates were flash frozen and processed simultaneously for TMT labelling. A quantity of 50 µg of proteins were reduced in 10mM DTT for 2 minutes and boiled and alkylated in 50mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Loading buffer (DTT and β-mercaptoethanaol free) was added to the protein extract to a final concentration of 1x. Proteins were separated on a 4-12% gradient precast protein gel (Biorad #4561084) for 15 minutes at 200 volts and revealed on the gel using SimplyBlue SafeStain solution (Thermo Fischer Scientific #LC6060). For each condition, two bands (A and B) containing all stained proteins were excised from the gel. Gel bands were successively washed at RT with 300 µL of H2O and 300 µL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) for 15 minutes each. Supernatants were removed and gel bands were washed in 300 µL of 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 300 µL of 50%ACN/50% 50mM TEAB at RT for 15 minutes each. Supernatants were discarded and previous washes were repeated if gel bands were still blue. Finally, gel bands were incubated in 150 µL of 100% ACN for 5 minutes at RT and dried for 5 minutes in a speedvac. In-gel digestion was performed overnight in 50 µL of 12.5ng/µL of trypsin in 50mM TEAB at 30°C. Digested gel bands were incubated in 50 µL of ACN for 30 minutes at RT. Supernatants containing the digested peptides were collected and residual peptides were eluted with 100% ACN and 1% formic acid. Peptides were dried and resuspended in 50mM TEAB. Peptide concentrations were measured with a nanodrop using absorbance values at 205nm. Finally, for each condition, a same maximal quantity of peptides was used for TMT labelling following the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fischer Scientific #90110). Peptides-related to bands A and B from a same condition were labelled independently with the same label. Labelled peptides from band A of the different conditions were then mixed altogether (same for labelled peptides from band B), dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted on a Zip Tip. Trypsin digested peptides were loaded on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using 1.5ug of the sample resuspended in 1% formic acid. Settings used are identical to what has been previously described except the following parameters: full-scan MS survey spectra acquisition (m/z 375-1,400) was realized using resolution of 140,000 with 3,000,000 ions and a maximum IT of 120ms.

### Data Protocol
For the TMT-based quantitative proteomic experiment, three independent biological replicates were used. Proteins were identified by MaxQuant using UniProt (Drosophila Melanogaster UP000000803). The “proteinGroup.txt” output file from MaxQuant analysis was used to collect corrected reporter intensities per sample per every single TMT MS-spec detected protein as a measure of its quantification in that sample. Since series of replicates were run experimentally on different days, we checked for batch effect presence through generation of multidimential scaling plot (MDS) with package limma v3.42.2. in R environment. Once confirmed, batch effect was handled in R environment using the internal reference scaling (IRS) methodology, capable of correcting the random MS2 sampling that occurs between TMT experiments. Since the dataset contained proteins which were not quantified in all replicates, we first filtered for proteins that were identified in 2 out of 3 replicates of at least one condition and then we checked the pattern for missing data through package DEP v1.8.0. Once verified missing data were occurring at random (MAR) we imputed them using the k-nearest neighbor approach with R package DEP v1.8.0. Differential expression (DE) analysis was performed in R though the aforementioned, TMT DE specialize package, DEP v1.8.0 (FDR = 0.05, lfc = log2(1.5)). Enriched Reactome pathways were searched independently for proteins showing increased and decreased abundancies (respectively two-fold more or two-fold less) using the “STRING enrichment” plugin in Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane trafficking is defined as the vesicular transport of proteins into, out of, and throughout the cell. In intestinal enterocytes, defects in endocytic/recycling pathways result in impaired function and are linked to diseases. However, how these trafficking pathways regulate intestinal tissue homeostasis is poorly understood. Using the <i>Drosophila</i> intestine as an in vivo system, we investigated enterocyte-specific functions for the early endosomal machinery. We focused on Rab21, which regulates specific steps in early endosomal trafficking. Depletion of Rab21 in enterocytes led to abnormalities in intestinal morphology, with deregulated cellular equilibrium associated with a gain in mitotic cells and increased cell death. Increases in apoptosis and Yorkie signaling were responsible for compensatory proliferation and tissue inflammation. Using an RNA interference screen, we identified regulators of autophagy and membrane trafficking that phenocopied <i>Rab21</i> knockdown. We further showed that <i>Rab21</i> knockdown-induced hyperplasia was rescued by inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling. Moreover, quantitative proteomics identified proteins affected by Rab21 depletion. Of these, we validated changes in apolipoprotein ApoLpp and the trehalose transporter Tret1-1, indicating roles for enterocyte Rab21 in lipid and carbohydrate homeostasis, respectively. Our data shed light on an important role for early endosomal trafficking, and Rab21, in enterocyte-mediated intestinal epithelium maintenance.

### Keywords
Rab21, Intestine, Drosophila, Tmt

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé Department of Immunology and Cell Biology Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Steve Jean

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Jean
Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé Department of Immunology and Cell Biology Université de Sherbrooke


