### Accession
PXD031315

### Title
The structural basis of Cdc7-Dbf4 kinase dependent targeting and phosphorylation of the MCM2-7 double hexamer

### Description
The controlled assembly of replication forks is critical for genome stability. The Dbf4-dependent Cdc7 kinase (DDK) initiates replisome assembly by phosphorylating the MCM2-7 replicative helicase at the N-terminal tails of Mcm2, Mcm4 and Mcm6. At present, it remains poorly understood how DDK docks onto the helicase and how the kinase targets distal Mcm subunits for phosphorylation. By cryo-electron microscopy and biochemical analysis we discovered that an interaction between the HBRCT domain of Dbf4 with Mcm2 serves as an anchoring point, which supports binding of DDK across the MCM2-7 double-hexamer interface and phosphorylation of Mcm4 on the opposite hexamer. Moreover, a rotation of DDK along its anchoring point allows phosphorylation of Mcm2 and Mcm6 on opposite hexamers. In summary, our work provides fundamental insights in the DDK structure, control and the selective activation of the MCM2-7 helicase during DNA replication, which can be exploited for development of novel DDK inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing: Protein samples (1µg/sample) were processed using an in-solution digestion procedure. Briefly, samples were sequentially reduced and alkylated at room temperature and in the dark, to final concentrations of 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 50mM 2-chloroacetamide (2-CAM), respectively. 250ng of trypsin (Promega, V5280) was added for a final approximate 1:4 protease to protein ratio. Samples were incubated at 37oC over-night. The digestion was stopped by acidification with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and protein digests were desalted using Glygen C18 spin tips (Glygen Corp, TT2C18.96). Tryptic peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA). Eluents were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis: Dried tryptic digests were re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA by shaking (1200rpm) for 30min at room temperature and then pulse sonicated on an ultrasonic water bath for 5min, followed by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 5°C) for 10 minutes. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a coupled to a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via an EASY spray source (Thermo Scientific). For LC-MS/MS analysis re-dissolved protein digests were injected and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 100μm × 2cm) for desalting and concentration at 8μL/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Final on-column digest concentration was 400ng per injection. Peptides were then eluted on-line to an analytical column (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC C18, 75μm × 50cm) at a flow rate of 250nl/min. Peptides were separated using a 90 minute gradient, 1-22% of buffer B for 70 minutes followed by 22-42% buffer B for another 20 minutes (composition of buffer B – 75/5/20%, acetonitrile/DMSO/H2O + 0.1% FA) and subsequent column conditioning and equilibration. Eluted peptides were analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in positive polarity using a data-dependent acquisition mode. Ions forfragmentation were determined from an initial MS1 survey scan at 120,000 resolution, followed by HCD (Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation) of the top 20 most abundant ions at 15,000 resolution. MS1 and MS2 scan AGC targets were set to 3e6 and 5e4 for maximum injection times of 25ms and 100msrespectively. A survey scan m/z range of 350 – 1750 was used, normalised collision energy set to 27%, charge exclusion enabled with unassigned and +1 charge states rejected and a minimal AGC target of 8e3. Dynamic exclusion was set to 50 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using the MaxQuant software platform (v1.6.10.43), with database searches carried out by the in-built Andromeda search engine against a Swissprot S. cerevisiae database (version 20200924, number of entries: 7,905). A reverse decoy search approach was used at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptide spectrum matches and protein groups. Search parameters included: maximum missed cleavages set to 2, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, Carbamidomethyl-Thio-Phospho (STY) and Thio-Phospho (STY). Label-free quantification was enabled with an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. ‘Match between runs’ function was enabled, with alignment and matching time windows of 20 and 0.7 minutes respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The controlled assembly of replication forks is critical for genome stability. The Dbf4-dependent Cdc7 kinase (DDK) initiates replisome assembly by phosphorylating the MCM2-7 replicative helicase at the N-terminal tails of Mcm2, Mcm4 and Mcm6. At present, it remains poorly understood how DDK docks onto the helicase and how the kinase targets distal Mcm subunits for phosphorylation. Using cryo-electron microscopy and biochemical analysis we discovered that an interaction between the HBRCT domain of Dbf4 with Mcm2 serves as an anchoring point, which supports binding of DDK across the MCM2-7 double-hexamer interface and phosphorylation of Mcm4 on the opposite hexamer. Moreover, a rotation of DDK along its anchoring point allows phosphorylation of Mcm2 and Mcm6. In summary, our work provides fundamental insights into DDK structure, control and selective activation of the MCM2-7 helicase during DNA replication. Importantly, these insights can be exploited for development of novel DDK inhibitors.

### Keywords
Helicase, Origins, Helicase activation, Yeast, Molecular dynamics, Ddk, Cdc7, S-phase, Dbf4, Mcm2-7, Kinase, Cryo-em, Dna replication

### Affiliations
Core facility head
Medical Research Council - London Institute of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Alex Montoya

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pavel Shliaha
Core facility head


