### Accession
PXD028358

### Title
Proteotoxicity caused by perturbed protein complexes underlies hybrid incompatibility

### Description
Dobzhansky-Muller incompatibilities represent a major driver of reproductive isolation between species. They are caused when two or more interacting components encoded by alleles from different species cannot function properly when mixed. At incipient stages of speciation, complex incompatibilities involving multiple genetic loci with weak effects are frequently observed, but the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. We observed perturbed proteostasis leading to compromised mitosis and meiosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae hybrid lines carrying one or two chromosomes from Saccharomyces bayanus var uvarum. Levels of proteotoxicity are correlated with the number of protein complexes on replaced chromosomes and can be alleviated or aggravated, respectively, by up- or down-regulating the ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation machinery. Using proteomic approaches, we detect destabilized multi-protein complexes in a hybrid line. However, hybrid fitness can be significantly improved by rescuing small ribosomal subunits, a primary destabilized complex. Our findings reveal the general role of impaired protein complex assembly in complex incompatibilities.

### Sample Protocol
The same protein amounts of lysates from the pure Sc strain (labeled with heavy Arg and Lys) and the 8+15L or 16L lines (labeled with light Arg and Lys) were mixed, and then a total of 200 μl of lysate was injected into a Superose 6 10/300GL column equilibrated with the lysis buffer on an ÄKTA Purifier system. The flow rate was 0.2 ml/min, and 200-μl fractions were collected. We pooled every three sequential fractions into one new fraction, resulting in a total of 27 fractions. For the control experiment, the same protein amounts of lysates from a pure Sc cell culture labeled with heavy Arg and Lys and another pure Sc cell culture labeled with light Arg and Lys were mixed and analyzed according to an identical protocol.  Proteins in the 27 SEC fractions were denatured by adding urea to a final concentration of 8 M, followed by reduction with 5 mM dithioerythritol at 37 °C for 45 min, and cysteine alkylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 1 h. Protein samples were transferred to Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filters (10 kDa) centrifuged at 13,200 × g for 20 min. Buffer exchange was performed in two successive washes with 8 M urea in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.4. Protein concentrations were then determined by the Bradford assay. Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C using LysC protease and trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w). Total peptide concentration was measured via Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assays. Peptide desalting was achieved using C18 Stage Tips, and 0.5 μg of the peptide from each sample was taken for LC-MS/MS analysis.  NanoLC-nanoESi-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray interface. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length PepMap C18 column packed with 2 μm particles having a pore width of 100 Å and they were separated for 150 min using a segmented gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1600 m/z were performed at a 120K resolution with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation window at 2 Da with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 50 ms. Only precursors with charge states of 2-6 were sampled for MS2. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
A custom database of yeast protein sequences was built for the SILAC comparison of the proteins encoded on Chromosome 16. Briefly, the protein sequences of Chromosome 16 from S. cerevisiae were compared to those from S. bayanus var uvarum, and the common trypsin-digested peptide sequences were used for the SILAC quantification. Mass spectrometry data were processed with MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.7.0) according to a protocol described previously. Peptides and proteins were identified using the Andromeda search engine against the custom yeast database with the following search parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation of protein N-termini, and trypsin cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages. For analysis of the control set, the pure Sc protein sequence database was used. The unique peptides were used for peptide quantification. To improve the number of peptides that could be used for protein quantification and relative abundance profiling across SEC fractions, the match between runs option was enabled with a matching window set to 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. The re-quantify option was also enabled. The false discovery rate (FDR) of peptides and protein identification was set at 1%. All other MaxQuant parameters were left as the default options. All protein identifications were required to have at least one unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein complex, Genetic incompatibility, Proteostasis, Proteotoxicity, Epistasis, Speciation

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Chemistry/Academia Sinica
Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan

### Submitter
Yi-Yun Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun-Yi Leu
Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan


