### Accession
PXD002888

### Title
Construction and analysis of the testis/sperm-enriched interaction network: identification of potential PPP1CC2 complexes as targets for male contraception

### Description
Phosphoprotein phosphatase 1 catalytic subunit gamma 2 (PPP1CC2), a PPP1 isoform restricted to testicular germ cells and spermatozoa, is essential for completion of spermatogenesis and highly similar PPP1C isoforms are capable of compensating for the loss of Ppp1cc in every tissue except in testis. In addition, inhibition of the enzymatic activity of PPP1C in spermatozoa stimulates motility. The key to understand the regulation of PPP1CC2 lies in the identification and characterization of its interacting partners. By integrating tissue-specific protein expression and protein-protein interaction data, we identified testis/sperm-enriched/specific PPP1CC complexes and potential key PPP1 interacting proteins (PIPs) for male reproduction. We constructed a testis/sperm-enriched network, analyzed several topological properties and specified the biological/physiological properties of the proteins in the network. Proteins were classified into modules according to their topological features and functional annotations, which clarified the mechanisms underlying testis and sperm function and, more specifically, the role of PPP1CC in spermatogenesis and sperm motility. Previously uncharacterized PIPs, such as AKAP4, were identified based on analyses of the interaction network. The PPP1CC2 interaction with AKAP4 in human sperm was also validated by different methods and the complex was proposed as potential targets for male contraception due to its significance in spermatozoa motility.

### Sample Protocol
After immunoprecipitation, SDS in the samples was removed using HIPPR detergent removal spin columns (Pierce). Next, the samples were boiled for 5 min and put on ice for another 5 min. The proteins were then digested overnight by trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. The peptide mixtures were acidified with formic acid to stop the digestion. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). The peptides were first trapped on a pre-column (in-house, 100 µm internal diameter (I.D.) x 20 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) after which they were loaded onto an analytical column (in-house, 75 µm I.D. x 150 mm, 3 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient over 30 min from 2% solvent A (0.05% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) to 55% solvent B (0.05% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode during which the six most intense ions were selected for fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Distiller (version 2.3.2, Matrix Science) was used to generate Mascot Generic Files (MGFs) as previously described 31. The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.3, Matrix Science) was used to search these peak lists against the human subsection of the Swiss-Prot database (version 2013_06, 20,257 entries). Trypsin/P was set as the protease used, allowing for one missed cleavage. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for the precursor and fragment ions respectively. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and N-pyroglutamate were set as variable modifications. Only peptide spectrum matches that ranked first and scored above the identity threshold set at the 99% confidence level were withheld.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ppp1cc2, Sperm

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Ghent University VIB Belgium

### Submitter
Pieter-Jan De Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
Ghent University VIB Belgium


