### Accession
PXD021036

### Title
Proteomes of Wenzhouxiangella isolate grown on three substrates

### Description
A new haloalkaliphilic species of Wenzhouxiangella, strain AB-CW3 was isolated from a system of alkaline soda lakes in the Kulunda Steppe. Its complete, circular genome was assembled from combined nanopore and illumina sequencing and its proteome was determined for three different experimental conditions: growth on Staphylococcus cells, casein, or peptone. AB-CW3 is an aerobic bacterium feeding mainly on proteins and peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted in triplicate from three samples of the Wenzhouxiangella isolate grown on either Staphylococcus, casein, or peptone. Cell lysis was performed by mixing samples with SDT-lysis buffer (0.1 M DTT, 4% SDS) in a 10:1 ratio, and heating at 95°C for 10 minutes. Protein was then extracted from cell lysates using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol by Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). After protein extraction, an overnight digestion with 1.3 µg trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C was conducted, followed by elution of peptides using 0.5 M NaCl.      Peptides were separated by an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and analyzed by a QExactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described by Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 8(1558)). In total, 400 ng of peptides were injected per sample, and a 120 minute gradient was used for peptide separation.

### Data Protocol
A protein sequence database for the Wenzhouxiangella isolate was created using the predicted open reading frames from the circular genome. Sequences of common contaminating proteins were also added to this database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Proteome Discoverer v 2.2 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used to analyze the MS/MS spectra. MS/MS spectra were searched against the protein sequence database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). False discovery rates (FDRs) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and proteins were calculated and filtered using the Percolator Node and the FidoCT node in Proteome Discoverer respectively. Only peptides and proteins with an FDR below 5% were kept. Proteins with less than one unique peptide were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
1d-lc, Wenzhouxiangella, Soda lakes, Proteomics, Isolate, Proteome, Kulunda steppe

### Affiliations
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary Ab, Canada
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Jackie Zorz

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
Department of Geoscience, University of Calgary, Calgary Ab, Canada


