### Accession
PXD031448

### Title
Histone PTMs profiles of maltonis treated cells

### Description
The effect of maltonis, a soluble maltol-derived synthetic molecule, on histone PTMs was investigated in NB4 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were enriched from 2*106 NB4 cells as described (PMID: 31605746). Approximately 4 ug of histone octamer were mixed with an equal amount of heavy-isotope labelled histones, used as internal standard (super-SILAC mix (PMID: 28137569)) and separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. Histone bands were excised, chemically acylated with propionic anhydride and in-gel digested with trypsin, followed by peptide N-terminal derivatization with phenyl isocyanate (PIC) (PMID: 34315505). Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as described (PMID: 34315505).

### Data Protocol
The acquired RAW data were analyzed using Epiprofile 2.0 (PMID: 29790754), selecting the SILAC option.

### Publication Abstract
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is an aggressive subtype of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in which the PML/RAR&#x3b1; fusion protein exerts oncogenic activities by recruiting repressive complexes to the promoter of specific target genes. Other epigenetic perturbations, as alterations of histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3), have been frequently found in AMLs and are associated with leukemogenesis and leukemia progression. Here, we characterized the epigenomic effects of maltonis, a novel maltol-derived molecule, in APL cells. We demonstrate that maltonis treatments induce a profound remodulation of the histone code, reducing global H3K9me3 signal and modulating other histone post-translational modifications. Transcriptomic and epigenomic analyses revealed that maltonis exposure induces changes of genes expression associated with a genomic redistribution of histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac). Upregulation of interferon alpha and gamma response and downregulation of c-MYC target genes, in function of c-MYC reduced expression (monitored in all the hematopoietic neoplasms tested), represent the most significant modulated pathways. These data demonstrate the ability of maltonis to epigenetically reprogram the gene expression profile of APL cells, inducing an intriguing antiviral-like response, concomitantly with the downregulation of c-MYC-related pathways, thus making it an attractive candidate for antileukemic therapy.

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology


