### Accession
PXD041110

### Title
Yolk-deprived Caenorhabditis elegans secure brood size at the expense of competitive fitness

### Description
Oviparous animals support reproduction via the incorporation of yolk as a nutrient source into the eggs. In Caenorhabditis elegans, however, yolk proteins seem dispensable for fecundity, despite constituting the vast majority of the embryonic protein pool and acting as carriers for nutrient-rich lipids. Here, we used yolk protein-deprived C. elegans mutants to gain insight into the traits that may yet be influenced by yolk rationing. We show that massive yolk provisioning confers a temporal advantage during embryogenesis, while also increasing early juvenile body size and promoting competitive fitness. Opposite to species that reduce egg production under yolk deprivation, our results indicate that C. elegans relies on yolk as a fail-safe to secure offspring survival, rather than to maintain offspring numbers.

### Sample Protocol
To compare the proteome of yolk protein-deprived ceh-60 mutant and yolk protein-provisioned wild-type embryos, we relied on differential proteomics using TMTsixplexTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) isobaric labelling. Per condition, six samples were taken consisting of embryos harvested from twelve full grown (approximately 1,500 worms per plate) NGM plates seeded with E. coli OP50. According to the manufacturer’s TMTsixplexTM protocol, samples were lysed with Lysis buffer (10% sodium dodecyl sulfate in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate). Protein homogenates were sonicated for 10 s, kept 50 s on ice (5 repeats) and centrifuged at 16 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentration of the samples was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay. For each sample, 100 µg protein extract was digested overnight with 2.5 µg trypsin at 37°C. Peptide digests were dried using an Univapo 150 ECH vacuum concentrator (Uniequip) and stored at -80°C until labelling. Peptides were labelled with TMT Label Reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After an incubation period of 1 hour, the reaction was quenched by adding 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. For each mass spectrometry run, three samples of one condition were pooled with three samples of a second condition in equal amounts. In total three TMT experiments were performed: wild type vs ceh-60(lst466), wild type vs ceh 60(lst491) and ceh-60(lst466) vs ceh60(lst491). All samples were run on a 2x Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Eksigent nanoAcquity LC-Ultra system (Waters, Milford, MA). 1 µg of total protein of the labelled sample was dissolved in 10 µL 1% acetonitrile in water before it was loaded on an analytic 200 cm µPACᵀᴹ column (Pharmafluidics). Separation was established by a linear gradient from 1% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile in water in 120 minutes with a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. The 2x Q Exactive Plus was set up in a data dependent MS/MS mode with a scan spectrum range of 350 to 1,850 m/z and a resolution of 70,000. The dynamic exclusion time was set at 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analyzed in MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) using 6-plex TMT as internal labels with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.003 Da. Oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, and up to 5 modifications were allowed per peptide. MaxQuant’s default orbitrap settings were used and identified peptides were mapped to the UniProt C. elegans reference proteome (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001940).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Tmt, Yolk deprivation

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Molecular and Functional Neurobiology, KU Leuven

### Submitter
Ellen Geens

### Lab Head
Dr Liesbet Temmerman
Molecular and Functional Neurobiology, KU Leuven


