### Accession
PXD018168

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based analysis of Mycobacterial single-colony proteome

### Description
Here as an attempt to explore bacterial single-colony proteomics, we describe a quantitative mass spectrometry-based protocol to isolate and analyse the proteome of a single mycobacterial colony from 7H10 media. Tryptic peptides are evaluated with high performance liquid chromatography coupled with a hybrid quadrupole mass filter Orbitrap analyser (Q Exactive) and raw data analysed using the MaxQuant Suite and downstream analysis using Perseus software . A total of 7805 unique peptides and 1387 proteins were identified

### Sample Protocol
Mycobacterium smegmatis  single colonies were cultured in complete 7H10 media. Lysis thereafter of single colonies was done using a sonicator probe in lysis buffer consisting of 500mM Tris pH 8, Protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablets. acetone methanol precipitation was used to precpitate the proteins after which were reduced by 3mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 minutes and alkalated using 16.5mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 minutes. Predigestion using Lys-C and digestion using trypsin. Desalting utilised Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and LC-MS/MS mesurement used a Q-exactive mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine to search MS/MS data against Uniprot Mycobacterium smegmatis (strain: mc2 155) (6602 entries) database with common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, NQ acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as a protease with 2 missed cleavages allowed and at least two peptides were required for LFQ quantitation. Precursor mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm for HCD fragmentation data analysis. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set to 1%. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. Downstream statistical analysis was performed with Perseus (1.6.10.45).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based single-cell proteomic analysis has recently gained momentum and is now an emerging area with established protocols and promising results. Traditional proteomic studies, especially involving bacteria, have been limited to suspension cultures with large protein yields. Such studies, however, remain population centered with the uniqueness of individual responses to environmental challenges becoming diluted. To enable bacterial single-colony proteomics, we describe a quantitative mass spectrometry-based protocol to isolate and analyze the proteome of a single mycobacterial colony from 7H10 media, with growth supplements for optimal growth. Following protein purification and digestion, tryptic peptides are analyzed by UHPLC coupled to a hybrid Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Raw data were analyzed using the MaxQuant Suite, and downstream statistical analysis was performed using Perseus software. A total of 7805 unique peptides and 1387 proteins were identified. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018168. In this chapter, we identify steps most prone to sample loss and describe measures of alleviation that allows the preservation of protein yield and boosts quantitative power while increasing reproducibility, of "very limiting samples."

### Keywords
Mycobacteria, Proteomics, Protein extraction, Single-colony, Mass spectrometry, Bacterial proteome

### Affiliations
Department:Intergrated biomedical sciences,Division:Chemical biology,Institute of infectious diseases and Molecular medicine(IDM),Faculty of health science, University of Cape Town, South Africa
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
john Iradukunda

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Blackburn
Department:Intergrated biomedical sciences,Division:Chemical biology,Institute of infectious diseases and Molecular medicine(IDM),Faculty of health science, University of Cape Town, South Africa


