### Accession
PXD002694

### Title
Direct and Absolute Quantification of over 1800 Yeast Proteins via Selected Reaction Monitoring HUB_MAN C4PR_LIV

### Description
Defining intracellular protein concentration is critical in molecular systems biology. Although strategies for determining relative protein changes are available, defining robust absolute values in copies per cell has proven significantly more challenging. Here we present a reference dataset quantifying over 1800 S. cerevisiae proteins by direct means using protein-specific stable-isotope labelled internal standards and selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mass spectrometry, far exceeding any previous study. This was achieved by careful design of over 100 QconCAT recombinant proteins as standards, defining 1167 proteins in terms of copies per cell and upper limits on a further 668, with robust CVs routinely less than 20%. The SRM-derived proteome is compared with existing quantitative data sets, highlighting the disparities between methodologies. Coupled with a quantification of the transcriptome by RNA-seq taken from the same cells, these data enable revised estimates of several fundamental molecular parameters: a total protein count of ~100 million molecules-per-cell, a median of ~1000 proteins-per-transcript, and a linear model of protein translation explaining 70% of the variance in translation rate. This work contributes a ‘gold-standard’ reference yeast proteome (including 531 proteins with high quality, dual peptide quantification) that can be widely used in systems models and for other comparative studies.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast (EUROSCARF accession number Y11335) was grown in defined minimal C-limiting (F1) medium using 10 g.l-1 of glucose as the sole carbon source. The F1 medium was supplemented with 0.5 mM arg and 1 mM lys. 4 cultures were grown in chemostat mode at a dilution rate of 0.1 h-1 and 15ml aliquots of the culture were centrifuged (4000 rpm; 4 °C; 10 minutes). The supernatant discarded, the pellet flash frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80 °C for protein extraction. Cell counts performed using an automated cell counter. Proteins extracted by re-suspending the biomass pellets in 250 μl of 50 mM ambic containing 1 tablet of Roche complete-mini protease inhibitors (+ EDTA) per 10 ml. 200ul Acid washed glass beads were added. The pellet was bead-beated for 15 bursts of 30 sec with 1 min cool down between cycles. The biomass was centrifuged for 10 minutes 13,000 rpm at 4 °C; the supernatant was removed and stored on ice. Fresh ambic (250 µl) with protease inhibitors was added and pellet was re-suspended by vortexing. The bottom of the extraction vial was pierced with a hot needle, the vial placed on a fresh tube and quickly centrifuged (5 minutes at 4000 rpm at 4 °C). The flow-through and the supernatant fraction were combined, the exact volume measured and protein amount determined by standard Bradford assay. Protein extracts were aliquoted and stored at -80°C prior to subsequent digestion. Yeast lysate representing protein from 21.5 million cells was dispensed and made to 150 µl by addition of 25mM ambic. Proteins were denatured by 10 µl of 1% (w/v) RapiGest™ in 25mM ambic and incubation at 80 °C 10 minutes. The sample was reduced (10 µl of 60mM DTT, incubation at 60 °C for 10 minutes) and alkylated (10 µl of 180 mM IAM, 30 minutes at RT in dark). Trypsin (2 µg in 10 µl) was added and incubated at 37 °C. After 4.5 hours an additional 10 µl of trypsin was added and digestion left overnight. Digestion termination and RapiGest™ removal by acidification (3 µl of TFA for 45 minutes at 37 °C) and centrifugation (15,000 g 15 minutes). “QeX” dataset was based on a 1D RP separation of the yeast digest using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano system coupled to a QExactive™ mass spectrometer. The sample (5 µL: 400,000 cells and 50fmol glycogen phosphorylase (Uniprot P00489)) was loaded onto the trapping column (PepMap100, C18, 75 μm X 20 mm) for 7 min at a flow rate of 4 μL/min with 0.1% (v/v) FA. The sample was resolved on the analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% FA) 3% B (99.9%  MeCN 0.1% FA) to 60% A 40% B over 240 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The DDA program consisted of a 70,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (AGC set to 1e6 ions with a max fill time of 250ms) the 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS (17,000 resolution scan, AGC of 5e4 ions and max fill time of 250ms, an ion selection window of 3 m/z, a normalised collision energy of 30 and a 30 second dynamic exclusion window). The “SAX fractionation” dataset used the on-tip pre-fractionation approach described by Wisniewski et al (2011). Initially 130 µg of yeast preparation were brought to 250µL in a solution containing 4% SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT and incubated at 95C for 5 min. DNA in the sample was sheared by sonication (3 10s pulses) and the lysate clarified by centrifugation at 17,136g for 5 min. The sample volume was brought to 400 µL with 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, cooled on ice, and 100 µL of 100% TCA added to precipitate protein. Precipitation was carried out overnight on ice after which the precipitate was washed twice with ice-cold acetone, dried, re-suspended in a solution containing 8M urea, 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and 0.1M DTT, and the protein reduced for 10 min at 60°C. Alkylation was then performed by adding IAM in 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) to a final concentration of 50mM and incubation of the sample for 30 min in the dark at RT. Further 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) was added, to dilute the urea to 6M, after which LysC was added at 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio, and the mixture incubated for 4h at 37C. Following this, the urea was further diluted down to 1.5M with 25mM ambic before adding trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio) for an overnight incubation at 37°C. The next day, the peptide digest was desalted using a C18 Macro spin column (eluting with 70% acetonitrile), dried using a SpeedVac. Briefly, peptides were separated on a SAX "column" (10 layers of a 3 M Empore Anion Exchange disk in a 200 µL micro pipette tip). Peptides were loaded on the column in 200 µL of Britton and Robinson buffer composed of 20 mM CH3COOH, 20 mM H3PO4, 20 mM H3BO3, and NaOH, at pH 11. For elution of fractions, Britton and Robinson buffer solutions titrated to pH 8, 6, 5, 4 and 2 using NaOH were used. Eluted peptides were desalted using C18 StageTip plugs as described by Rappsilber et al. (2007). Each elution was then dried using a SpeedVac, re-suspended in 0.05% TFA. LC-MSMS was performed on previous system.

### Data Protocol
The data was processed with Progenesis (v4.1 Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Samples were aligned according to retention time using a combination of manual and automatic alignment. Default peak picking parameters were applied and features with charges from 1+ to 4+ featuring three or more isotope peaks were retained. Database searching was performed using MASCOT (Matrix Science). A Mascot Generic File was created by Progenesis and searched against the reference proteome set of S.cerevisiae from Uniprot (6560 proteins) with the sequence of rabbit glycogen phosphorylase (UniProt: P00489) added. A fixed carbamidomethyl modification for cysteine and variable oxidation modification for methionine were specified. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 mmu were applied. At a p value of 0.05, the built in MASCOT decoy search reported a peptide FDR of 0.5%. Label-free absolute quantification was performed following the “Top3” methodology described by Silva et al. (2006). The SAX dataset was processed with MaxQuant (v. 1.3.0.5, Cox and Mann, 2008) using the Andromedia search engine (Cox et al 2011). The sequence database was the reference proteome set of S.cerevisiae from Uniprot (6560 proteins). A fixed carbamidomethyl modification for cysteine and variable oxidation modification for methionine were specified. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 mmu were applied and a 1% FDR threshold at both peptide and protein level. All other parameters were left at default settings. Label-free absolute quantification was performed following the “Top3” methodology described by Silva et al. (2006) but instead of using an internal standard for calibration, the total content of a yeast cell was assumed to be 60 million molecules.

### Publication Abstract
Defining intracellular protein concentration is critical in molecular systems biology. Although strategies for determining relative protein changes are available, defining robust absolute values in copies per cell has proven significantly more challenging. Here we present a reference data set quantifying over 1800Saccharomyces cerevisiaeproteins by direct means using protein-specific stable-isotope labeled internal standards and selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mass spectrometry, far exceeding any previous study. This was achieved by careful design of over 100 QconCAT recombinant proteins as standards, defining 1167 proteins in terms of copies per cell and upper limits on a further 668, with robust CVs routinely less than 20%. The selected reaction monitoring-derived proteome is compared with existing quantitative data sets, highlighting the disparities between methodologies. Coupled with a quantification of the transcriptome by RNA-seq taken from the same cells, these data support revised estimates of several fundamental molecular parameters: a total protein count of &#x223c;100 million molecules-per-cell, a median of &#x223c;1000 proteins-per-transcript, and a linear model of protein translation explaining 70% of the variance in translation rate. This work contributes a "gold-standard" reference yeast proteome (including 532 values based on high quality, dual peptide quantification) that can be widely used in systems models and for other comparative studies.

### Keywords
Absolute quantification; selected reaction monitoring; srm; stable-isotope labelling; yeast; tandem quadrupole; qconcat

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Head of Biochemistry  Centre for Proteome Research G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street   Liverpool  L69 7ZB

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Rob Beynon
Head of Biochemistry  Centre for Proteome Research G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street   Liverpool  L69 7ZB


