### Accession
PXD002472

### Title
Proteomic study of S erythrea bioprocess

### Description
Proteome composition of Saccharopolyspora erythrea during the fermentation bioprocess was studied. Samples were collected at two timepoints (prior to the rapid growth phase and at the start of the rapid growth phase), and relative differences in protein abundance were determined by spectral counting.

### Sample Protocol
At selected time points 4 ml of bioprocess broth were centrifuged and the cell pellet was washed twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH = 7.2. To prepare cell extract the cell pellet was resuspened in 400 uL of extraction buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % (w/v) CHAPS, 40 mM Tris, 65 mM DTT, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)– two tablets/10 mL of buffer and disrupted by sonification - four times, 15 s each with 30 s intervals for cooling the mixture on ice. The cell homogenate was centrifuged at 20000 g for 20 min at 4 °C.  Protein concentration in the cell extract was determined using the method of Bradford. cell extract was separated by SDS-PAGE using a 12% Tris-Glycine precast gel (Lonza). Gel was stained by Commasie Brilliant Blue and whole protein lanes were cut into eight bands. Each gel band was destained in a solution of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50 % acetonitrile and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis. Destained gel bands were first reduced in the presence of 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (45 minutes at 56 °C). Reduction was followed by acetylation of cysteines by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (30 minutes at room temperature). Gel pieces were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate dried and digested by trypsine (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by extraction solution (50 % acetonitrile / 5 % formic acid) and concentrated to 15 µl. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an EASY-nanoLCII HPLC unit (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptide sample was first loaded on a C18 trapping column (Proxeon EASY-ColumnTM, 2 cm (length), 100 μm internal diameter, 5 μm 120 Å, C18-A1 beads) and then separated on a 10 cm long C18 PicoFritTM AQUASIL analytical column, (75 µm internal diameter, 5 μm 100Å, C18 beads) (New Objective) using forward flushing. Peptides were eluted with a 90 minute linear gradient of 5-50% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS/MS spectra were obtained by fragmentation of the nine most intense precursor ions from the full MS scan. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count of 2 and 120 seconds exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
The database search and quantification by spectral counting were performed using the MaxQuant proteomics software using the S. erythraea protein database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Saccharopolyspora erythrea, Bioprocess, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana,  Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr Marko Fonovic
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana,  Slovenia


