### Accession
PXD006178

### Title
A quantitative proteomic based approach to study the genistein induced epigenetic reprogramming in MDA-MB231 cells

### Description
Epidemiological data indicate that consumption of soy-based food significantly reduces the cancer risk in human through interaction with estrogen receptors and the ‘phytoestrogen’ genistein present in the soy is responsible for this chemopreventive activity. The epigenome regulatory effect of genistein also reported but the key mechanism behind this effect remain elusive. In this current project, we reported the epigenome modulation effect of genistein using MDA-MB231 cells. Cells were treated with low-dose genistein for >1 month and the stable epigenetic alterations were analyzed by partial MNase digestion and TMT-based quantitative proteomics based chromatome mapping approach. We identified a total of 3177 chromatin-bound proteins with high confidence, including 882 proteins that displayed altered binding topology after cell conditioning with genistein. Prolonged phytochemical exposure permanently modified the binding topology of the key epigenetic regulators and preserved their binding topology in untreated progeny. Genistein induced altered epigenome modulation negatively regulates the expression of cell proliferation genes and suppress cell growth. In contrast, previously exposed cells displayed reduced expression of DNA repair genes and enhanced genotoxic stress upon genistein withdrawal.

### Sample Protocol
The MDA-MB-231 cell were cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS in the presence or absence of 4µM genistein (or DMSO vehicle control) for 8 weeks total duration. In some experiments, the cells were cultured in genistein-supplemented medium for 4 weeks only then cultured for a further 4 weeks in DMEM (genistein withdrawal). Chromatin isolation was carried out and partially digested with 10KU MNase for 60min at 37oC. The supernatant fraction and undigested pellet collected and used for the proteomic experiments. Cells from three biological replicates were pooled prior to the chromatin isolation in order to minimize the effects of processing error. The protein samples were reduced, alkylated and tryptic digested using in-gel protein digestion protocol. Tryptic peptides form different conditions were labeled with TMT reagent multiplex kits according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific, USA). The TMT-labeled peptides were pooled and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 Vac cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) before being vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by reverse-phase chromatography at ~pH 8. Briefly, the labeled peptides were reconstituted in 200μl buffer A (0.02% NH4OH in water) and fractionated using X-Bridge C18 columns (4.6×200mm, 5μm particle size, 130Å pore size) (Waters, Milford, MA) on a HPLC unit (Prominence™, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) at flow rate of 1ml/min. The HPLC gradient comprised 100-95% buffer A (0.02% NH4OH in water) for 3min; 5-35% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.02% NH4OH) for 40min; then 35-70% buffer B for 12min, followed by 70% buffer B for 5min. The chromatograms were recorded at 280nm. A total of 64 fractions were collected within the 65min elution period. The eluted peptides were combined into 16 distinct fractions using a concatenated pooling strategy and concentrated to dryness using vacuum centrifugation. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with online nano-HPLC system (Thermo Scientific; USA). Data were acquired using Xcaliber 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific; USA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher, MA) together with the Sequest and Mascot search engines (parameters included cysteine alkylation with MMTS as static modification; methionine oxidation, and asparagine and glutamine deamidation as dynamic modifications; full trypsin digestion and maximum 2 missed and/or non-specific cleavages as digestion parameters; 10ppm precursor mass and 0.02Da fragment mass tolerance). The UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) of human proteins (downloaded on 25 July, 2016, including 70,849 sequences and 23,964,784 residues) was used as a search database with a false discovery rate cut-off of <0.05% at the peptide level. The resulting data set was automatically bias-corrected to eliminate potential variation due to unequal mixing when combining the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Epidemiological data indicate that human cancer risk is significantly reduced by the consumption of soy-based foods containing the "phytoestrogen" genistein, which can signal via host cell estrogen receptors. While additional chemoprotective effects of genistein induced by epigenetic factors have also been reported, the key molecules and mechanisms involved are poorly defined. We therefore investigated genistein effects on chromatin-bound proteins in the estrogen receptor-deficient cell line MDA-MB-231 which is insensitive to phytoestrogen signaling. After exposure to low-dose genistein for &gt;1 month, MDA-MB-231 cells exhibited stable epigenetic alterations that are analyzed via partial MNase digestion and TMT-based quantitative proteomics. 3177 chromatin-bound proteins are identified with high confidence, including 882 molecules that displayed altered binding topology after cell conditioning with genistein. Prolonged phytochemical exposure conferred heritable changes in the binding topology of key epigenetic regulators including ATRX, SUV39H1/H2, and HP1BP3 that are preserved in untreated progeny, resulting in sustained downregulation of proliferation genes and reduced cell growth. These data indicate that soy derivative genistein exerts complex estrogen receptor-independent effects on the epigenome likely to influence tumorigenesis by restricting cell growth.

### Keywords
Heterochromatin, Chromatin, Quantitative proteomics, Chromatome, Genistein, Euchromatin, Epigenetics, Dna repair, Tmt, Epigenetic reprogram, Epigenome

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University
School of Biological Sciences Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang drive, Singapore 637551

### Submitter
Bamaprasad Dutta

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences Division of Structural Biology and Biochemistry Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang drive, Singapore 637551


