### Accession
PXD012853

### Title
Epigenetic homogeneity in histone methylation underlies sperm programming for embryonic transcription

### Description
Sperm contributes genetic and epigenetic information to the embryo to efficiently support development. However, the mechanism underlying such developmental competence remains elusive. Here, we investigated whether all sperm cells have a common epigenetic configuration that primes transcriptional program for embryonic development. We show for the first time that remodelling of histones during spermiogenesis results in the retention of methylated histone H3 at the same genomic location in every sperm cell. This homogeneously methylated fraction of histone H3 in the sperm genome is maintained during early embryonic replication. Such methylated histone fraction resisting postfertilisation reprogramming marks developmental genes whose expression is perturbed upon experimental reduction of histone methylation. A similar homogeneously methylated histone H3 fraction is detected in human sperm. Altogether, we uncover a conserved mechanism of paternal epigenetic information transmission to the embryo through the homogeneous retention of methylated histone in a sperm cells population.

### Sample Protocol
TCA precipitated protein pellets were suspended in buffer containing 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)/0.1%, heated at 90°C for 5 min followed by bath sonication for 30 secs. Proteins were reduced with 2μl of 50mM tris-2-caraboxymethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour at 60°C followed by alkylation with 1μl of 200mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10min at room temperature (RT). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using trypsin (Thermo Scientific) asprotease at ratio protein/trypsin ~ 1:30. Protein digests were labelled with the TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched with 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific) for 15 min at room temperature (RT). Samples were mixed and subsequently fractionated using basic pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific). Fractions were dried and each fraction was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis.Peptide fractions were analysed on a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with RSLC nano Ultimate 3000 system. Peptides were trapped on a 100μm ID x 2 cm microcapillary C18 column (5µm, 100A) followed by 2h elution on a 75μm ID x 25 cm C18 RP column (3µm, 100A) with 5–45% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at 300nl/min flow rate. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (380–1,500 m/z) was acquired at 120K resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 3×105 and Maximum Injection Time (MIT) of 100 ms). Subsequent MS2 scans were acquired with a top speed approach using a 3-s duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID) with a collision energy of 35%, an AGC setting of 1×104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da and MIT of 35ms. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 45s. During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and isolated using a 2.0 Da m/z window. MS2–MS3 was conducted using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology with the top10 setting. HCD was used for the MS3, using 55% collision energy. Reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap at 50K resolution, an AGC setting of 5×104 and MIT of 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
The collected CID tandem mass spectra were processed with the SequestHT search engine against the Xenopus laevis proteome database on the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software for peptide and protein identifications. The node for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.5 Da, Dynamic Modifications were methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), aspartamine and glutamine deamination (+0.984 Da) and Static Modifications were TMT6plex at any N-Terminus, K (+229.163 Da) for the quantitative data. Methylthio at C (+45.988) was included for the total proteome data. The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a TMT 6plex (Thermo Scientific Instruments) Quantification Method, for MS3 scan events, HCD activation type, integration window tolerance 20 ppm and integration method Most Confident Centroid. The consensus workflow included S/N calculation for TMT intensities and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. Strict FDR was set at q-value < 0.01. Quantitative proteomics data were analysed by qPLEXanalyzer, an R Bioconductor package. The raw peptide intensities were normalized by median scaled protein histone H4 (Xelaev18026404m.g) intensities. Statistical analysis of differentially-expressed protein was carried out using Limma moderated t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm contributes genetic and epigenetic information to the embryo to efficiently support development. However, the mechanism underlying such developmental competence remains elusive. Here, we investigated whether all sperm cells have a common epigenetic configuration that primes transcriptional program for embryonic development. Using calibrated ChIP-seq, we show that remodelling of histones during spermiogenesis results in the retention of methylated histone H3 at the same genomic location in most sperm cell. This homogeneously methylated fraction of histone H3 in the sperm genome is maintained during early embryonic replication. Such methylated histone fraction resisting post-fertilisation reprogramming marks developmental genes whose expression is perturbed upon experimental reduction of histone methylation. A similar homogeneously methylated histone H3 fraction is detected in human sperm. Altogether, we uncover a conserved mechanism of paternal epigenetic information transmission to the embryo through the homogeneous retention of methylated histone in a sperm cells population.

### Keywords
Sperm, Epigenetics, Programming, Lc-ms/ms, Ice-chip

### Affiliations
gurdon institute

### Submitter
jerome jullien

### Lab Head
Dr jerome jullien
gurdon institute


