### Accession
PXD033953

### Title
A network-based approach reveals a novel mechanism of resistance to TKI-therapy in AML

### Description
Internal tandem duplications (ITDs) in the FLT3 gene are frequently identified and confer a poor prognosis in patient affected by acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The insertion site of the ITDs in FLT3 significantly impacts the sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) therapy, affecting patient’s clinical outcome. To decipher the molecular mechanisms driving the different sensitivity to TKIs therapy of FLT3-ITD cells, we used high-sensitive mass spectrometry-based (phospho)proteomics and deep sequencing. Here, we developed a novel generally-applicable data analysis strategy, dubbed “Signaling Profiler”, that supports the integration of unbiased large-scale datasets with literature-derived signaling networks. The approach resulted in the generation of FLT3-ITDs specific predictive models and reveales a crucial and conserved role of the WEE1-CDK1 axis in TKIs resistance. Remarkably, pharmacological inhibition of the WEE1 kinase significantly synergizes and strengths the pro-apoptotic effect of TKIs therapy in cell lines and patient-derived primary blasts. In conclusion, this work proposes a new molecular mechanism of TKIs resistance in AML and suggests a combination therapy as option to improve therapeutic efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation Frozen tissue samples were homogenized in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, and 2% SDC, heated for 5 min at 95°C and sonicated (Diagenode Bioruptor at high intensity, 15 x 30s). 50 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP,40 mM CAA for 5 min at 40°C in the dark. Samples were digested with trypsin and LysC 1:50 (enzyme:protein) overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA and loaded onto activated triple layer styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS; 3 M Empore) STAGE tips. STAGE tips were washed with 100 µl ethylacetate 1% TFA, 100 µl 30% Methanol 1% TFA and 150 µl 0.2% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 60 µl SDB-RPS elution buffer (80% ACN, 5% NH4OH), concentrated in a SpeedVac for 40 min at 45°C and dissolved in 10 µl MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA).  LC-MS/MS analysis Single-shot measurements were performed with 500 ng of purified peptides, determined by absorbance at 280 nm on a NanoDrop 2000. Peptides were loaded onto a 50-cm column, packed in-house with 1.9 µm C18 ReproSil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH) with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Column temperature was kept at 60°C using a column oven. Peptides were eluted over 60 min using a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). In brief, the gradient started with 5% buffer B and increased stepwise to 45% over 45min, followed by a wash-out at 95% buffer B, all at a flowrate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were then transferred to the gas phase using electrospray ionization (ESI), pre-filtered by a FAIMS device (CV -50 V) before entering the Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. A data-independent (DIA) acquisition method was used, in which one full scan (300-1650 m/z, max. ion fill time of 45ms, normalized AGC target = 300%, R= 120.000 at 200 m/z) was followed by 66 tMS2 fragment scans of unequally-spaced windows with 1 Th overlap, covering the same m/z range (fill time = 22 ms, normalized AGC target = 1000%, normalized HCD collision energy = 30%, R= 15.000).

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed in the MaxQuant environment (Cox and Mann, 2008), version 1.6.14.0, employing the Andromeda engine for database search. Proteome and phosphoproteome samples were analysed together by specifying two separate groups and setting group specific parameters for each sample type. MS/MS spectra were matched against the Mus Murine UniProt FASTA database (September 2014), with an FDR of < 1% at the level of proteins, peptides and modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline and between aspartic acid and proline. The search included cysteine carbamidomethy- lation as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine tyrosine residue (STY) for the phosphoprotemic samples.. MaxQuants Label free Quantification method and a minimum ration count of two was used for the total proteme samples. For proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, where possible, the identity of peptides present but not sequenced in a given run was obtained by trans- ferring identifications across liquid chromatography (LC)-MS runs (‘match between runs’). For phosphopeptide identification, an Andromeda minimum score and minimum delta score threshold of 40 and 17 were used, respectively.  Peptides had to be fully tryptic in both proteome or phosphoproteme samples and up to two or four missed cleavages were allowed for protease digestion, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The insertion site of the internal tandem duplications (ITDs) in the FLT3 gene affects the sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) therapy in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Patients with the ITD in the tyrosine kinase domain lack effective therapeutic options. Here, to identify genotype-driven strategies increasing the TKI therapy efficacy, we developed SignalingProfiler, a strategy supporting the integration of high-sensitive mass spectrometry-based (phospho)proteomics, RNA sequencing datasets with literature-derived signaling networks. The approach generated FLT3-ITD genotype-specific predictive models and revealed a conserved role of the WEE1-CDK1 axis in TKIs resistance. Remarkably, pharmacological inhibition of the WEE1 kinase synergizes and strengthens the pro-apoptotic effect of TKIs therapy in cell lines and patient-derived primary blasts. Finally, we propose a new molecular mechanism of TKIs resistance in AML and suggest the combination of WEE1 inhibitor and TKI as a therapeutic option to improve patients clinical outcome.

### Keywords
Aml, Ba/f3 cells, Tki, Flt3, Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Midostaurin, Quizartinib, Acute myeloid leukemia, Tyrosine kinase inhibitors

### Affiliations
Institute for Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Institute for Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany German Center for Diabetes Research, Neuherberg, Germany


