### Accession
PXD017021

### Title
Tryp-N: A thermostable protease for the production of N-terminal argininyl and lysinyl peptides

### Description
Identification and characterization of Tryp-N, A thermostable protease for the production of N-terminal argininyl and lysinyl peptides

### Sample Protocol
pH Profile:  Each enzymatic digest was conducted on E. coli cell lysate, then assessed by LC/MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Determination of unique peptide counts followed by quantitation of N-terminal amino acid fractions of each peptide

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics is a mainstay in protein identification and analysis. These studies typically employ proteolytic treatment of biological samples to generate suitably sized peptides for tandem mass spectrometric (MS) analysis. In MS, fragmentation of peptides is largely driven by charge localization. Consequently, peptides with basic centers exclusively on their N-termini produce mainly b-ions. Thus, it was long ago realized that proteases that yield such peptides would be valuable proteomic tools for achieving simplified peptide fragmentation patterns and peptide assignment. Work by several groups has identified such proteases, however, structural analysis of these suggested that enzymatic optimization was possible. We therefore endeavored to find enzymes that could provide enhanced activity and versatility while maintaining specificity. Using these previously described proteases as informatic search templates, we discovered and then characterized a thermophilic metalloprotease with N-terminal specificity for arginine and lysine. This enzyme, dubbed Tryp-N, affords many advantages including improved thermostability, solvent and detergent tolerance, and rapid digestion time.

### Keywords
Lys-n, Tryp-n, Trypsin, Arginine, Ulilysin, Lysine, Proteomics, Metalloprotease, Thermostable, Lysarginase

### Affiliations
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

### Submitter
Jonathan Ipsaro

### Lab Head
Dr Darryl J. Pappin
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory


