### Accession
PXD008373

### Title
Proteome Landscape of Early Stage Hepatocellular Carcinoma Identifies Proteomic Subtypes and New Therapeutic Targets - Phosphorylation data

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for approximately 90% of primary liver cancers, the second leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Although HCC surgical treatment may be curative in the early stages, its five-year overall survival is only 50-70%. Advances in proteomic technologies have expanded the breadth and depth of cancer proteome characterization. Here, we present the largest characterization effort on proteomic profiling of 222 tumor and paired non-tumor tissues in clinically early HCC (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage 0 and A). Quantitative proteomic data identified three more-refined subtypes in the early- stage cohort of HCC (termed S-I, S-II and S-III) with different clinical outcomes. S-I retained hepatic detoxification and metabolic functions with the best prognosis, S-II increased molecular expression related to proliferation, and S-III showed distinct enrichment of tumor metastasis and immune response pathways and the poorest prognosis. The subtype specific signatures targeted by known FDA approved drugs or inhibitors under clinical investigations for HCC provide a novel resource for HCC therapeutic targets. A new mechanism of disrupted cholesterol homeostasis with aberrant accumulation of cholesteryl esters was also highlighted in S-III. Thus, this study represents the first proteomic stratification of early-stage HCC, providing insights into tumor biology and personalized targeted therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Liver tissues (approximately 0.1 g each) were minced and lysed in T-PER buﬀer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) followed by 1 min sonication (3s on and 3s oﬀ, amplitude 25%). The lysate was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected as whole-tissue extract. The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. Two milligram of protein lysates was digested with MED-FASP method using the 30kDa Microcon Centrifugal Filter Unit. The proteins were ﬁrst digested with Trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega) at a ratio of 1:100 overnight (37°C). Following the ﬁrst digestion, trypsin at a ratio of 1:100 were added into the ﬁlter units as a second digestion and incubated at 37°C for 6 hours. The collected peptides were combined with the peptides from ﬁrst digestion and dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge at 45°C and store at -80°C for further use. The phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads and fractionated with high pH reversed-phase. The TiO2 beads were preconditioned by suspending in buﬀer A (0.4% TFA, 80% ACN) and dispersed into tubes (5 mg TiO2 beads per tube), the beads were rotated for 1 min and quickly spun down. The protein digests were dissolved into tubes containing 5mg TiO2 beads with 500 µl buﬀer B (70% ACN, 5% TFA, 20% lactic acid), which were then incubated with gentle rotation at room temperature (30 min at 20 rpm). Subsequently, the TiO2 beads were spun down at 800 x g for 3 min, and thesupernatants were transferred to fresh tubes and incubated with a second round of TiO2 beads as described above. The two round of incubated beads were mixed and resuspended with 200 µl buﬀer B. The beads were further washed with 150 µl buﬀer B four times, followed by twice additional washing with 100 μl buﬀer A. The beads were loaded into HpRP columns and the phosphopeptides were fractionated respectively from the HpRP columns with 100 µl elution buﬀer 1 (15% ammonia), elution buﬀer 2 (15% ammonia, 2% ACN), elution buﬀer 3 (15% ammonia, 5% ACN), elution buﬀer 4 (15% ammonia, 8% ACN), elution buﬀer 5 (15% ammonia, 10% ACN) and elution buﬀer 6 (15% ammonia, 40% ACN). The elutions were collected and fractions were combined into 3 subfractions as follows: fraction 1 with 6, fraction 2 with 4, and fraction 3 with 5. Thus 3 subfractions of eluted phosphopeptides were collected and instantaneously dried down in a SpeedVac at 45°C and store at -80 °C. All peptides were reconstituted in 5% FA (vol/vol) and separated on an in-house-made C18 reverse phase column (15cm length × 75µm diameter, Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA) with C18 beads (1.9µm, Michrom Bioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA ) on an EASY-nano-LC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion or Q-Exactive Orbitrap. Peptides separation of HeLa and HepG2.2.15 cells was achieved using a 75 min gradient (buﬀer A: 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, buﬀer B: 0.1% FA in ACN) at a ﬂow rate of 380 nL/min (0-16 min, 3%-10%B, 16-51 min, 10%-22%B, 51-66 min, 22%-30%B, 66-67 min, 30%-95%B, 67-75 min, 95%B), then analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) was operated in positive ion mode with ion transfer tube temperature 320°C. The positive ion spray voltage was 2.0kV. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 120,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 5.0e5 for a scan range of 300-1400 m/z, and a max injection time of 50 ms. The instrument was run in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3s. HCD fragmentation wasperformed at normalized collision energy was 32%. MS2 AGC target was set to 5.0e3 with a max injection time of 35ms and dynamic exclusion was set to 18s. Phosphopeptides yielded by HpRP-TiO2 were separated using a 78 min gradient (buﬀer A: 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water, buﬀer B: 0.1% FA in ACN) at a ﬂow rate of 0.6 µL/min (0-71 min, 5% to 30%B, 71-72 min, 30% to 95%B, 72-72 min, 95%B), then analyzed by Q-Exactive Orbitrap. The MS survey scan was analyzed over a mass range of 300-1400 Da with a resolution of 70000 at m/z 200. The isolation width was 3 m/z for precursor ion selection. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3e6, and the maximum injection time (MIT) was 60 ms. The MS2 was analyzed using data-dependent mode searching for the 20 most intense ions fragmented in the HCD. For each scan with a resolution of 17500 at m/z 200, the AGC was set at 5e4 and the MIT was 80 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set at 18 s to suppress the repeated detection of the same fragment ion peaks. The relative collision energy for MS 2 was set at 27% for HCD.

### Data Protocol
The MS RAW data were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the Human Uniprot database. (version 20140922, 20,193 sequences) All MS/MS spectra were searched with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as ﬁxed modiﬁcation and protein N-terminus acetylation, methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (STY) as variable modiﬁcations; an initial mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a ﬁnal mass tolerance of 6 ppm for precursor mass; allowing max of three missed cleavages. Peptides, proteins, and phosphosites were set to a 1% false discovery rate, the minimum length allowed was 6 amino acids and a minimum Andromeda score of 40. The match between run (MBR) feature was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the third leading cause of deaths from cancer worldwide. Infection with the hepatitis B virus is one of the leading risk factors for developing hepatocellular carcinoma, particularly in East Asia<sup>1</sup>. Although surgical treatment may be effective in the early stages, the five-year overall rate of survival after developing this cancer is only 50-70%<sup>2</sup>. Here, using proteomic and phospho-proteomic profiling, we characterize 110 paired tumour and non-tumour tissues of clinical early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma related to hepatitis B virus infection. Our quantitative proteomic data highlight heterogeneity in early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma: we used this to stratify the cohort into the subtypes S-I, S-II and S-III, each of which has a different clinical outcome. S-III, which is characterized by disrupted cholesterol homeostasis, is associated with the lowest overall rate of survival and the greatest risk of a poor prognosis after first-line surgery. The knockdown of sterol O-acyltransferase 1 (SOAT1)-high expression of which is a signature specific to the S-III subtype-alters the distribution of cellular cholesterol, and effectively suppresses the proliferation and migration of hepatocellular carcinoma. Finally, on the basis of a patient-derived tumour xenograft mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma, we found that treatment with avasimibe, an inhibitor of SOAT1, markedly reduced the size of tumours that had high levels of SOAT1 expression. The proteomic stratification of early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma presented in this study provides insight into the tumour biology of this cancer, and suggests opportunities for personalized therapies that target it.

### Keywords
Hepatocellular carcinoma, Phosphoproteome, Therapeutic targets

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China

### Submitter
yang zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Fuchu He
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China


