### Accession
PXD000693

### Title
LC-MS/MS to identify proteins present in apoplastic fluid extracted from WT and ca1ca4 mutant Arabidopsis plants grown under low and high CO2 conditions

### Description
geLC-MS/MS analysis was performed to identify proteins that are present in apoplastic fluid isolated from rosette leaves of 8-week-old wild type and carbonic anhydrase (ca1ca4) mutant Arabidopsis. Plants were grown in either low (150 ppm) or high (500 ppm) CO2.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from apoplastic fluid were extracted by addition of equal volume Tris-buffered phenol. After centrifugation at 10,000 x g for  10 minutes, the aqueous phase was removed and proteins in the organic phase precipitated by adding 5 volumesof 0.1 M  ammonium acetate in methanol. After overnight incubation at -20°C, the samples werecentrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 minutes and  the pelleted proteins washed twice with 80% acetone.Protein pellets in 80% acetone were air-dried, resuspended in SDS-PAGE  loading buffer and 50μg separated by SDS-PAGE in a 10% gel. Proteins were visualized by Coomassie Blue G-250staining, and each sample lane cut into 10 separate gel slices. Reduction, alkylation and in-gel trypsin digest of the individual gel slices was  performed as described previously41. Tryptic peptides were extracted by sequential addition and removal of 100 μl 1% trifluoroaceticacid (TFA), 50% acetonitrile (ACN) /1% TFA twice, then 100% ACN. Solutions containing the extracted peptides for each sample  were pooled in a fresh tube and lyophilized overnight. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 1.0 % formic acid/5% ACN, applied to a12 cm 150 μm inner diameter silica column packed in-house with Magic C18 media (Michrom BioResources, Inc.) and eluted into  the nanoelectrospray ion source of a LTQ-Orbitrap LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer (Thermoelectron Corp., Rockford, IL, USA)  controlled by XCalibur version 2.2.1. A fully automated chromatography run using 0.1% formic acid (Buffer A) and 99.9% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (Buffer B) was performed with the following settings: increase from 0 to 40% buffer B over 70 minutes, increase to 80% buffer B in 1 minute and hold at 80% buffer B for 5 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Mascot Distiller version 2.3.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). Mascot (server version 2.3,  Matrix Science, London, UK) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version 2010.12.01.1) were used to analyze the MS/MS spectra by searching an in-house Arabidopsis TAIR10 protein database assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0.80 Da. Oxidation of methionine and iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications with identifications accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental stimuli, including elevated carbon dioxide levels, regulate stomatal development; however, the key mechanisms mediating the perception and relay of the CO2 signal to the stomatal development machinery remain elusive. To adapt CO2 intake to water loss, plants regulate the development of stomatal gas exchange pores in the aerial epidermis. A diverse range of plant species show a decrease in stomatal density in response to the continuing rise in atmospheric CO2 (ref. 4). To date, one mutant that exhibits deregulation of this CO2-controlled stomatal development response, hic (which is defective in cell-wall wax biosynthesis, ref. 5), has been identified. Here we show that recently isolated Arabidopsis thaliana &#x3b2;-carbonic anhydrase double mutants (ca1&#xa0;ca4) exhibit an inversion in their response to elevated CO2, showing increased stomatal development at elevated CO2 levels. We characterized the mechanisms mediating this response and identified an extracellular signalling pathway involved in the regulation of CO2-controlled stomatal development by carbonic anhydrases. RNA-seq analyses of transcripts show that the extracellular pro-peptide-encoding gene EPIDERMAL PATTERNING FACTOR 2 (EPF2), but not EPF1 (ref. 9), is induced in wild-type leaves but not in ca1&#xa0;ca4 mutant leaves at elevated CO2 levels. Moreover, EPF2 is essential for CO2 control of stomatal development. Using cell-wall proteomic analyses and CO2-dependent transcriptomic analyses, we identified a novel CO2-induced extracellular protease, CRSP (CO2 RESPONSE SECRETED PROTEASE), as a mediator of CO2-controlled stomatal development. Our results identify mechanisms and genes that function in the repression of stomatal development in leaves during atmospheric CO2 elevation, including the carbonic-anhydrase-encoding genes CA1 and CA4 and the secreted protease CRSP, which cleaves the pro-peptide EPF2, in turn repressing stomatal development. Elucidation of these mechanisms advances the understanding of how plants perceive and relay the elevated CO2 signal and provides a framework to guide future research into how environmental challenges can modulate gas exchange in plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms, Apoplast, Extracellular

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri
Biochemistry

### Submitter
Jeff Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Scott C Peck
Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri


