### Accession
PXD000835

### Title
Pacific Oyster Ctenidia Proteomics

### Description
Pacific oysters (Crassostrea gigas) were exposed to either 400 µatm (control) or 2800 µatm (ocean acidification) of pCO2 for 1 month.  At the end of 1 month, half of the oysters from each pCO2 treatment were subjected to an additional mechanical stimulation.  Gill (ctenidia) tissue was excised from 4 oysters from each of 4 treatments - 400 and 2800 µatm with and without mechanical stimulation.  Tandem mass spectrometry was performed on all 16 samples on a LTQ Orbitrap XL with 3 technical replicates per biological sample.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted oyster gill protein samples were trypsin digested and desalted before chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Peptides were trapped on a 100 µm i.d. x 20 mm long pre-column packed with 200 A (5 µm) Magic C18 particles.  For separation, a 75 µm i.d. x 250 mm long analytical column with a laser pulled emitter tip lacked with 100 A (5 µm) Magic C18 particles was used and analysed in the positive ion mode.  For each analysis approximately 0.5 µg of peptides was loaded onto the pre-column at 2 µl/min in water/acetonitrile (98%/2%) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  Peptides were eluted using an acentonitrile gradient flowing at 240 nl/min, using a mobile phase gradient of increasing concentration of acentonitrile in water iwth 0.1% formic acid.  High resolution precursor ion scans were acquired at 60000 resolution in the Orbitrap over 400-2000 m/z while 6 consecutive tandem mass spectra were acquired by collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap.  The data-dependent threshold was set at 5000 counts for MS/MS, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 400 ms for full scans and 100 ms for MS/MS measurements.  The number of ions accumulated was set to 1E6 for Orbitrap scans and 1E4 for linear ion trap MS/MS scans.  An angiotensitn and neurotensis standard was run after every 8 injections.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequence and corresponding protein identification for all mass spectra was carried out using SEQUEST and the C. gigas proteome version 9 (http://dx.doi.org/10.5524/100030).  A DECOY database was created by reversing the c. gigas proteome and adding it to the forward database.  This yielded a false discovery rate of ~0.6%.  Search parameters included trypsin as the assigned enzyme and a precursor mass accuracy of +/- 0.3 Da.  SEQUEST results were analysed using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet in order to evaluate peptide matches statistically and assign protein probabilities.  Only proteins with a probability of at least 0.9 (estimated FDR of 0.6%), a minimuym of 2 unique peptide hits within a single replicate, and a minimum of 4 total tandem mass spectral assignments in the combined technical and biological replicagtes were used in further characterizations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pacific oyster, Ocean acidification

### Affiliations
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Roberts
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


