### Accession
PXD005756

### Title
Quantification of the GDNF-regulated proteome and phosphoproteome in spermatogonial progenitor cells (SPCs)

### Description
A quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteome and phosphoproteome profiles of SPCs following sustained stimulation with glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF).

### Sample Protocol
We first established cell cultures using validated protocols for the long-term in vitro propagation of mouse SPCs. Next, we compared the proteomes and phosphoproteomes of SPCs after overnight GDNF starvation and re-exposure to GDNF for 3 hours, using 3 independent lines as biological replicates. After digestion of extracted proteins with trypsin, purified Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 6-plex-labelled peptides from untreated (GDNF starved) and treated (GDNF replenished) replicates were pooled, and phosphopeptides were fractionated by high‐pH reversed phase, tandemly enriched by IMAC and TiO2. All samples were analyzed using LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry, and raw spectra were processed using MaxQuant-1.3.0.5.

### Data Protocol
Using a false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 0.01 for peptides and proteins, we identified 7921 proteins in SPCs with high confidence.Among these, 34 proteins were upregulated and 22 proteins were downregulated in response to GDNF. We identified 3382 proteins that were phosphorylated at one or multiple residues, including a total of 12141 phosphorylation sites,which encompassed 10450 serines (86%), 1524 threonines (12.6%) and 167 (1.4%) tyrosines.

### Publication Abstract
Cytokine-dependent renewal of stem cells is a fundamental requisite for tissue homeostasis and regeneration. Spermatogonial progenitor cells (SPCs) including stem cells support life-long spermatogenesis and male fertility, but pivotal phosphorylation events that regulate fate decisions in SPCs remain unresolved. Here, we described a quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses of SPCs following sustained stimulation with glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), an extrinsic factor supporting SPC proliferation. Stimulated SPCs contained 3382 identified phosphorylated proteins and 12141 phosphorylation sites. Of them, 325 differentially phosphorylated proteins and 570 phosphorylation sites triggered by GDNF were highly enriched for ERK1/2, GSK3, CDK1, and CDK5 phosphorylating motifs. We validated that inhibition of GDNF/ERK1/2-signaling impaired SPC proliferation and increased G2/M cell cycle arrest. Significantly, we found that proliferation of SPCs requires phosphorylation of the mTORC1 component Raptor at Ser<sup>863</sup> Tissue-specific deletion of <i>Raptor</i> in mouse germline cells results in impaired spermatogenesis and progressive loss of spermatogonia, but <i>in vitro</i> increased phosphorylation of Raptor by raptor over-expression in SPCs induced a more rapidly growth of SPCs in culture. These findings implicate previously undescribed signaling networks in governing fate decision of SPCs, which is essential for the understanding of spermatogenesis and of potential consequences of pathogenic insult for male infertility.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Spc

### Affiliations
Nanjing medical university
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 101 Longmian Rd, Jiangning District, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China.

### Submitter
hao zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 101 Longmian Rd, Jiangning District, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, China.


