### Accession
PXD019909

### Title
Spatially and cell-type resolved quantitative proteomic atlas of healthy human skin

### Description
Human skin provides both physical integrity and immunological protection from the external environment, using functionally distinct layers, cell types and extracellular matrix. Despite its central role in human health and disease, the constituent proteins of skin have not been systematically characterized. Here, we combined advanced tissue dissection methods, flow cytometry and state-of-the-art proteomics to describe a spatially-resolved quantitative proteomic atlas of human skin.  We quantified 10,701 proteins as a function of their spatial location and cellular origin. The resulting protein atlas and our initial data analyses demonstrate the value of proteomics for understanding cell-type diversity within the skin. We describe here the quantitative distribution of structural proteins, known and novel proteins specific to cellular subsets and those with specialized immunological funtions such as cytokines and chemokines. We anticipate this proteomic atlas of human skin will become an essential community resource for basic and translational research (www.skin.science).

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Samples of skin layers were supended in 200 µl, 50 mM Tris-HCl and individually mixed using an ultra-Turrax blender (T 10 basic ultra, IKA, Staufen, Germany) for 30s x 8 while kept on ice.  Lysis buffer (200 µL, 99 % 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE)  and 5mM DTT) was added, and the samples were boiled for 10 minutes in the thermomixer. The protocol was slightly modified for the cultivated cells and FACS sorted cells where there was no need for tissue fragmentation. Lysis buffer (containing 20 % TFE/ 39,5 mMTRIS HCL/ 5mM DTT) was added directly to the cell pellets and vortexed for 30 seconds, and the samples were boiled for 10 minutes in the thermomixer. The samples were placed shortly on ice and subsequently sonicated using a biorupter 15 cycles of 30 seconds. To prevent the disulfide-bonds to restore, IAA were added to a final concentration of 25 mM. The samples were left in dark for 20 minutes and dried using Speed-Vac for 30 minutes at 30 ̊C. 200 µL digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8) was added with 8 µL Lys-C and 8 µL trypsin (dependent on the cell number to an estimated enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50), and left overnight in thermomixer at agitation (37 ̊C, 1300 rpm) to be digested. The following day peptides  were acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for binding to SDB-RPS StageTips. The samples were loaded on 4 layers SDS-RPS material Stage-Tip plugs, and centrifuged at 500g for 10 minutes. The samples were washed twice with 0,2% TFA (200 µL), and lastly eluted with an elution buffer (60 µL, 80% acetonitrile/1% ammonia) onto a MS-plate and dried using a Speed-Vac (45 minutes at 45 ̊C). Peptides were resuspended in 8 µL, 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and peptide concentration was estimated using the Nanodrop®. In addition to the sample processing of each individual sample, we created matching libraries for high-pH reversed phase fractionation. About 20 µg of peptides were further fractionated into 8/16 fractions. 500ng of each unfractionated and fractionated samples was used for subsequent LC-MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Nanoflow LC–MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was conducted on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer  (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany)14 coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray ion source. 500 ng of peptides were loaded on a 50-cm HPLC-column (75 μm inner diameter, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 2 to 20% B in 55 minutes and stepped up to 40% in 40 minutes followed by a 5 minutes wash at 98% B at 350 nl per minute where solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B was 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water. The total duration of the run was 100 minutes. Column temperature was kept at 60 °C using an in-house-developed oven.  For spectral library generation, samples were fractionated using a high pH reversed-phase fractionator as previously described and measured in DDA mode57. Briefly, the mass spectrometer was operated in ‘top‐15’ data‐dependent mode, collecting MS spectra in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (60,000 resolution, 300–1,650 m/z range) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6 and a maximum ion injection time of 25 ms. The most intense ions from the full scan were isolated with an isolation width of 1.4 m/z. Following higher‐energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27, MS/MS spectra were collected in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution) with an AGC target of 1E5 and a maximum ion injection time of 28 ms. Precursor dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 30 seconds.  For DIA, the acquisition method consisted of one MS1 scan (350 or 300 to 1,650 m/z, resolution 60,000 or 120,000, maximum injection time 60 ms, AGC target 3E6) and 32 segments at varying isolation windows from 14,4 m/z to 562,8 m/z (resolution 30,000, maximum injection time 54 ms, AGC target 3E6). Stepped normalized collision energy was 25, 27.5 and 30. The default charge state for MS2 was set to 2.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis DIA raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut Pulsar X software (Biognosys, version 12.0.20491.17) and default settings for targeted DIA analysis with the ‘mutated’ as decoy method. Data export was filtered by ‘No Decoy’ and ‘Quantification Data Filtering’ for peptide and protein quantifications.  DDA raw files were processed in the MaxQuant environment (1.6.3.4)58. The integrated Andromeda search engine was used for peptide and protein identification at an FDR of less than 1%. The human UniProtKB database (October 2017) was used as forward database and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search. ‘Trypsin’ was set as the enzyme specificity. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, acetyl (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. We required a minimum of 7 amino acids for peptide identification. Proteins that could not be discriminated by unique peptides were assigned to the same protein group. The ‘match-between-runs’ (MBR) option was enabled. MBR was restriced to samples of the same type (skin primary cells, skin tissue layers). Label free quantification was performed using the iBAQ approach59. Proteins, which were found as reverse hits or only identified by site-modification, were filtered out. Prior to data analysis, samples were median normalized (column-wise for each sample).  Statistical analysis All statistical and bioinformatic analyses were performed using Perseus59, the R framework (https://www.r-project.org/) and CKG’s Analytics core60. Heatmaps were generated using the open source tool Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus). Missing values (those displayed as 0 or ‘NaN’ in the MaxQuant output) were imputed using the MinProb approach (random draws from a Gaussian distribution; width = 0.3 and downshift = 1.8).

### Publication Abstract
Human skin provides both physical integrity and immunological protection from the external environment using functionally distinct layers, cell types and extracellular matrix. Despite its central role in human health and disease, the constituent proteins of skin have not been systematically characterized. Here, we combine advanced tissue dissection methods, flow cytometry and state-of-the-art proteomics to describe a spatially-resolved quantitative proteomic atlas of human skin. We quantify 10,701 proteins as a function of their spatial location and cellular origin. The resulting protein atlas and our initial data analyses demonstrate the value of proteomics for understanding cell-type diversity within the skin. We describe the quantitative distribution of structural proteins, known and previously undescribed proteins specific to cellular subsets and those with specialized immunological functions such as cytokines and chemokines. We anticipate that this proteomic atlas of human skin will become an essential community resource for basic and translational research ( https://skin.science/ ).

### Keywords
Stratum corneum, T cell, Dermis, Melanocytes, Macrophages, Endothelial cells, Keratin, Subcutis, Interleukins, Collagen, Proteomics, Protein expression, Skin, Mast cell, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried (near Munich) Germany

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried (near Munich) Germany


