### Accession
PXD043392

### Title
N-terminus of Spt16 anchors FACT to Mcm2 for parental histone recycling

### Description
Parental histone recycling is essential for the restoration of chromatin-based epigenetic information during chromatin replication; however, the specific mechanisms underlying the local recycling of parental histones remain poorly understood. Here, we reveal an unexpected role of the Spt16-N domain in histone chaperone FACT during parental histone recycling and transfer in budding yeast. We found that depletion of Spt16 or mutations in the Spt16 middle domain leads to defects in both parental histone recycling and new histone deposition, affecting both the leading and lagging strands of DNA replication forks, highlighting the essential role of the FACT complex in both parental histone recycling and new histone deposition. Surprisingly, Spt16-N deletion results in an apparent defect in parental histone recycling, with a more pronounced defect on the lagging strand than the corresponding leading strand. Mechanistically, the Spt16-N domain acts as a protective barrier, shielding FACT-bound histone H3-H4 and facilitating its interaction with Mcm2, which ensures efficient local parental histone recycling. Collectively, the Spt16-N domain provides a protein–protein interaction module allowing FACT to act as a shuttle chaperone, cooperate with multiple replisome components, which act as co-chaperones, to form a complex involving the shuttle chaperone, histones, and co-chaperones, during parental histone recycling and transfer.

### Sample Protocol
Sample digestion: 1. Add 20μl 8M urea to the protein precipitation until the white protein is dissolved.  2. Add 1/20 volume of 100mM DTT and incubate at 37℃ for 1h.  3. Add 1/20 volume 200mM IAA and incubate at room temperature away from light for 1h.  4. 75μl of 25mM NH4HCO3 containing pancreatic enzyme was added to dilute urea to less than 2M, and incubated at 37℃ overnight. (trypsin: protein=1:50 mass ratio)  5. Add 4μl 2.5%TFA to terminate the enzymolysis.  6. Peptide desalination, spin dry. LC-MS/MS detection:  1. The peptide sample was dissolved with 0.1% formic acid mass spectrometry water, the concentration was about 0.1μg/μl, 16700g centrifuge for 12min, and the supernatant was taken into the mass spectrometry sample tube.  2. EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography, C18 liquid chromatography column and Thermo Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer were used for LC-MS/MS detection. The mobile phase of the liquid chromatography consisted of 0.1% formic acid in phase A and 80% acetonitrile /0.1% formic acid in phase B, and the flow rate was 280 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
1. The quantitative LC-MS/MS results are processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software, and the main parameter Settings as following: Database: Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae  Protease: Trypsin  Maximum number of missed cuts: 2  Fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation  Variable modification: Oxidation (methionine); Acetylation  Precursor ion mass tolerance: 10 ppm  Fragment ion mass tolerance: 0.02 Da  Minimum peptide length :6 amino acids  protein-level FDR: 1%  peptide-level FDR: 1%  Ratios of WT and mutant are constructed to assess the difference of protein level. To evaluate the protein level changes, the log2 ratios were averaged between the three biological replicates. Lists of proteins up- or down-regulated for mutants were generated by selecting protein level changes beyond mean ±1 SD (standard deviation). Benjamini p-value was calculated from log10-transformed WT/mutant ratio. Protein information was obtained from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD, http://yeast genome.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Parental histone recycling is vital for maintaining chromatin-based epigenetic information during replication, yet its underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we uncover an unexpected role of histone chaperone FACT and its N-terminus of the Spt16 subunit during parental histone recycling and transfer in budding yeast. Depletion of Spt16 and mutations at its middle domain that impair histone binding compromise parental histone recycling on both the leading and lagging strands of DNA replication forks. Intriguingly, deletion of the Spt16-N domain impairs parental histone recycling, with a more pronounced defect observed on the lagging strand. Mechanistically, the Spt16-N domain interacts with the replicative helicase MCM2-7 and facilitates the formation of a ternary complex involving FACT, histone H3/H4&#xa0;and Mcm2 histone binding domain, critical for the recycling and transfer of parental histones to lagging strands. Lack of the Spt16-N domain weakens the FACT-MCM interaction and reduces parental histone recycling. We propose that the Spt16-N domain acts as a protein-protein interaction module, enabling FACT to function as a shuttle chaperone in collaboration with Mcm2 and potentially other replisome components for efficient local parental histone recycling and inheritance.

### Keywords
Fact，parental histone recycling, Mcm2-7

### Affiliations
Peking University
State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences and Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

### Submitter
Qing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Li
State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences and Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.


