### Accession
PXD024582

### Title
Identification of alpha-satellite RNA interacting proteins

### Description
We set out to identify proteins that bind alpha-satellite ncRNAs in HCT-116 and SW-480 colorectal cancer human cell lines. We performed RNA pulldown followed by mass spectrometry identification of the associated proteins. Among the identified proteins, we observed a statistical overrepresenttion of some ontology ssociated to mitotic progression in HCT-116 cells, but not in SW-480 cells.

### Sample Protocol
We determined the consensus sequence of the different alpha-satellite monomers in the CGSW2 sequence (cloned by us, genbank accession: MW491379), which consists of 5 alpha-satellite monomers. Biotinylated probes against the resulting consensus sequence were designed. Then, we performed RNA pulldown. Briefly, we transcribed the 5R RNA in vitro and incubated 400 pmol of denatured RNA with 500 pmol of biotinylated probe in 50 mM KCl supplemented with 120 U of RNAseOUTTM (Invitrogen, 10777019) for 1 h at RT. The RNA:probe complex was then incubated with magnetic streptavidin beads (2.5 mg) in 100 mM KCl, 5% glycerol, 5 mM HEPES, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.25% Triton X-100 and 120 U RNAseOUTTM for an additional 30 min at RT. RNA:probe:bead complexes were washed 2 times in 50 mM KCl. Cells were lysed first in hypotonic buffer (10× the pellet volume): 10 mM Tris (pH 7.9), 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP40, 40 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.2 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM PNPP, 2 mM DTT, 1× Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), and 10 nM PMSF for 30 min at 4°C. Nuclei were centrifuged at 4°C for 1 min at 600 × g, and the pellet was washed once with 1 mL of hypotonic buffer. Nuclear extract was recovered through the addition of RIPA lysis buffer and centrifugation at full speed for 10 min at 4°C. Nuclear extracts were resuspended in 150 mM KCl, 10% glycerol, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 15 µg/mL tRNA, 1 mM DTT and 240 U RNAse, and 4 mg of nuclear extract in 2 mL was added to dried RNA:probe:beads and incubated for 2 h at 4°C. After 2 washes in the same buffer, the bound proteins were resuspended in Laemmli buffer, separated in a precast gel (Invitrogen) and sent for mass spectrometry analysis. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1).  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.    On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). References: 1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91

### Data Protocol
As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (1).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.    References: 1. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994

### Publication Abstract
Cell cycle progression requires control of the abundance of several proteins and RNAs over space and time to properly transit from one phase to the next and to ensure faithful genomic inheritance in daughter cells. The proteasome, the main protein degradation system of the cell, facilitates the establishment of a proteome specific to each phase of the cell cycle. Its activity also strongly influences transcription. Here, we detected the upregulation of repetitive RNAs upon proteasome inhibition in human cancer cells using RNA-seq. The effect of proteasome inhibition on centromeres was remarkable, especially on &#x3b1;-Satellite RNAs. We showed that &#x3b1;-Satellite RNAs fluctuate along the cell cycle and interact with members of the cohesin ring, suggesting that these transcripts may take part in the regulation of mitotic progression. Next, we forced exogenous overexpression and used gapmer oligonucleotide targeting to demonstrate that &#x3b1;-Sat RNAs have regulatory roles in mitosis. Finally, we explored the transcriptional regulation of &#x3b1;-Satellite DNA. Through in&#x2009;silico analyses, we detected the presence of CCAAT transcription factor-binding motifs within &#x3b1;-Satellite centromeric arrays. Using high-resolution three-dimensional immuno-FISH and ChIP-qPCR, we showed an association between the &#x3b1;-Satellite upregulation and the recruitment of the transcription factor NFY-A to the centromere upon MG132-induced proteasome inhibition. Together, our results show that the proteasome controls &#x3b1;-Satellite RNAs associated with the regulation of mitosis.

### Keywords
Alpha satellite, Rna pulldown, Ncrna

### Affiliations
Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología-Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, UNAM/ Dirección General, Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Periférico Sur 4809, Arenal Tepepan, 1450 Tlalpan, Ciudad de México
Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer - UNAM - Instituto Nacional de Cancerología

### Submitter
Rodrigo Cáceres

### Lab Head
Dr Luis A. Herrera
Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología-Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, UNAM/ Dirección General, Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Periférico Sur 4809, Arenal Tepepan, 1450 Tlalpan, Ciudad de México


