### Accession
PXD020451

### Title
Protein kinase A controls the hexosamine pathway by tuning feedback inhibition of GFAT-1

### Description
The hexosamine pathway (HP) is a key anabolic pathway whose product uridine 5’-diphospho-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) is an essential precursor for all glycosylation processes in mammals. It modulates the ER stress response, is implicated in cancer and diabetes, and HP activation extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. The highly conserved glutamine fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase 1 (GFAT 1) is the first and rate-limiting HP enzyme. GFAT 1 activity is modulated through UDP-GlcNAc feedback inhibition and by kinase signaling, including Ser205 phosphorylation by protein kinase A (PKA). The consequence and molecular mechanism of GFAT 1 PKA phosphorylation, however, remains poorly understood. Here, we identify the GFAT 1 R203H substitution that elevates UDP-GlcNAc levels in C. elegans, leading to ER stress resistance. In human GFAT-1, the R203H substitution interfered with UDP-GlcNAc inhibition and with PKA-mediated Ser205 phosphorylation. Of note, Ser205 phosphorylation had two discernible effects: It lowered baseline GFAT 1 activity while abolishing UDP-GlcNAc feedback inhibition. Thus, GFAT-1 phosphorylation by PKA uncoupled the feedback loop of the HP and depending on UDP-GlcNAc availability, phosphorylation by PKA lowers or enhances GFAT 1 activity in vivo. Mechanistically, our data indicate that the relative positioning of the two GFAT 1 domains might be affected by phosphorylation and we propose a model how Ser205 phosphorylation modulates the activity and feedback inhibition of GFAT 1.

### Sample Protocol
One fifth of the desalted pep STAGE tip purified peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1 % formic acid in water and 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6 % to 31 % buffer B for 57 min and from 31 % to 44 % buffer B for 5 min at 200 nl/min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z was measured at 60000 resolution in the 350 to 1500 m/z range. Precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 27 % normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 30000 using an AGC target of 2e5 and 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.  Heavy synthetic peptides, corresponding to phosphorylated Ser205, read below, were separated on a segmented gradient from 6 % to 60 % buffer B for 62 min at 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometric analysis was carried out as described above. The phosphorylated (Ser205, pS), heavily labeled (K*) reference peptides Maxi SpikeTides L (wild type: SVHFPGQAVGTRRG-pS-PLLIGVRSEH-K* and mutant R203H: SVHFPGQAVGTRHG-pS-PLLIGVRSEH-K*) were purchased from JPT Peptide Technologies (Berlin, Germany). Heavy peptides were dissolved in 50 % acetonitrile, 0.05 % formic acid in water and sonicated in a water bath for one minute. The solution was further diluted using 0.1 % formic acid in water for a final peptide concentration of 7 nM. The solution was aliquoted and stored at -20°C. For analysis, desalted GFAT-1 peptides were dissolved in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid in water and 2 µL of the peptide solution were combined with 2 µL of the tenfold diluted heavy peptide solution; 2 µL were analyzed by targeted mass spectrometry. For targeted analysis, peptides were separated as described above. Targeted analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The m/z values for charge states 4 and 5 from the heavy and light peptide were chosen for targeted fragmentation across the entire LC run. The isolation width was 1.6 and collision energy was set to 27 %. Fragment m/z values were measured in the Orbitrap in profile mode, at a resolution of 60K, an AGC target of 5e4, and a maximum injection time of 118 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 using the integrated Andromeda search engine67,68. Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against manually created GFAT-1 fasta file. The database was automatically complemented with sequences of contaminating proteins by MaxQuant. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and Phospho (STY) were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “LysC/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. For the analysis of the raw data from the synthetic heave peptides, Lys8 was set as “Standard” and used as a variable modification. Raw data was analyzed using Skyline69 version 19.1.0.193.  A library was built from the untargeted analysis of the heavy peptides. The library ion match tolerance was set to 0.05 m/z, the 10 most intense product ions were picked. Ions with charges 1 or 2 and type y an b were used for quantification. An isotope modification of type “Label” was created using the following modification: 13C(6)25N(2) (K). Isotope label type and internal standard type were set to “heavy”. For quantification, MS level was set to 2. Results at the peptide and the precursor level were exported and used for downstream data analysis and visualization. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1106) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD020451.

### Publication Abstract
The hexosamine pathway (HP) is a key anabolic pathway whose product uridine 5'-diphospho-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) is an essential precursor for glycosylation processes in mammals. It modulates the ER stress response and HP activation extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. The highly conserved glutamine fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase 1 (GFAT-1) is the rate-limiting HP enzyme. GFAT-1 activity is modulated by UDP-GlcNAc feedback inhibition and via phosphorylation by protein kinase A (PKA). Molecular consequences of GFAT-1 phosphorylation, however, remain poorly understood. Here, we identify the GFAT-1 R203H substitution that elevates UDP-GlcNAc levels in C. elegans. In human GFAT-1, the R203H substitution interferes with UDP-GlcNAc inhibition and with PKA-mediated Ser205 phosphorylation. Our data indicate that phosphorylation affects the interactions of the two GFAT-1 domains to control catalytic activity. Notably, Ser205 phosphorylation has two discernible effects: it lowers baseline GFAT-1 activity and abolishes UDP-GlcNAc feedback inhibition. PKA controls the HP by uncoupling the metabolic feedback loop of GFAT-1.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Pka

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing D-50931 Cologne, Germany  CECAD - Cluster of Excellence University of Cologne D-50931 Cologne, Germany  Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC) University of Cologne D-50931 Cologne, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Martin S. Denzel
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing D-50931 Cologne, Germany  CECAD - Cluster of Excellence University of Cologne D-50931 Cologne, Germany  Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC) University of Cologne D-50931 Cologne, Germany


