### Accession
PXD005610

### Title
Label free quantitative mass spectrometry identifies platelet degranulation as an early event during platelet storage

### Description
Shelf life of platelet concentrates (PCs) is limited to up to 7 days due to loss of platelet functionality during storage, commonly referred to as the platelet storage lesion (PSL). To get more insight into the development of the PSL, we used label free quantitative mass spectrometry to identify changes in the platelet proteome during storage. In total 2501 proteins were accurately quantified in 3 biological replicates on at least 1 of the 7 different time-points analyzed. Significant changes in levels of 21 proteins were observed over time. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of these proteins revealed that the majority of this set was involved in platelet degranulation, secretion and regulated exocytosis. Twelve of these proteins, which included SPARC and von Willebrand factor (VWF), have been shown to reside in α-granules; a significant decline in levels of these proteins was already observed at day 5 of storage. A strongly reduced level of Protein S100A9 (S100A9) which is predominantly localized in the cytoplasm was observed at day 5 of storage. We also monitored changes upon prolonged storage (13-16 days); identifying elevated levels of α-2-macroglobulin, glycogenin and Ig μ chain C region. The ability of platelets to bind and/or endocytose α-2-macroglobulin was confirmed by confocal microscopy. Taken together, our data show that release of α-granules is an early event during platelet storage. In addition, we show that platelets can bind or ingest proteins during storage which may have impact on the hemostatic properties of platelets used for transfusion.

### Sample Protocol
About 100x10^6 platelets in 25 µl wash buffer were lysed in 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), the protein concentration was determined and 5 μg of protein was used for sample preparation for mass spectrometry. Disulphide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 60 minutes at 20°C, alkylated with 55 mM iodocetamide for 45 minutes at 20°C, and samples were digested overnight at 20°C with MS-grade trypsin (Promega) (in a protein:trypsin ratio of 20:1). Peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips 46 and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile as described 27. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 5 μl. Three μl was injected in the Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Orbitrap Fusion).  Tryptic peptides derived from were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific), using the same settings as described in Gazendam et al. 2016 27. All MS data were acquired with Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, 1.5.2.8 28. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded February 2015) 29. Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for reverse hits, ‘only identified by site’ and potential contaminants using Perseus 1.5.1.6. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale. Samples were grouped per time point (7 groups, 3 samples per group) and proteins were filtered for at least 3 valid values on at least one of the 7 time points. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. The global changes in protein levels were assessed employing the analysis-of-variance function of Perseus, proteins with FDR p-values lower than 0.05 (S0: 0.2) were considered to be significantly changed over time. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of biological processes, molecular functions and cellular compartments of the significantly different proteins was performed using the CytoScape (version 3.3.0) 30 plug-in BiNGO (version 3.0.3) 31. Ontology and annotation datasets were downloaded on April 4, 2016 from the Gene Ontology Consortium website (www.geneontology.org). The significantly differentially expressed proteins were compared to the accurately quantified proteins in the dataset. GO terms were assigned significantly enriched when p < 0.005.

### Publication Abstract
Shelf life of platelet concentrates is limited to 5-7 days due to loss of platelet function during storage, commonly referred to as the platelet storage lesion (PSL). To get more insight into the development of the PSL, we used label free quantitative mass spectrometry to identify changes in the platelet proteome during storage. In total 2501 proteins were accurately quantified in 3 biological replicates on at least 1 of the 7 different time-points analyzed. Significant changes in levels of 21 proteins were observed over time. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of these proteins revealed that the majority of this set was involved in platelet degranulation, secretion and regulated exocytosis. Twelve of these proteins have been shown to reside in &#x3b1;-granules. Upon prolonged storage (13-16 days) elevated levels of &#x3b1;-2-macroglobulin, glycogenin and Ig &#x3bc; chain C region were identified. Taken together this study identifies novel markers for monitoring of the PSL that may potentially also be used for the detection of "young" and "old" platelets in the circulation.

### Keywords
Alpha-granules, Platelet storage, Label free quantification, Proteomics, Platelets

### Affiliations
Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin-AMC Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Maaike Rijkers

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Voorberg
Department of Plasma Proteins, Sanquin-AMC Landsteiner Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


