### Accession
PXD009553

### Title
Quantitative proteomic profiling reveals key pathways in the anti-cancer action of methoxychalcone derivatives in triple negative breast cancer

### Description
Synthetic analogues of chalcones were investigated as potential therapeutics for triple negative breast cancer. These analogues were used in quantitative proteomic experiments to determine the mechanism of action.

### Sample Protocol
Cells incubated with drug or a DMSO vehicle control. Cells were washed, harvested, and pelleted. Samples were processed and labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Samples were analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC. Three microliters of sample were injected first onto a 5 mm C18 PepMap100 column for desalting, and then onto a PicoFrit self-pack analytical column (OD: 360 µm, ID: 75 µm, Tip: 15 ± 1 µm, no coating, New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed with 25 cm of MagicC18 AQ. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B was 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were separated over 100 minutes using a gradient of 2-35% B, followed by two minutes with a gradient of 35-85% B, and seven minutes at a constant 85% B. High energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) was performed for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantitation was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 and Perseus version 1.6.0.7. Triplicate runs were analyzed together as fractions in MaxQuant against the human Swiss-Prot database.

### Publication Abstract
Triple negative breast cancer is an aggressive, heterogeneous disease with high recurrence and metastasis rates even with modern chemotherapy regimens and thus is in need of new therapeutics. Here, three novel synthetic analogues of chalcones, plant-based molecules that have demonstrated potency against a wide variety of cancers, were investigated as potential therapeutics for triple negative breast cancer. These compounds exhibit IC<sub>50</sub> values of &#x223c;5 &#x3bc;M in triple negative breast cancer cell lines and are more potent against triple negative breast cancer cell lines than against nontumor breast cell lines according to viability experiments. Tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomics followed by gene set enrichment analysis and validation experiments using flow cytometry, apoptosis, and Western blot assays revealed three different anticancer mechanisms for these compounds. First, the chalcone analogues induce the unfolded protein response followed by apoptosis. Second, increases in the abundances of MHC-I pathway proteins occurs, which would likely result in immune stimulation in an organism. And third, treatment with the chalcone analogues causes disruption of the cell cycle by interfering with microtubule structure and by inducing G1 phase arrest. These data demonstrate the potential of these novel chalcone derivatives as treatments for triple negative breast cancer, though further work evaluating their efficacy in vivo is needed.

### Keywords
Drugs, Human, Cell lines, Breast cancer, Cancer

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Canary Center at Stanford For Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology School of Medicine Stanford University

### Submitter
Sharon Pitteri

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Pitteri
Canary Center at Stanford For Cancer Early Detection Department of Radiology School of Medicine Stanford University


