### Accession
PXD046954

### Title
Characterization of MdpS: An In-depth Analysis of a MUC5B-Degrading Protease from Streptococcus oralis

### Description
Oral biofilms, comprising hundreds of bacteria and other microorganisms on oral mucosal and dental surfaces, play a central role in oral health and disease dynamics. Streptococcus oralis, a key constituent of these biofilms, contribute significantly to their formation, serving as an early colonizer and microcolony scaffold. The interaction between S. oralis and the orally predominant mucin, MUC5B, is pivotal in biofilm development, yet the mechanism underlying MUC5B degradation remains poorly understood. This study introduces MdpS (Mucin Degrading Protease from Streptococcus oralis), a protease that extensively hydrolyses MUC5B and offers an insight into its sequence homology, physicochemical properties, and substrate- and amino acid specificity. MdpS exhibits high sequence conservation within the species and also explicitly among early biofilm colonizing streptococci. It is characterized as a calcium or magnesium dependent serine protease with strict physicochemical preferences, including narrow pH and temperature tolerance, and high sensitivity to increased sodium chloride and reducing agent concentrations. Furthermore, MdpS primarily hydrolyze proteins with O-glycans, but also show activity towards immunoglobulins IgA1/2 and IgM, suggesting potential immunomodulatory effects. Significantly, MdpS extensively degrades MUC5B in the N- and C-terminal domains, emphasizing its role in mucin degradation with implications in carbon and nitrogen sequestration for S. oralis with a potential function by cross-feeding the oral biofilm. Moreover, the enzyme displays amino acid preferences of serine, threonine or cysteine depending on substrate glycosylation. Understanding the interplay between S. oralis and MUC5B, facilitated by MdpS, has significant implications for the management of a healthy eubiotic oral microenvironment, offering potential targets for interventions aimed at modulating oral biofilm composition and succession. Additionally, the MdpS data challenges the presently acknowledged model of MUC5B degradation, because contrarily MdpS does not necessitate O-glycan removal prior to extensive peptide backbone hydrolysis. These findings emphasize the necessity for further research in this field.

### Sample Protocol
Etanercept hydrolysis: Native or deglycosylated Etanercept (Pfizer Inc.) was incubated with or without MdpS in 2 mM Ca2+ in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, prior to quenching the reaction with 2 mM Zn2+. The N – and O-glycans were removed before or after MdpS incubation by SialEXO (Genovis), OglyZOR (Genovis), GalNAcEXO (Genovis), and PNGaseF (Genovis) (4 h, 37 C) to evaluate MdpS glycan dependence and to reduce the peptide mass variation, simplifying the analysis. Fragments were separated using LC (Agilent Technologies 1290 Infinity, C18).   MdpS autoproteolysis: MdpS autoproteolysis was allowed in a reaction with 2 mM Ca2+ in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, using different incubation times, viz. 0, 2, 4, 8, 16, 24 h (37 C). The reactions were immediately quenched with 2 mM Zn2+ and kept in the freezer (18 h, -20 C) before denaturing and reducing using 4 M Guanidine Hydrochloride and 0.1 M DTT (1 h, 37 C). Protein fragments were separated using LC (Agilent Technologies 1290 Infinity, C4).  Cell localization analysis: The cell localization of MdpS was evaluated by analyzing the content in three different samples: papain-digested cells (surface associated: cell wall-attached), sonicated cells (lysate: intracellular and cell wall-attached), and the bacterial supernatant (extracellular). The S. oralis ATCC 9811 strain was cultivated in Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) broth (17 h, 37 °C) after which the cells and supernatant were separated and stored in the freezer (−20°C). One cell fraction was dissolved in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.6, (5% SDS) before being sonicated for release of intracellular proteins (6 × 5 min with an equally long pause between each step, 70% efficiency, kept on ice) after which the supernatant was collected. A second cell fraction was incubated with 5 μg papain (Sigma) and L-cys (1 h, 37°C), prior to inhibiting further hydrolysis with leupeptin (Sigma) and collecting the supernatant. The S. oralis supernatant was concentrated and re-buffered in PBS before being analyzed. The three samples were incubated with trypsin (Promega, United States)and separated using LC (Evosep ONE, nano-UHPLC, C18).

### Data Protocol
Etanercept hydrolysis: Fragments were analyzed by MS/MS (Bruker Impact II). MdpS hydrolysis sites were mapped using the Bruker Compass Data Analysis 5.2 and BioPharma Compass 4.0 software.  MdpS autoproteolysis: Protein fragments were analyzed by MS (Bruker Impact II). MdpS hydrolysis sites were mapped using the Bruker Compass Data Analysis 5.2 software.  Cell localization analysis: The three samples were analyzed by MS/MS (Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadropole-Orbitrap). The recognized MdpS peptide sequences were then identified and quantified from a database search with MaxQuant 1.6 against Streptococcus oralis with the mnemonic name STROR and taxon ID 1303 in the Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
Oral biofilms, comprising hundreds of bacteria and other microorganisms on oral mucosal and dental surfaces, play a central role in oral health and disease dynamics. <i>Streptococcus oralis</i>, a key constituent of these biofilms, contributes significantly to the formation of which, serving as an early colonizer and microcolony scaffold. The interaction between <i>S. oralis</i> and the orally predominant mucin, MUC5B, is pivotal in biofilm development, yet the mechanism underlying MUC5B degradation remains poorly understood. This study introduces MdpS (Mucin Degrading Protease from <i>Streptococcus oralis</i>), a protease that extensively hydrolyses MUC5B and offers an insight into its evolutionary conservation, physicochemical properties, and substrate- and amino acid specificity. MdpS exhibits high sequence conservation within the species and also explicitly among early biofilm colonizing streptococci. It is a calcium or magnesium dependent serine protease with strict physicochemical preferences, including narrow pH and temperature tolerance, and high sensitivity to increasing concentrations of sodium chloride and reducing agents. Furthermore, MdpS primarily hydrolyzes proteins with O-glycans, but also shows activity toward immunoglobulins IgA1/2 and IgM, suggesting potential immunomodulatory effects. Significantly, MdpS extensively degrades MUC5B in the N- and C-terminal domains, emphasizing its role in mucin degradation, with implications for carbon and nitrogen sequestration for <i>S. oralis</i> or oral biofilm cross-feeding. Moreover, depending on substrate glycosylation, the amino acids serine, threonine or cysteine triggers the enzymatic action. Understanding the interplay between <i>S. oralis</i> and MUC5B, facilitated by MdpS, has significant implications for the management of a healthy eubiotic oral microenvironment, offering potential targets for interventions aimed at modulating oral biofilm composition and succession. Additionally, since MdpS does not rely on O-glycan removal prior to extensive peptide backbone hydrolysis, the MdpS data challenges the current model of MUC5B degradation. These findings emphasize the necessity for further research in this field.

### Keywords
Mucin degradation, Oral biofilm, Serine protease, O-glycosylation, Streptococcus oralis, Muc5b

### Affiliations
Department of Oral Biology and Pathology, Faculty of Odontology, Malmö University, Malmö, Sweden
Malmö University

### Submitter
Fredrik Leo

### Lab Head
Dr Claes Wickström
Department of Oral Biology and Pathology, Faculty of Odontology, Malmö University, Malmö, Sweden


