### Accession
PXD046182

### Title
Cervical Cancer Tissue Immunopeptidomics

### Description
10 cervical cancer tissue tumour resections were analysed using an immunopeptidomics workflow.

### Sample Protocol
1 mL Protein A-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) were washed in 50 mM borate, 50 mM KCl (pH 8.0) solution and then incubated with 2 mg of pan-HLA-I antibody (W6/32) slowly rotating for 1 h at 4°C. The beads were washed in a column format with 0.2 M triethanolamine (pH 8.2), and the bound antibody was cross-linked by incubation with 40 mM dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (DMP) (Sigma) (pH 8.3) for 1 h at room temperature. Ice-cold 0.2 M Tris buffer (pH 8.0) was added to the mixture to stop the reaction. Unbound antibody was washed off the column by washing with 0.1 M citrate (pH 3.0), and the column was equilibrated in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) for further use. 5 × 108 cells pellets were lysed by using 10 mL lysis buffer (0.5% IGEPAL 630, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)), and mixed for 30 min. Tissues were homogenized using a bead-beater (Bertin Instruments). The lysate was centrifuged at 300 g for 10 min to remove nuclei and then at 15,000 g for 60 min to pellet other insoluble material. 1 mL W6/32 cross-linked to protein A-Sepharose beads (GE) was added to cleared lysates for 1h, and beads were washed with 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0) containing first 150 mM NaCl, then 450 mM NaCl, and next no salt. HLA-peptide complexes were eluted by using 5 mL 10% acetic acid and dried. After immunoprecipitation, peptide-HLA complexes were resuspended in 120 μL loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 1% acetonitrile (ACN) in water). Samples were fractioned by reverse-phase (RP) high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an Ultimate 300 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with a 4.6- by 50-mm Pro-Swift RP-1S column (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto the column and eluted using a 10 min linear gradient from 3% to 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 500 nL/min, and elution was monitored by light absorbance at 280 nm. Fractions were collected in 1-min intervals. Alternate fractions were combined in two final fractions (odd and even). Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS2 using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System supplemented with a PepMap C18 column, 2 μm particle size, 75 μm × 50 cm (Thermo Scientific) directly interphased with a Q-Exactive HFX Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A 60 min linear gradient from 3% to 25% ACN in 1% DMSO/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min was applied for peptide elution. Peptide ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using an Easy-Spray Source at 2000 V.  Ions were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition. Initially a full-MS1 scan (120,000 resolution, 60 ms accumulation time, AGC 3X106) was followed by 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (60,000 resolution, 120 ms accumulation time, AGC 5X105), with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and normalized HCD energy of 25%.

### Data Protocol
Data was analalysed by Peaks X software (Bioinformatics Solutions). A score threshold of -lg10P=20 was applied to achieve an overall FDR of 2.1% and 37661 peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the nature and extent of non-canonical human leukocyte antigen (HLA) presentation in tumour cells is a priority for target antigen discovery for the development of next generation immunotherapies in cancer. We here employ a de novo mass spectrometric sequencing approach with a refined, MHC-centric analysis strategy to detect non-canonical MHC-associated peptides specific to cancer without any prior knowledge of the target sequence from genomic or RNA sequencing data. Our strategy integrates MHC binding rank, Average local confidence scores, and peptide Retention time prediction for improved de novo candidate Selection; culminating in the machine learning model MARS. We benchmark our model on a large synthetic peptide library dataset and reanalysis of a published dataset of high-quality non-canonical MHC-associated peptide identifications in human cancer. We achieve almost 2-fold improvement for high quality spectral assignments in comparison to de novo sequencing alone with an estimated accuracy of above 85.7% when integrated with a stepwise peptide sequence mapping strategy. Finally, we utilize MARS to detect and validate lncRNA-derived peptides in human cervical tumour resections, demonstrating its suitability to discover novel, immunogenic, non-canonical peptide sequences in primary tumour tissue.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, High-risk hpv infection, Hla-associated peptides, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
University of Oxford University of Utrecht
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford University of Utrecht


