### Accession
PXD038119

### Title
Characteristics of Mycobacterium tuberculosis PtpA interaction and activity on the alpha subunit of human mitochondrial trifunctional protein, a key enzyme of lipid metabolism

### Description
Characteristics of Mycobacterium tuberculosis PtpA interaction and activity on the alpha subunit of human mitochondrial trifunctional protein, a key enzyme of lipid metabolism

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 60 min and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min and in darkness. Then, in-gel proteolytic digestion with trypsin and peptide extraction were performed. To verify the identity of the hTFP𝛼 immunopurified or produced as recombinant protein and for p-Tyr identification, peptide analyisis was carried out using a nano-HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Thermo) coupled to a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass  spectrometer (QExactive Plus, Thermo). Peptide mixtures were separated using a two-solvent system (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B: 0.1% 531 formic acid in acetonitrile) with a gradient from 0% to 90% of B) and a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min over 100 min.

### Data Protocol
PatternLab V (Version 539 5.0.0.109) was employed to generate a target-decoy database using sequences from E. coli and hTFP𝛼, PtpA, Jak, downloaded from the UniProt. In addition, 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants were included. The following search parameters were used: trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme with full specificity; oxidation of Met and phosphorylation on Tyr as variable modifications,carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification; and 35 ppm of tolerance from the measured precursor m/z. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro), and acceptable false discovery rate (FDR) criteria were set on ≤1% at the protein level and ≤2% at the peptide level and max tolearnce for precursor 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
During <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb)</i> infection, the virulence factor PtpA belonging to the protein tyrosine phosphatase family is delivered into the cytosol of the macrophage. PtpA interacts with numerous eukaryotic proteins modulating phagosome maturation, innate immune response, apoptosis, and potentially host-lipid metabolism, as previously reported by our group. <i>In vitro</i>, the human trifunctional protein enzyme (<i>h</i>TFP) is a <i>bona fide</i> PtpA substrate, a key enzyme of mitochondrial &#x3b2;-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids, containing two alpha and two beta subunits arranged in a tetramer structure. Interestingly, it has been described that the alpha subunit of <i>h</i>TFP (ECHA, <i>h</i>TFP&#x3b1;) is no longer detected in mitochondria during macrophage infection with the virulent <i>Mtb</i> H37Rv. To better understand if PtpA could be the bacterial factor responsible for this effect, in the present work, we studied in-depth the PtpA activity and interaction with <i>h</i>TFP<sub>&#x3b1;</sub>. With this aim, we performed docking and <i>in vitro</i> dephosphorylation assays defining the P-Tyr-271 as the potential target of mycobacterial PtpA, a residue located in the helix-10 of <i>h</i>TFP<sub>&#x3b1;</sub>, previously described as relevant for its mitochondrial membrane localization and activity. Phylogenetic analysis showed that Tyr-271 is absent in TFP<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> of bacteria and is present in more complex eukaryotic organisms. These results suggest that this residue is a specific PtpA target, and its phosphorylation state is a way of regulating its subcellular localization. We also showed that phosphorylation of Tyr-271 can be catalyzed by Jak kinase. In addition, we found by molecular dynamics that PtpA and <i>h</i>TFP<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> form a stable protein complex through the PtpA active site, and we determined the dissociation equilibrium constant. Finally, a detailed study of PtpA interaction with ubiquitin, a reported PtpA activator, showed that additional factors are required to explain a ubiquitin-mediated activation of PtpA. Altogether, our results provide further evidence supporting that PtpA could be the bacterial factor that dephosphorylates <i>h</i>TFP<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> during infection, potentially affecting its mitochondrial localization or &#x3b2;-oxidation activity.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Ptpa, Echa

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit. Institut Pasteur de Montevideo e IIBCE

### Submitter
Rosario Durán

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Duran
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit. Institut Pasteur de Montevideo e IIBCE


