### Accession
PXD022959

### Title
HTPS screen of coagulation proteases at 20C with NaCl, ChCl, LiCl

### Description
Goal of the experiment is the characterization of proteases activity and specificity upon Na+ binding. Na+ is an allosteric binders that can induce a conformational change of the protease AS to regulate activity and specificity; only proteases with Y and F in position 225 can coordinate a Na+ molecule.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the effect of Na+ on the proteases of the blood cascade we performed the assay in presence of 0.2M of NaCl or choline chloride (ChCl) as previously reported55. In some of the assays, LiCl was used as a control at 0.2M concentration in parallel with ChCl. We performed the digestion experiments with blood cascade proteases under both conditions for 2 hours at 20 °C in 96-well plates and collected the peptides as previously described. Additionally, before the LC-MS/MS analysis we performed a desalting step of the samples with C18 UltraMicroSpin columns according to the manufacturer’s protocol (The Nest group, USA). The dried peptide samples were re-suspended in 0.1% FA water at a concentration of approximately 1µg/µL. The MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fischer Scientific) interfaced with an Easy 1000 nano-LC unit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and operated as described previously. 1 µg of sample was loaded directly on the analytical column made in house (75-μm inner diameter; New Objective) with ReproSil-Pur 120A C18 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH) as stationary phase. The flow rate was set to 200 nl/min and the peptides were chromatographically separated with a 5 – 25 % 90 minute acetonitrile/water gradient in 0.1% formic acid. The data acquisition mode (data-dependent acquisition) was set to perform a cycle of 3 s with high resolution MS (R=30.000, AGC=50ms) and MS/MS (R=60.000, AGC=54ms) in the Orbitrap. During the entire run, the MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in the mass range of 350 to 1650 m/z; precursors with charges 2-7 and intensity higher than 2*104 were fragmented (HCD, NCE=28) and identified in the Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 30 seconds. Every triplicate run we run a targeted experiment to monitor the performance of teh instrument over time.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in R (version 3.4.3) using the workflow deposited on Github (https://github.com/anfoss/HTPS_workflow) under MIT license. Briefly, the script recovers the cleavage sequences from the identified peptides and transfers them into a positional matrix (amino acids upstream the cleavage site occupy P8-P1 position and amino acids downstream P1'-P8' position). A frequency matrix is generated counting the abundance of amino acids per position and normalized for all identified peptides. To harmonize the multivariate protease specificity data, the positional occurrences of amino acids are converted into protease frequency matrices. In parallel, a random frequency matrix of the same size is generated by sampling the same number of amino acids as contained in the frequency matrix from the natural distribution of amino acids in HTPS_DB.fasta. The proteases were first compared in terms of numbers of generated cleavages under different tested conditions.  To compare proteases in terms of significantly different positional features, a two-side paired t-test was employed to evaluate similarity between frequency matrices or differential frequency matrices and thus to evaluate the similarities/differences between the tested proteases (p<0.01).

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are among the largest protein families and critical regulators of biochemical processes like apoptosis and blood coagulation. Knowledge of proteases has been expanded by the development of proteomic approaches, however, technology for multiplexed screening of proteases within native environments is currently lacking behind. Here we introduce a simple method to profile protease activity based on isolation of protease products from native lysates using a 96FASP filter, their analysis in a mass spectrometer and a custom data analysis pipeline. The method is significantly faster, cheaper, technically less demanding, easy to multiplex and produces accurate protease fingerprints. Using the blood cascade proteases as a case study, we obtain protease substrate profiles that can be used to map specificity, cleavage entropy and allosteric effects and to design protease probes. The data further show that protease substrate predictions enable the selection of potential physiological substrates for targeted validation in biochemical assays.

### Keywords
Protease investigation

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland


### SDRF

