### Accession
PXD032931

### Title
PrkA regulates Bacillus subtilis sporulation through a Lon protease activity

### Description
In Bacillus subtilis, sporulation is a sequential and highly regulated process. Phosphorylation events by Histidine or Serine/Threonine kinases are key points in this regulation. PrkA has been proposed to be an essential Serine kinase for the initiation of sporulation but its kinase activity has not been clearly demonstrated so far. Indeed, neither its autophosphorylation nor identification of a B. subtilis phosphorylated substrate was unambiguously established. Bioinformatic homology searches revealed sequence similarities with the AAA+ ATP-dependent Lon protease family. Here, we showed that PrkA is indeed able to hydrolyse the α-casein, an exogenous substrate of Lon proteases, in an ATP-dependent manner. We also showed that this ATP-dependent protease activity is essential for PrkA function in sporulation since mutation in the Walker A motif leads to a sporulation defect. Furthermore, we found that PrkA protease activity is tightly regulated by phosphorylation events involving one of the Ser/Thr kinases of B. subtilis, PrkC, as characterized by mass spectrometry from 3 in vitro independent experiments (1: PrkA+PrkC/2:PrKA-S219E+PrkC/3: PrKA-T217E+PrkC).  We finally demonstrated that PrkA regulation of the transcriptional factor σK via the transition phase regulator ScoC is certainly indirect.

### Sample Protocol
5 μg of PrkA or the mutated PrkA (notated as PrkA-T217E and PrkA-S219E) proteins were incubated for 60 min at 37°C with 5 μg of PrkCc (notated PrkC in the deposited files) in a 15 μl reaction mixture containing 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 2.5 mM MgCl2 and 5 mM ATP in the 3 in vitro independent designed experiments: (1: PrkA+PrkC/2: PrKA-T217E+PrkC /3: PrKA-S219E+PrkC). 6µg of proteins of each reaction in solution were digested by Trypsin/LysC protease (1/50, w/w) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate pH8 overnight. Digested proteins were processed by a desalting step on ZipTip C18 prior injection of 0.6 µg of tryptic peptides onto a  nano liquid chromatography (LC) Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an ESI-Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Diego) for proteomic analysis, as previously described in Zhang et al, 2018 (Sci Rep. 8(1):6805. DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-24772-7).

### Data Protocol
For proteomics analysis and phosphorylation characterization (Tables S1 in this paper) : acquired Raw Spectra (joined files :“PrkA_PrkC_ATP”; “PrkA_T217E_PrkC_ATP”; “PrkA_S219E_PrkC_ATP”) were processed by Proteome Discoverer software (ThermoFisher, version 2.4.1.15) using the workflow including the Spectrum files ReCalibration node, the Sequest HT algorithm and the IMP-ptmRS node specific for better phosphorylation site probability. Database Bacilus subtilis was extracted from Uniprot (strain 168, TxID 224308 last modified 2021-09-24; 5573 entries) which the natural sequence of PrkA (P39134) was withdrawn (joined FASTA file “Bacillus_subtilis_strain_168_TxId_224308_uniprot_minusPrkAsequence”) and sequences of recombinant PrkA (or mutated recombinants PrkA) with a C-ter tag –ASSVDKLAAALEHHHHHH were added (joined FASTA files : “PrkA_tagCTer_6His”; “PrkA_T217E_tagCTer_6His”; “PrkA_S219E_tagCTer_6His”). Parameters were mentioned as follows : enzyme used trypsin (2 missed cleavages); mass values specific for monoisotopic; precursor mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.02 Da; dynamic modifications for oxidation on Met (+15.995) and phosphorylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr (+79.966). Total number of Peptide Spectral Matches (PSM) identifying PrkA, PrkA-T217E and PrkA-S219E were 2883, 3753 and 3757 respectively, allowing 77%, 80% and 85% sequence coverage, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
In Bacillus subtilis, sporulation is a sequential and highly regulated process. Phosphorylation events by histidine kinases are key points in the phosphorelay that initiates sporulation, but serine/threonine protein kinases also play important auxiliary roles in this regulation. PrkA has been proposed to be a serine protein kinase expressed during the initiation of sporulation and involved in this differentiation process. Additionally, the role of PrkA in sporulation has been previously proposed to be mediated via the transition phase regulator ScoC, which in turn regulates the transcriptional factor &#x3c3;<sup>K</sup> and its regulon. However, the kinase activity of PrkA has not been clearly demonstrated, and neither its autophosphorylation nor phosphorylated substrates have been unambiguously established in B.&#xa0;subtilis. We demonstrated here that PrkA regulation of ScoC is likely indirect. Following bioinformatic homology searches, we revealed sequence similarities of PrkA with the ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities ATP-dependent Lon protease family. Here, we showed that PrkA is indeed able to hydrolyze &#x3b1;-casein, an exogenous substrate of Lon proteases, in an ATP-dependent manner. We also showed that this ATP-dependent protease activity is essential for PrkA function in sporulation since mutation in the Walker A motif leads to a sporulation defect. Furthermore, we found that PrkA protease activity is tightly regulated by phosphorylation events involving one of the Ser/Thr protein kinases of B.&#xa0;subtilis, PrkC. Taken together, our results clarify the key role of PrkA in the complex process of B.&#xa0;subtilis sporulation.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lon protease, Atpase, Sporulation, Bacillus subtilis, Prka

### Affiliations
Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, FR3479, Proteomics facility of Institut de Microbilogie de la Méditerranée, Marseille Protéomique
CNRS

### Submitter
Regine Lebrun

### Lab Head
Dr Régine Lebru
Aix-Marseille Univ, CNRS, FR3479, Proteomics facility of Institut de Microbilogie de la Méditerranée, Marseille Protéomique


