### Accession
PXD004949

### Title
Proteogenomics of adenosine-to-inosine RNA editing in fruit fly

### Description
This dataset is a part of a bigger work on RNA editing in D. melanogaster brain. We present Orbitrap spectra searched against a customized database of Drosophila proteome with introduction of variants provided by RNA editing. Tree files reflect 3 technical replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Frozen flies D. melanogaster of Canton S line were dissected in PBS and 200 brains were collected for the further lysis.  Brain pellet was resuspended in 100 µL lysis solution containing 0.1 % (w/v) Protease MAX Surfactant (Promega, USA), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10% (v/v) acetonitrile. The cell lysate was stirred for 60 min at 550 rpm at room temperature. The mixture was then subjected to sonication by Bandelin Sonopuls HD2070 ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin Electronic, Berlin, Germany) at 30% amplitude using short pulses for 5 min. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 15,700 g for 10 min at 20°C (Centrifuge 5415R; Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Total protein concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA Kit; Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Two µL of 500 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) buffer were added to the samples to the final DTT concentration of 10 mM, followed by incubation for 20 min at 56°C. After that, 2 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM TEABC were added to the sample to the final IAA concentration of 10 mM. The mixture was incubated in the darkness at room temperature for 30 min. The total resultant protein content was digested with trypsin (Trypsin Gold; Promega, USA). The enzyme was added at the ratio of 1:40 (w/w) to the total protein content and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. Enzymatic digestion was terminated by addition of acetic acid (5% w/v). After the reaction was stopped, the sample was stirred (500 rpm) for 30 min at 45°C followed by centrifugation at 15,700 g for 10 min at 20°C (Centrifuge 5415R; Eppendorf, Germany). The supernatant was then added to the filter unit (10 kDa; Millipore, USA) and centrifuged at 13,400 g for 20 min at 20°C in the same centrifuge. After that, 100 µL of 50% formic acid were added to the filter unit and the sample was centrifuged at 13,400 g for 20 min at 20°C. The final peptide concentration was measured using Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) on a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Sample was dried up using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 45°C. Dried peptides were stored at - 80°C until the LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved using homemade C18 column, 25 cm (Silica Tip 360µm OD, 75µm ID, New Objective, USA) connected to an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min flow rate for 240 min at a linear gradient from 2% to 26% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides were ionized with electrospray ionization and analyzed on Orbitrap QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The survey MS spectrum was acquired at the resolution of 60,000 in the range of m/z 200-2000. MS/MS data for 20 most intense precursors were obtained with a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charge z>1 at a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion of up to 500 precursors for 60 seconds was used to avoid repeated analysis of the same peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The brain proteome of Drosophila melanogaster was characterized by liquid chromatography/high-resolution mass spectrometry and compared to the earlier characterized Drosophila whole-body and head proteomes. Raw data for all the proteomes were processed in a similar manner. Approximately 4000 proteins were identified in the brain proteome that represented, as expected, the subsets of the head and body proteomes. However, after thorough data curation, we reliably identified 24 proteins unique for the brain proteome; 13 of them have never been detected before at the protein level. Fourteen of 24 identified proteins have been annotated as nuclear proteins. Comparison of three used datasets by label-free quantitation showed statistically significant enrichment of the brain proteome with nuclear proteins. Therefore, we recommend the use of isolated brain preparations in the studies of Drosophila nuclear proteins.

### Keywords
Ls-msms, Rna editing, Proteomics, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Head of the Department of Personalized Medicine Institute of Biomedical Chemistry  Moscow Russia
IBMC

### Submitter
Irina Ilina

### Lab Head
Dr Sergei Moshkovskii
Head of the Department of Personalized Medicine Institute of Biomedical Chemistry  Moscow Russia


