### Accession
PXD013030

### Title
Resistance Strategies Differ Against Specialist and Generalist Cyanophages

### Description
Long-term coexistence between cyanobacteria and their lytic viruses (cyanophages) in the oceans is thought to be due to the presence of sensitive cells in which cyanophages reproduce, ultimately killing the cell, while other cyanobacteria survive due to resistance to infection. Here we investigated resistance strategies in naturally resistant cyanobacteria and compared strategies against generalist and specialist cyanophages. Resistance was extracellular in most interactions against specialist cyanophages, preventing entry into the cell. In contrast, resistance was intracellular in practically all interactions against generalist cyanophages. Intriguingly, the stage of intracellular arrest was interaction-specific, halting at various stages of the infection cycle. These findings unveil a heavy cost of promiscuous entry of generalist phages into non-host cells that is rarely paid by specialists, potential unknown mechanisms of intracellular resistance and that the range for viral-mediated horizontal gene transfer extends much beyond just hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolysis  The proteins were extracted in 2% Sodium deoxy cholate (SDC), 50mM Ammonium bicarbonate and two cycles of sonication.  The proteins from each sample were reduced with 3mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with  10mM iodoacetamide (in the dark, room temperature for  30 min) and digested in 1%SDC , 50mM ammonium bicabonate with modified trypsin (Promega), overnight at 37oC. An additional second trypsinization was done for 4 hours. The samples were centrifuged, brought to 1% Formic Acid, centrifuged again and then were desalted using C18 tips (Ultra micro, Harvard) and dried. Each sample was re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid and taken to mass spectrometry analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 250-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 180 minutes gradient of 5 to 28% 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95% and 25 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using either Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) or the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (Mathias Mann's group) with 1% FDR. The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software. The databases that were used were virus, Synechococcus & Prochlorococcus sections of the uniprot.

### Publication Abstract
Long-term coexistence between unicellular cyanobacteria and their lytic viruses (cyanophages) in the oceans is thought to be due to the presence of sensitive cells in which cyanophages reproduce, ultimately killing the cell, while other cyanobacteria survive due to resistance to infection. Here, we investigated resistance in marine cyanobacteria from the genera <i>Synechococcus</i> and <i>Prochlorococcus</i> and compared modes of resistance against specialist and generalist cyanophages belonging to the T7-like and T4-like cyanophage families. Resistance was extracellular in most interactions against specialist cyanophages irrespective of the phage family, preventing entry into the cell. In contrast, resistance was intracellular in practically all interactions against generalist T4-like cyanophages. The stage of intracellular arrest was interaction-specific, halting at various stages of the infection cycle. Incomplete infection cycles proceeded to various degrees of phage genome transcription and translation as well as phage genome replication in numerous interactions. In a particularly intriguing case, intracellular capsid assembly was observed, but the phage genome was not packaged. The cyanobacteria survived the encounter despite late-stage infection and partial genome degradation. We hypothesize that this is tolerated due to genome polyploidy, which we found for certain strains of both <i>Synechococcus</i> and <i>Prochlorococcus</i> Our findings unveil a heavy cost of promiscuous entry of generalist phages into nonhost cells that is rarely paid by specialist phages and suggests the presence of unknown mechanisms of intracellular resistance in the marine unicellular cyanobacteria. Furthermore, these findings indicate that the range for virus-mediated horizontal gene transfer extends beyond hosts to nonhost cyanobacterial cells.

### Keywords
Resistance, Cyanobacterial, Cyanophages

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Debbie Lindell
Faculty of Biology, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel


