### Accession
PXD046450

### Title
Nedd4-2-dependent regulation of astrocytic Kir4.1 and Connexin43 controls neuronal network activity

### Description
Nedd4-2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase in which missense mutation is related to familial epilepsy, indicating its critical role in regulating neuronal network activity. However, Nedd4-2 substrates involved in neuronal network function have yet to be identified. Using mouse lines lacking Nedd4-1 and Nedd4-2 and an isobaric labeling approach for quantitative comparison of the synaptic membrane proteome, we identified astrocytic channel proteins inwardly rectifying potassium channel 4.1 (Kir4.1) and Connexin43 as upregulated in ubiquitin ligase knockout mice and thus as candidate Nedd4-2 substrates. Kir4.1 and Connexin43 were confirmed as Nedd4-2 substrates by independent methods and their functional role in astrocytes as to modulation of neuronal network activity was established.

### Sample Protocol
Purified synaptic membrane fractions were separated on precast gradient gels and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining. Proteins in the gel were subjected to automated in-gel digestion and isobaric peptide labeling as described in detail in Schmidt et al., 2013 (doi: 10.1002/pmic.201200366). The iTRAQ Reagent 4plex Kit (Sciex, Cat#4352135) was used to label the tryptic peptides derived from the different SM fractions as follows: iTRAQ114, mixture of equal volumes of all three samples to be compared; iTRAQ115, 1:1 mixture of N4-1/2 CTL and N4-1/2 bDKO; iTRAQ116, N4-1/2 CTL; iTRAQ117, N4-1/2 bDKO (forward labeling). To control for reagent-specific labeling artifacts, a replicate experiment was performed, in which iTRAQ channels 116 and 117 were switched (reverse labeling). The iTRAQ114/115 channels served as internal controls for normalization and quality control of the iTRAQ reporter ion signals. Labeled peptides were pooled and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent mode with higher-energy C-trap fragmentation as described (Schmidt et al., 2013).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) and peak lists were searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against UniProtKB mus musculus protein database (downloaded 2013-05-14) supplemented with common contaminants and concatenated with the reverse sequences of all entries. Search parameters were set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin without proline restriction was specified as digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. A minimal length of six amino acids per identified peptide was required for protein identification. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. The command 're-quantify' was enabled, and 'keep low scoring versions of identified peptides' was disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Nedd4-2 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase in which missense mutation is related to familial epilepsy, indicating its critical role in regulating neuronal network activity. However, Nedd4-2 substrates involved in neuronal network function have yet to be identified. Using mouse lines lacking Nedd4-1 and Nedd4-2, we identified astrocytic channel proteins inwardly rectifying K+ channel 4.1 (Kir4.1) and Connexin43 as Nedd4-2 substrates. We found that the expression of Kir4.1 and Connexin43 is increased upon conditional deletion of Nedd4-2 in astrocytes, leading to an elevation of astrocytic membrane ion permeability and gap junction activity, with a consequent reduction of &#x3b3;-oscillatory neuronal network activity. Interestingly, our biochemical data demonstrate that missense mutations found in familial epileptic patients produce gain-of-function of the Nedd4-2 gene product. Our data reveal a process of coordinated astrocytic ion channel proteostasis that controls astrocyte function and astrocyte-dependent neuronal network activity and elucidate a potential mechanism by which aberrant Nedd4-2 function leads to epilepsy.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Isobaric labeling, Protein homeostasis, Synaptic membranes

### Affiliations
Neuroproteomics Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen Germany

### Submitter
Olaf Jahn

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen Germany


