### Accession
PXD006811

### Title
Quantitative chemoproteomic profiling of beta lactones in cancer cells

### Description
The spongiolactones are marine natural products with an unusual rearranged spongiane skeleton and a fused β-lactone ring. These compounds have potential anticancer properties, but their mode of action has yet to be explored. Here we employ activity-based protein profiling to identify the targets of a more potent spongiolactone derivative (probe 3) in live cancer cells, and compare these to the target profile of a simpler β-lactone (probe 4). Furthermore, we treat K562 cells with probe 3 and perform quantitative proteomic analysis of the global proteome after 24 hrs. Together, these proteomic data provide the first insights into the covalent mechanism of action of this natural product class.

### Sample Protocol
Human cell cultures (K562, Jurkat or A549 cells) were incubated with probes 3, 4 or DMSO control in RPMI media for 2 h. Cells were lysed (0.5% SDS, 1% NP40, sodium phosphate pH8). Proteins were ligated via click chemistry with an azido-biotin reagent and enriched on avidin beads. Beads were washed and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested on-bead with trypsin. A-C/D are biological replicates.  Peptides were desalted on stage-tip. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Gradients of 125 min were used and the Fusion was operated in a top speed data-dependent mode. For global proteome analysis, K562 cells were incubated with probe 3 or DMSO control in RPMI media for 24 or 4 h. Cells were lysed as above and protein precipitated, reduced, alkylated and digested. Samples a-c are replicates from the cell labelling stage. Peptides were desalted on 50 mg Sep-Pak® C18 columns. Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). Gradients of 155 min were used and the Q Exactive Plus was operated in a TOP12 data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant versions 1.5.3.8 or 1.5.5.1, and peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome (canonical version, without isoforms, downloaded 13/04/2016) using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected to allow for protein grouping. LFQ experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the built-in label-free quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). For chemical proteomic samples, match between runs was enabled for replicates. SPO10: probe 3 (=SP5P) or DMSO labelling in K562 cells SPO11: probe 3 (=SP5P) or DMSO labelling in Jurkat cells SPO17: probe 3 (=SP5P) or DMSO labelling in A549 cells AW: probe 4 (=D3) or DMSO labelling in Jurkat cells. For global proteome data, match between runs was enabled. Samples 1-3: probe 3 incubation for 4 h in K562 cells; 4-6: probe 3 incubation for 24 h; 7-9: DMSO incubation for 24 h.

### Publication Abstract
The spongiolactones are marine natural products with an unusual rearranged spongiane skeleton and a fused &#x3b2;-lactone ring. These compounds have potential anticancer properties but their mode of action has yet to be explored. Here we employ activity-based protein profiling to identify the targets of a more potent spongiolactone derivative in live cancer cells, and compare these to the targets of a simpler &#x3b2;-lactone. These hits provide the first insights into the covalent mechanism of action of this natural product class.

### Keywords
Response to compound, Leukemia, Abpp, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Megan Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A Sieber
Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Technische Universität München, Germany


