### Accession
PXD022156

### Title
Development of a mass-spectrometry based method for the identification of the in vivo whole blood and plasma ADP-ribosylomes

### Description
Blood and plasma proteins are heavily investigated as biomarkers for different diseases. However, the post-translational modifications of these proteins are rarely analyzed since blood contains many enzymes that rapidly remove the modification after sampling. In contrast to the well-described role of protein ADP-ribosylation in cells and organs, its role in blood remains mostly uncharacterized. Here, we established that plasma phosphodiesterases and ADP-ribosylhydrolases rapidly demodified in vitro ADP-ribosylated proteins. Thus, to identify the in vivo whole blood and plasma ADP-ribosylomes, we established a novel mass-spectrometry based workflow that was applied to blood samples collected from LPS-treated pigs (Sus scrofa), which serves as a model for human systemic inflammatory response syndrome. These analyses identified 60 ADP-ribosylated proteins, 17 of which were ADP-ribosylated plasma proteins. This new protocol provides an important step forward for the rapidly developing field of ADP-ribosylation and defines the blood and plasma ADP-ribosylomes under both healthy and disease conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For blood sample collection, 6 mL of venous blood were collected from each animal and immediately split into 3 fractions: 2 ml were transferred to heparin and EDTA tubes, respectively. Heparin samples were then centrifuged (1000x g, 10 min), the plasma separated from the cell pellet and stored at -80 °C for downstream plasma proteome analyses. The EDTA samples were kept at RT and immediately processed for hematological analyses. The remaining 2 ml were denatured via addition of 4 ml of 6 M GndHCl and mixed thoroughly to denature the samples. These whole blood lysates (WBL) were then heated to 95 °C for 10 min and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS ADP-ribosylome analysis. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (6M GndHCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.0), sonicated and then stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. For all samples, protein disulfide bridges were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) in the dark at 37 °C for 1 h.  Plasma input samples were prepared for MS analysis via filter aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski, 2018). Briefly, 100 µg of protein were transferred onto the Microcon-10 kDa centrifugal filter unit, centrifuged (14’000x g, 20 min, RT) and washed 3 times with 100 µl 0.5 M NaCl (centrifugation as described). 120 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added to the filter unit and centrifuged as described above. Trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, Wisconsin) was added at a 1 µg trypsin : 25 µg protein ratio, the filter units sealed and incubated overnight (37 °C, 16-20 hrs, 300 rpm). The filter units were then centrifuged as described and the columns re-eluted using 80 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. The eluate was acidified with 10% TFA to a pH of 3-4 and the samples were then further prepared for MS analysis via Zip Tip clean-up according to the Millipore zip tip user guide (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). The peptides were eluted with 15 µl of 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA, dried to completion and then re-dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to a final peptide concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed either on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatographs (Waters). Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. For ADP-ribosylome analyses, 15mg of proteins were used. Wildtype and an evolved Af152 macrodomains (Nowak et al., Nat.Com. manuscript accepted), were expressed and purified as previously described (S. C. Larsen et al., 2017). Binding and crosslinking of the GST-Af1521 fusion proteins to Glutathione Sepharose 4B beads (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, Missouri), peptide enrichment (“standard workflow”) and pre-MS clean-up using stage tips were performed as previously described (Martello et al., 2016). After elution, samples were resuspended to 12 µl in MS-buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid), vortexed briefly, sonicated (10 min, 100%, 25 °C), and centrifuged (16’000x g, 2 min, RT) before MS analysis. For the new workflow established in this study, samples were diluted to 0.2 M GndHCl using 1x PARG buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.25 mM DTT), and 4.2 µg PARG (in-house) per 10 mg protein and 10 µl/30 ml of Benzonase (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) were added to each sample. The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 hr. Samples were then trypsin digested according to standard protocol and all subsequent steps performed as previously described (Martello et al., 2016). WBL samples collected during the LPS trial were prepared using the new workflow with additional high pH (HpH) and low pH (LpH) fractionation on MicroSpin C18 columns (Nest Group Inc., Southborough, Massachusetts) as described in (I. A. Hendriks et al., 2019). Samples were eluted from the HpH column using three different percentages of ACN (7%, 15%, and 50% in 20 mM NH4OH) and from the LpH column using one condition containing 60% ACN / 0.1% TFA. ADP-ribosylated peptides were identified using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to ACQUITY UPLC liquid chromatograph (Waters). The ADP-ribose product-dependent method called HCD-PP-EThcD (Bilan et al., 2017) was applied, which includes high-energy data-dependent HCD, followed by high-quality HCD and EThcD MS/MS when two or more ADPr fragment peaks (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.07091, and 428.0372) were observed in the initial HCD scan. A detailed description of the MS parameters can be found in (Bilan et al., 2017).

### Data Protocol
MS analyses of input proteome samples were performed using standard data dependent acquisition (DDA) methods. The MGFs were searched against the UniProtKB porcine (one protein/gene) databases. The following search parameters were used to search input proteome deconvoluted data: trypsin digests with up to 5 missed cleavages, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modifications, variable acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) modification, peptide tolerance = 10 ppm, number of 13C = 1, peptide charge = 2+/3+/4+, MS/MS tolerance = 0.5 Da (UniProt, 2019). Plasma proteome search results were filtered as described above for peptide score and peptides expect values, without regard to ADP-ribosylation.  For ADP-ribosylome data analysis, MS and MS/MS spectra were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using Proteome Discoverer, v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). For the multiple fragmentation techniques (HCD and EThcD) were utilized, separate MGF files were created from the raw file for each type of fragmentation. Mascot searches were carried out as previously described (Bilan et al., 2017) with the following protocol modifications. The MGFs were searched against the UniProtKB human or porcine databases. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Finally, S, R, K, D, E, H and Y residues were set as variable ADP-ribose acceptor amino acids. The neutral losses of 249.0862 Da, 347.0631 Da, and 583.0829 Da from the ADP-ribose were scored in HCD fragment ion spectra (Gehrig et al., manuscript under revision).

### Publication Abstract
Blood and plasma proteins are heavily investigated as biomarkers for different diseases. However, the post-translational modification states of these proteins are rarely analyzed since blood contains many enzymes that rapidly remove these modifications after sampling. In contrast to the well-described role of protein ADP-ribosylation in cells and organs, its role in blood remains mostly uncharacterized. Here, we discovered that plasma phosphodiesterases and/or ADP-ribosylhydrolases rapidly demodify <i>in vitro</i> ADP-ribosylated proteins. Thus, to identify the <i>in vivo</i> whole blood and plasma ADP-ribosylomes, we established a mass-spectrometry-based workflow that was applied to blood samples collected from LPS-treated pigs (<i>Sus scrofa domesticus</i>), which serves as a model for human systemic inflammatory response syndrome. These analyses identified 60 ADP-ribosylated proteins, 17 of which were ADP-ribosylated plasma proteins. This new protocol provides an important step forward for the rapidly developing field of ADP-ribosylation and defines the blood and plasma ADP-ribosylomes under both healthy and disease conditions.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Plasma, Systemic inflammatory response syndrome, Histidine adp-ribosylation, Sepsis, Blood

### Affiliations
Head of Department Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zürich

### Submitter
Deena Leslie Pedrioli

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger, Prof. PhD, DVM
Head of Department Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


