### Accession
PXD006123

### Title
Tomato 14-3-3 proteins regulate hypocotyl response to blue light and are downstream mediators of cytokinin signalling

### Description
Interactome analysis of tomato 14-3-3 proteins TFT6 and TFT9 and their role in response to blue light

### Sample Protocol
To prepare purified 14-3-3 proteins, the coding region of TFT9 and TFT6 were each cloned into the C-terminal his-vector PQE60 (Qiagen, Germany) and N, C-terminal his-vector PET28b+ (Novagen), respectively.  Recombinant His-tagged proteins were expressed in E. coli strain BL21 (DE3) at 37°C for 4 h following induction with addition of 1 mM isopropylthio-β-galactoside (IPTG). Each protein was immobilized on nickel-charged His-Affinity Gel using His-Spin Protein Miniprep (Zymo Research, USA) and incubated with nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins extracts from excised elongating zones of hypocotyls. Cellular fractions were prepared with NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents (ThermoScientific, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions, buffers were supplemented with plant protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein extracts were incubated with immobilized TFTs for 1 hour at 4°C and unbound fractions were washed with two volumes of wash buffer. The bound proteins were eluted with 150 μl of the elution buffer containing 250 mM imidazole, diluted with 1.5 ml digestion buffer (2 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and digested with an immobilized trypsin (Promega) overnight, desalted by C18 SPE and analyzed by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo) and an UHR maXis impact q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker) as described previously (Novak et al., 2015; Baldrianova et al., 2015; Cerna et al., 2017). The quantitative differences were evaluated by calculating normalized number of peptide spectral matches (PSM) and putative blue-light-dependant TFT interactors (not identified in dark-grown samples or significantly increased at blue light) were targeted  in experimental replicates via an SRM-based analysis (TSQ Quantiva, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were extracted by Bruker’s Data Analysis 4.1 and processed as described previously (e.g. Cerna et al., 2017). In brief, recalibrated MGF files were searched against tomato (ITAG 2.4) protein sequence database by Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 with the following parameters: Enzyme - trypsin, max two missed cleavage sites; Mass tolerance - 35 ppm (MS) and 0.1 Da (MS/MS); Modifications - up to three dynamic modifications including Met oxidation, Asn/Gln deamidation, Lys/His/Leu/Arg methylation, N-terminal acetylation, Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation. Results were integrated by Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo), the quantitative differences were evaluated by calculating normalized number of peptide spectral matches (PSM) and putative blue-light-dependant TFT interactors (not identified in dark-grown samples or significantly increased at blue light) were targeted  in experimental replicates via an SRM-based analysis (TSQ Quantiva, Thermo). Only proteins with at least one detectable proteotypic peptide were considered for the analysis and the resulting data were evaluated in Skyline 3.1 (MacCossLab Software, https://skyline.gs.washington.edu) and the statistical significance was validated by t-test (p<0.05). Note that the data deposit contains a single representative replicate of each sample and the processing output is limited to Mascot search results.

### Publication Abstract
De-etiolation is the first developmental process under light control allowing the heterotrophic seedling to become autotrophic. The phytohormones cytokinins (CKs) largely contribute to this process. Reversible phosphorylation is a key event of cell signaling, allowing proteins to become active or generating a binding site for specific protein interaction. 14-3-3 proteins regulate a variety of plant responses. The expression, hormonal regulation, and proteomic network under the control of 14-3-3s were addressed in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) during blue light-induced photomorphogenesis. Two isoforms were specifically investigated due to their high expression during tomato de-etiolation. The multidisciplinary approach demonstrated that TFT9 expression, but not TFT6, was regulated by CKs and identified cis-regulating elements required for this response. Our study revealed &gt;130 potential TFT6/9 interactors. Their functional annotation predicted that TFTs might regulate the activity of proteins involved notably in cell wall strengthening or primary metabolism. Several potential interactors were also predicted to be CK-responsive. For the first time, the 14-3-3 interactome linked to de-etiolation was investigated and evidenced that 14-3-3s might be involved in CK signaling pathway, cell expansion inhibition and steady-state growth rate establishment, and reprograming from heterotrophy to autotrophy. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) is one of the most important vegetables consumed all around the world and represents probably the most preferred garden crop. Regulation of hypocotyl growth by light plays an important role in the early development of a seedling, and consequently the homogeneity of the culture. The present study focuses on the importance of tomato 14-3-3/TFT proteins in this process. We provide here the first report of 14-3-3 interactome in the regulation of light-induced de-etiolation and subsequent photomorphogenesis. Our data provide new insights into light-induced de-etiolation and open new horizons for dissecting the post-transcriptional regulations.

### Keywords
Tft, Interactome, Cytokinin, Photomorphogenesis

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Mendel University in Brno, CEITEC MENDELU

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno, CEITEC MENDELU


