### Accession
PXD018343

### Title
Proteome and PTMs analyses of mammary CAFs

### Description
To understand the molecular mechanisms that underpin pro-tumourigenic functions of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) we compared the proteome, acetylome, phosphoproteome of human immortalised breast cancer CAFs with those of the normal mammary fibroblasts that they were generated from. Based on the results obtained, we have also analysed proteome changes when CAFs were treated with the P300/CBP inhibitor c646.

### Sample Protocol
For the total proteome, cells were lysed in SDS buffer. For the proteome with c646 treatment, proteins were precipitated with acetone and redissolved in urea buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 75mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl). For SILAC experiments, equal quantities of heavy and light samples were mixed. For the total proteome that was used to normalised peptide acetylation levels, lysates were either in-gel digested as previously described or, after digestions, peptides were fractionated using on-Tip high pH reverse phase fractionation. The proteins were trypsin digested and desalted by C18 StageTip. For phosphoproteome enrichment, trypsin-digested peptides were acidified to pH 2.6 and acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 30%. The peptides were fractionated using an Akta system into 6 equal fractions, using an increasing concentration of KCL in 5 mM KH2PO4 to a final concentration of 350 mM KCl. Each fraction was then enriched for phosphorylated peptides by incubation with TiO2 beads (GL Sciences) in the presence of 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid. Phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 15% ammonium hydroxide and 40% acetonitrile (ACN), and desalted by C18 StageTip. For the acetylome enrichment, SILAC labelled cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing the deacetylase inhibitors Nicotinamide (10 mM) and Trichostatin A (1 µM). Proteins were precipitated with acetone, redissolved in urea buffer and quantified by Bradford assay. Equal quantities of heavy and light labelled proteins were combined and trypsin digested. Peptides were desalted by C18 SepPak filtration. Enrichment for acetylated peptides was performed with PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit (Cell Signalling Technology #13416) according to the manufacturers’ protocol.

### Data Protocol
The MS .raw files were processed with MaxQuant software 77 and searched with the Andromeda search engine with the following settings: minimal peptide length 7 amino acids, fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). For the acetylome and phosphoproteome, Acetyl (K) and Phospho (STY) were added as variable modifications respectively. Specificity for trypsin cleavage was required and maximum 2 missed cleavages were allowed. For SILAC experiments, multiplicity was set to 2, where the light labels were Arg0 and Lys0 and the heavy labels were Arg10 and Lys8. For label free (LFQ) experiments, the LFQ setting was enabled. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cancer-associated fibroblasts, Acetylome, Epigenetics, Proteome, Breast cancer, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
CRUK Beatson Institute


