### Accession
PXD007515

### Title
Discovery of a testis-specific complex TEX101-DPEP3 and selection of its disrupting antibodies

### Description
TEX101 is a testis-specific protein expressed exclusively in male germ cells and is a validated biomarker of male infertility. Studies in mice suggest that TEX101 is a cell-surface chaperone which regulates, through protein-protein interactions, the maturation of proteins involved in spermatozoa transit and oocyte binding. Male TEX101-null mice are sterile. Here, we identified by co-immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry the interactome of human TEX101 in testicular tissues and spermatozoa. The testis-specific cell-surface dipeptidase 3 (DPEP3) emerged as the top hit. We further validated the TEX101-DPEP3 complex by using hybrid immunoassays. Combinations of antibodies recognizing different epitopes of TEX101 and DPEP3 facilitated development of a simple immunoassay to screen for disruptors of TEX101-DPEP3 complex. As a proof-of-a-concept, we demonstrated that anti-TEX101 clone 34ED604 (antibody T4) disrupted the native TEX101-DPEP3 complex. Disrupting antibodies may be used to study the human TEX101-DPEP3 complex, and to develop modulators for male fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Co-IP of TEX101 complexes from testicular tissue lysate (600 μg of total protein) was performed in triplicates with anti-TEX101 antibodies T1 or T2 and non-specific mouse IgG coupled to beads (50 μL). Co-IP of TEX101 complexes from spermatozoa lysate (120 μg total protein) was performed in triplicates with T1 and non-specific mouse IgG coupled to beads (30 μL). Co-IP of TEX101 complexes from SP (600 μg total protein) was performed in triplicates with T1 and non-specific mouse IgG coupled to beads (50 μL). Following binding for 2 hours at RT with shaking, all beads were washed with TBS binding buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and then were re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were subjected to reduction (DTT; 5 mM final), alkylation (iodoacetamide; 10 mM final), and overnight digestion with trypsin (0.5 µg). Supernatants were collected and remaining beads were incubated again with 30% acetonitrile at RT for 10 min. First and second supernatants were pooled, and trypsin was inactivated by 1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and data analysis, mass spectra, generated by XCalibur (v. 2.0.6; Thermo Fischer Scientific), were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). Protein search was performed against the non-redundant Human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (HUMAN5640_sProt-012016). Search parameters included: trypsin enzyme specificity, 2 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 8 amino acids, minimum of 1 unique peptide, top 8 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da, peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ion and MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da, fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation and variable modification of methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation. False-discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% both at the protein and the peptide levels. Label-free relative quantification of identified proteins was achieved by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant (33). The ‘proteinGroups.txt’ file, generated by MaxQuant, was uploaded to Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) for further statistical analysis (34). Protein identifications classified as “Only identified by site”, “Reverse”, and “Contaminants” were excluded. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed, and two groups with three replicates each were compared (LFQ-anti-TEX101 and LFQ-mouse IgG). Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were filtered out. Missing LFQ values were imputed with values representing a normal distribution to enable statistical analysis. A two-sample t-test (Benjamini-Hochberg false-discovery rate-adjusted p values) was applied to determine proteins statistically enriched by anti-TEX101 versus non-specific mouse IgG. We performed variance correction (s0) for each comparison, and we applied FDR of 1% for candidate selection.

### Publication Abstract
TEX101 is a testis-specific protein expressed exclusively in male germ cells and is a validated biomarker of male infertility. Studies in mice suggest that TEX101 is a cell-surface chaperone which regulates, through protein-protein interactions, the maturation of proteins involved in spermatozoa transit and oocyte binding. Male TEX101-null mice are sterile. Here, we identified by co-immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry the interactome of human TEX101 in testicular tissues and spermatozoa. The testis-specific cell-surface dipeptidase 3 (DPEP3) emerged as the top hit. We further validated the TEX101-DPEP3 complex by using hybrid immunoassays. Combinations of antibodies recognizing different epitopes of TEX101 and DPEP3 facilitated development of a simple immunoassay to screen for disruptors of TEX101-DPEP3 complex. As a proof-of-a-concept, we demonstrated that anti-TEX101 antibody <i>T4</i> disrupted the native TEX101-DPEP3 complex. Disrupting antibodies may be used to study the human TEX101-DPEP3 complex, and to develop modulators for male fertility.

### Keywords
Tex101; testis-expressed sequence 101 protein; dpep3; dipeptidase 3; affinity purification-mass spectrometry; interactome; protein-protein interactions; testis-specific proteins; spermatozoa; disrupting antibodies

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada;Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada;Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada;Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Christina Schiza

### Lab Head
Dr Eleftherios P. Diamandis
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada;Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada;Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada;Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada


