### Accession
PXD037859

### Title
Synapse integrity and function: dependence on protein synthesis and identification of potential failure points

### Description
Synaptic integrity and function depend on myriad proteins - labile molecules with finite lifetimes that need to be continually replaced with freshly synthesized copies. Here we describe experiments designed to expose synaptic (and neuronal) properties and functions that are particularly sensitive to disruptions in protein supply, identify proteins lost early upon such disruptions, and uncover potential, yet currently underappreciated failure points. We report here that acute suppressions of protein synthesis are followed within hours by reductions in spontaneous network activity levels, impaired oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial function, reduced tenacity of both excitatory and inhibitory synapses and loss of synapses of both classes. Conversely, gross impairments in presynaptic vesicle recycling are observed only after several days, as is overt cell death. Proteomic analysis identified groups of potentially essential ‘early-lost’ proteins including regulators of synapse stability, proteins related to bioenergetics, fatty acid and lipid metabolism, and, unexpectedly, numerous proteins involved in Alzheimer’s disease pathology and amyloid beta processing.

### Sample Protocol
Cortical neurons were grown in culture for 14 days in media containing labeled lysine and arginine, either ‘Heavy’ (H) variants: Lys8 - 13C6, 15N2; Arg10 - 13C6, 15N4, or ‘Medium’ (M) variants: Lys6 - 13C6; Arg6 - 13C6. At this point, either CHX or a carrier solution was added to the cells labeled with either set of labeled amino acids.  0, 2, 4, or 8 hours after exposure, the cells were harvested, time-matched extracts were mixed and the samples were separated on SDS-PAGE. The proteins were trypsinized in gel and the peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS. 5 separate experiments were performed

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed by MaxQuant software and quantified by the same software using SiLAC For each protein at each time point, a ‘H/M ratio was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein synthesis, Silac, Synaptic integrity

### Affiliations
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Network Biology Research Laboratories  Fishbach Building, room 432  Technion City, Haifa 32000 Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Noam E. Ziv
Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Network Biology Research Laboratories  Fishbach Building, room 432  Technion City, Haifa 32000 Israel


