### Accession
PXD041625

### Title
Transcriptomics and proteomics reveal distinct biology for lymph node metastases and tumor deposits in colorectal cancer

### Description
Objective: Both lymph node metastases (LNMs) and tumor deposits (TDs) are included in colorectal cancer (CRC) staging, although knowledge regarding their biological background is lacking. This study aims to compare the biology of these prognostic features, which is essential for a better understanding of their role in CRC spread.  Design: Spatially resolved transcriptomic analysis using Digital Spatial Profiling was performed on TDs and LNMs from 10 CRC patients using 1,388 RNA targets, for the tumor cells and tumor microenvironment (TME). Shotgun proteomics identified 5,578 proteins in 12 different patients. Differences in RNA and protein expression were analyzed, and spatial deconvolution was performed. Image-based CMS (imCMS) analysis was performed on all TDs and LNMs included in the study. Results: Transcriptome and proteome profiles identified distinct clusters for TDs and LNMs in both the tumor and TME segment, with upregulation of matrix remodeling, cell adhesion/motility and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) in TDs (all p<0.05). Spatial deconvolution showed a significantly increased number of fibroblasts, macrophages, and regulatory T cells (p<0.05) in TDs. In consistency with a higher fibroblast and EMT component, imCMS classified 62% of TDs as poor prognosis subtype CMS4 compared to 36% of LNMs (p<0.05). Conclusion: Compared to LNMs, TDs have a more invasive state; involving a distinct TME and upregulation of EMT, which are reflected in a more frequent histological classification of TDs as CMS4. These results emphasize the heterogeneity of locoregional spread the fact that TDs should merit more attention both in future research and during staging.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve patients were selected for proteomic analysis, and from every patient one TD and one LNM was included (Supplementary Table 1). FFPE protein extracts were prepared by cutting five to ten sections of 10 µm FFPE tissue per TD or LNM, in triplicate. The sections were manually macro-dissected based on annotations made by a pathologist to include as little non-tumor material (lymphocytes for LNM, fatty tissue for TD) as possible, yielding a combination of tumor cells and TME in the final samples. The FFPE material was incubated three times in 1 mL 99.6% ethanol for 5 min after which they were vacuum-dried. The samples were homogenized with 100 µL lysis buffer (0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.1M dithiothreitol (DTT) and 4% SDS), followed by two times sonication on ice for 5 min with cycles of 30 sec on/off. Then, samples were incubated at 99°C for 60 min on 600rpm and sonicated again on ice for 15 cycles of 30 sec on/off. The extract was clarified by centrifugation at 16,000xg for 10 min at 21°C. The protein concentration of clarified lysate was measured using the Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific) after which 100 µg of each sample was used for Filter aided Sample Preparation (FASP(17)). The peptide samples were stored on stage tips at 4°C until measurement by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Peptide samples were eluted from StageTips with elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure H2O), reduced to 10% of the original volume by vacuum concentration and diluted in 0.1% formic acid to ~12 µL. The sample (5 µL) was injected and peptides were separated on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using different gradients of acetonitrile followed by washes at 60% followed by 95% acetonitrile for 120 min of total data collection. Mass spectra were collected with an acetonitrile gradient in top speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was done in MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 with default settings, with match-between-runs, iBAQ and label-free quantification enabled. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database including reverse peptide sequences for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation downloaded in June 2017. Mass tolerance was set at 4.5 and 20 ppm for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively. FDR was set at 0.01 for both the peptide and protein levels. A minimum of two ratio counts were required for protein quantification.  Common contaminants and decoy database hits were removed from the resulting MaxQuant protein groups file and alias gene names were replaced with official gene symbols using the Limma package. If this resulted in duplicate entries, the entry with the highest number of the razor + unique peptides was retained. Protein groups were required to have a least two assigned peptides, of which at least one was a unique peptide. Differentially enriched protein analysis was performed using the DEP package. All protein groups that were detected in all replicates of at least one condition were considered for downstream analysis. Imputation of missing values was performed using the MinProb method with the default settings. This yielded at total of 5,578 unique proteins for downstream analysis in R v4.2.0. or later.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Imcms, Digital spatial profiling, Lymph node metastases, Tumor deposits, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands


