### Accession
PXD024921

### Title
TMT-based proteomic analysis of CSF in dogs with intervertebral disc herniation

### Description
In our study, MS-based high-resolution proteomic analysis of CSF have been employed in order to gain deeper insights into changes occurring during IVDH in dogs, monitoring the pathophysiological processes at the protein and metabolite levels. The proteomics study involved canine patients classified within two groups. Healthy dogs (control group) (N=6) were mix breeds (20 kg average body weight), age 2-6 years, while the intervertebral disc herniation group (N=9) were mixed breeds (body weight 6-15 kg), age 7-12 years. In IVDH dogs, disc herniation was detected in T13/L1/L2 discs by CT. The dogs in IVDH group were paraplegic with preserved deep pain reflex and underwent a surgery procedure for decompression of the spinal cord.

### Sample Protocol
Cerebrospinal fluid was sampled under general anaesthesia from cisterna magna. Induction to general anaesthesia was obtained with propofol (Propofol®, Abbott, UK), administered intravenously and maintained with sevoflurane (Sevorane®, Abbott, UK) applied through an endotracheal tube. Anaesthesia was adjusted to minimally interfere cerebral blood flow and intracranial pressure. The CSF was collected into sterile Eppendorf tubes (size 1.5 mL), immediately centrifuged at 3000 xg at 4°C for 5 min, aliquoted into Eppendorf tubes (size 1.5 mL) to avoid multiple freeze-thaw cycles and stored at -80°C till analyzed. All samples were collected within 6 months.  Proteomic analysis of CSF samples (IVDH N=9 and control N=6) was performed by using a gel-free TMT-based quantitative approach as described previously (Horvatić et al., J Prot 2019, 192). In short, total protein concentration was determination using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). An internal standard was prepared by mixing equal protein amounts of each CSF sample. An amount of 35 µg CSF proteins was diluted to a volume of 100 µL using 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA), reduced (5 µL of 200 mM DTT for 60 min, 55°C) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), alkylated (5 µL of 375 mM IAA at 30 min, room temperature in the dark) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Lois, MO, USA) and acetone-precipitated (600 µL, overnight, -20°C). The obtained protein pellets were dissolved in 50 µL of 0.1 M TEAB and digested using trypsin gold (1 mg/mL, Promega; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37°C overnight). For labelling, TMT tenplex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were prepared as recommended by manufacturers and 19 µL of each reagent were used for labelling. The internal standard was labelled with TMT m/z 131, while other samples were randomized within two TMT experiments. Labelling reaction was quenched by 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Per experiment, nine TMT-labelled peptide samples were combined with the internal standard, aliquoted, dried, and stored at -80 °C for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.  High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as reported elsewhere (Jorvatić et al., J Prot 2019, 192). Differentially TMT-labelled peptides were desalted on the trap column and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm x 75 μm) using linear gradient 5-45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS-grade water. Ionization was achieved using a nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70000, 120 ms injection time, AGC target 1x106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. For HCD fragmentation, step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17500 and AGC target of 2x105 were used. Precursor ions with charge states of +1 and more than +7, as well as unassigned charge states, were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and reporter ion-based relative quantification the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3., Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied. Database search against Canis lupus familiaris FASTA files (downloaded from NCBI database 04/04/2019, 172083 entries) was performed using parameters as follows: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated automatically based on decoy database by the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer workflow and was set at 1%. Proteins containing at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were reported as identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Csf, Tmt, Intervertebral disc herniation, Dog

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia        Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia        Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


