### Accession
PXD027536

### Title
A Linkage- Specific Sialic Acid Labeling Strategy Reveals Different Site-Specific Glycosylation Patterns in SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Produced in CHO and HEK Cell Substrates

### Description
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus utilizes an extensively glycosylated spike protein that protrudes from the viral envelope to bind to angiotensin-converting enzyme-related carboxypeptidase (ACE2) as its primary receptor to mediate host-cell entry. Currently, the predominant recombinant spike protein production hosts are Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) and human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells. In this study, recombinant full-size spike protein was produced transiently in CHO and HEK cell suspensions. To further evaluate the sialic acid linkages presenting on spike glycans, a two-step amidation process, employing dimethylamine and ammonium hydroxide reactions in a solid support system, was developed to differentially modify the sialic acid linkages on glycans and glycopeptides from spike protein. We determined global and site-specific N-linked glycosylation patterns in soluble SARS-CoV-2 spike using MALDI-TOF and LC-MS/MS with electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) fragmentation. We identified the glycan compositions at 21 and 19 out of the 22 predicted N-glycosylation sites of the SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins produced in CHO and HEK, respectively. The N-glycan site at 1158 position (N1158) and the N-glycan sites at 122 ,282 and 1158 positions (N122, N282 and N1158) were found to be unoccupied on spike secreted from CHO and HEK cells, respectively. The structural mapping of glycans of recombinant human spike proteins revealed that CHO-Spike presented more complex and higher sialylation (α2,3-linked) content while HEK-Spike displayed more high-mannose and minor content of α2,3- and α2,6-linked sialic acids. The N74 site represents the most heavily N-glycosylated site on both spike proteins while some high-mannose abundant sites (N17, N234, N343, N616, N709, N717, N801 and N1134) on HEK-Spike may differentially shield the virus compared to CHO-spike and provide a different host immune system interaction strategy. Collectively, these data underscore the importance of characterizing site-specific glycosylation on recombinant human spike protein from HEK and CHO cells in order to better understand the impact of the production host on this complex and important protein used in diagnostics and vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
In this study, recombinant full-size spike protein was produced transiently in suspension propagated CHO and HEK hosts. To further evaluate the sialic acid linkages presenting on spike glycans, a two-step derivatization by dimethylamine and ammonium hydroxide using a solid support system was performed to differentially modify the sialic acid linkages on glycopeptides from spike protein secreted from the two hosts. We provided site-specific analysis of N-linked glycosylation on soluble full-size SARS-CoV-2 spike using LC-MS/MS with electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) fragmentation. The N-glycopeptides were enriched by HILIC column. For Nano LC-MS/MS analysis, glycopeptides were first loaded and de-salted with a trap column (Thermo Fisher PepMap™, C18, 3μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) at 5 μL/min with 100% Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) for 5 min. Then, glycopeptides were separated by an Accalaim PepMap™ 100 nano column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 250 mm) using a linear gradient of 2.5-37.5% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) over 85 min, with a wash at 90% B for 5 min. Data-dependent analysis (DDA) was carried out with a duty cycle of 2 s. Precursor masses were detected in the Orbitrap at resolution (R) = 120,000 (at m/z 200) with internal calibration (Easy IC). Stepped HCD spectra (HCD energy at 15, 25, and 35%) were acquired for precursors with charges between 2-8 and intensities over 5.0×104 at R= 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was set at 20 s. If at least one of the three common glycan oxonium fragment ions (m/z 138.0545, 204.0867, and 366.1396 Da) was observed within 15 ppm mass accuracy, EThcD acquisition were performed in the orbitrap at R = 30,000. The electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) reagent target was 2.0 × 105, with supplemental collision energy at 15%. The ETD reaction time was dependent on the precursor charge state: 125 ms (ETD reaction time) for charge 2, 100 ms for 3, 75 ms for 4, and 50 ms for ≥5.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using Byonic version 4.0 and glycopeptide quantification and characterization was performed by Byologic version 4.0. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 15 ppm. The manual score cutoff was 50, the PEP2D score was less than 0.5, and the protein false discovery rate (FDR) was 1%. To accommodate for amide-modified Neu5NAc and Neu5Gc masses, as incurred with use of dimethylamine and ammonium hydroxide, we built a mammalian N-glycan database to include these modifications. The α2,3-linked sialic acids formed a stable amidation structure with a mass shift of -0.984 Da, while the α2,6-linked sialic acids formed a stable dimethyl amidation structure in ammonium hydroxide with a mass shift of +27.047 Da. Dimethylamine can also modify the carboxyl groups on Aspartic acid (D), Glutamic acid (E) and the C-terminal of peptides. We noted this derivatization as a fixed modification in the Byonic search.

### Publication Abstract
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus utilizes the extensively glycosylated spike (S) protein protruding from the viral envelope to bind to angiotensin-converting enzyme-related carboxypeptidase (ACE2) as its primary receptor to mediate host-cell entry. Currently, the main recombinant S protein production hosts are Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) and human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells. In this study, a recombinant S protein truncated at the transmembrane domain and engineered to express a C-terminal trimerization motif was transiently produced in CHO and HEK cell suspensions. To further evaluate the sialic acid linkages presenting on S protein, a two-step amidation process, employing dimethylamine and ammonium hydroxide reactions in a solid support system, was developed to differentially modify the sialic acid linkages on the glycans and glycopeptides from the S protein. The process also adds a charge to Asp and Glu which aids in ionization. We used MALDI-TOF and LC-MS/MS with electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation (EThcD) fragmentation to determine global and site-specific N-linked glycosylation patterns. We identified 21 and 19 out of the 22 predicted N-glycosites of the SARS-CoV-2 S proteins produced in CHO and HEK, respectively. It was found that the N-glycosite at 1,158 position (N1158) and at 122, 282 and 1,158 positions (N122, N282 and N1158) were absent on S from CHO and HEK cells, respectively. The structural mapping of glycans of recombinant human S proteins reveals that CHO-Spike exhibits more complex and higher sialylation (&#x3b1;2,3-linked) content while HEK-Spike exhibits more high-mannose and a small amount of &#x3b1;2,3- and &#x3b1;2,6-linked sialic acids. The N74 site represents the most abundant glycosite on both spike proteins. The relatively higher amount of high-mannose abundant sites (N17, N234, N343, N616, N709, N717, N801, and N1134) on HEK-Spike suggests that glycan-shielding may differ among the two constructs. HEK-Spike can also provide different host immune system interaction profiles based on known immune system active lectins. Collectively, these data underscore the importance of characterizing the site-specific glycosylation of recombinant human spike proteins from HEK and CHO cells in order to better understand the impact of the production host on this complex and important protein used in research, diagnostics and vaccines.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Glycopeptide, Recombinant sars-2 spike, Sialic acids labeling

### Affiliations
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Johns Hopkins Universtiy

### Submitter
Qiong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr John F. Cipollo
Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)


