### Accession
PXD007573

### Title
iTRAQ-based proteomics suggests Ephb6 as a potential regulator of the ERK pathway in the prefrontal cortex of chronic social defeat stress model miceiTRAQ-based proteomics reveals Ephb6 as a potential regulator of the ERK pathway in the prefrontal cortex of chronic social defeat stress model mice

### Description
Purpose: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a worldwide concern and devastating psychiatric disease. The World Health Organization claims that MDD leads to at least 11.9% of the global burden of disease. However, the underlying pathophysiology mechanisms of MDD remain largely unknown.  Experimental design: Herein, we used a proteomic-based strategy to compare the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in chronic social defeat stress (CSDS) model mice with a control group. Based on pooled samples, differential proteins were identified in the PFC proteome using iTRAQ coupled with LC-MS/MS.  Results: Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was then followed to predict relevant pathways, with the ephrin receptor signaling pathway selected for further research. Additionally, as the selected key proteins of the ephrin receptor signaling pathway, ephrin type-B receptor 6 (EphB6) and the ERK pathway were validated by western blotting.  Conclusion and clinical relevant: Altogether, increased understanding of the ephrin receptor signaling pathway in MDD is provided, which implicates further investigation of PFC dysfunction induced by CSDS treatment.

### Sample Protocol
After the behavioral tests, mice were sacrificed by decapitation under 10% chloral hydrate anesthesia. Prefrontal tissue was rapidly dissected and stored in liquid nitrogen before storing frozen at -80C. Before iTRAQ, samples from the two groups (depressed group [n = 8] and control group [n = 8]) were prepared by the liquid nitrogen grinding method. Next, 1 ml SDT buffer was utilized for each sample obtained by liquid nitrogen grinding. After the samples had dissolved, lysates were sonicated (80 W, pulse for 5 s, rest for 7 s; repeat 6 times) and centrifuged (14000 ×g, 4C for 30 min). Next, supernatants were obtained through a 0.22 μm filter, before a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was applied for proteins quantification. For iTRAQ labeling and SCX fraction, two pooled samples were obtained corresponding to 8 mice in each treatment group, then each pooled sample was divided into two equal parts as biological replicates afterwards. Pooled proteins were digested and resultant peptide mixtures were labeled using iTRAQ reagent in accordance with a previous protocol [27]. Briefly, each sample was prepared for digestion (200 µg in 40 µl), diluted using 200 µl UA buffer, and centrifuged twice at 14000 ×g for 15 min, repeated twice. Next, 100 µl IAA buffer was added, then samples were incubated in darkness for 30 min. Afterwards, 100 µl UA buffer and dissolution buffer were used separately for washes, with each wash repeated twice. Proteins were then digested using 40 µl trypsin buffer (40 µl dissolution buffer containing 4 µl trypsin) at 37C overnight. Finally, released peptides were obtained and quantified. iTRAQ tags 115 and 116 were used to label peptides from the depressed group, while tags 113 and 114 were used for the control group. Labeled peptides were mixed at equal ratios and fractionated by SCX chromatography. Afterwards, approximately 34 fractions were collected from each test, followed by a C18 cartridges (66872-U; Sigma, USA) utilized for desalination  A Thermo Easy-nLC binary buffer system (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA) with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 84% acetonitrile) was performed for this experiment. Samples were first loaded to C18-reversed phase columns (2 cm × 100 μm, 5μm; C18) before preparing analytical columns (75 μm × 100 mm, 3μm; C18). Peptide mixtures were isolated at a 300 nl/min’s flow rate. While the separation gradient was set as below: 0–55 min, buffer B from 0% to 55%; 55–57 min, buffer B from 55% to 100%; and 57–60 min, buffer B remained 100%. Next, a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was applied to analyze eluted peptides. The mass range of positive ion mode was 300–1800 m/z, the resolution of survey scans was 70, 000 (m/z 200), the resolution for HCD spectra was 17, 500 (m/z 200), and maximum injecte times were respectively set at 10 ms and 60 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 40.0 s. The top 10 abundant precursor ions were used for MS/MS analysis with a normalized collision energy at 30 eV, and a underfill ratio at 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantitation, Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science) coupled with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) were used. The database from UniProt (uniprot_Mouse_77271_20150609) was downloaded, with the same search parameters as our previous study [28]. Herein, the Mascot search parameters of Mascot were described as below: Enzyme = trypsin; Fixed modifications = Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K); Missed cleavages = 2; Variable modification = Oxidation (M); Peptide mass tolerance = ± 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da; Furthermore, parameters of proteins quantification were set as follows: normalize on protein median, use of only unique peptides and the median protein ratio should be 1 after normalization. For the results, a false discovery rate (FDR)  0.01 was set. Here, a protein confidence index > 95% was used for protein identification and proteins deemed to be differentially expressed were filtered using p-values < 0.05

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ephb6, Chronic social defeat stress, Prefrontal cortex, Itraq, Major depressive disorder

### Affiliations
Chongqing Medical university
Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China

### Submitter
Guo Hua

### Lab Head
Dr Xie Peng
Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China


