### Accession
PXD020586

### Title
Quantitative Single-Cell Proteomics as a Tool to Characterize Cellular Hierarchies

### Description
Large-scale single-cell analyses are of fundamental importance in order to capture biological heterogeneity within complex cell systems, but have largely been limited to RNA-based technologies. Here we present a comprehensive benchmarked experimental and computational workflow, which establishes global single-cell mass spectrometry-based proteomics as a tool for large-scale single-cell analyses. By exploiting a primary leukemia model system, we demonstrate both through pre-enrichment of cell populations and through a non-enriched unbiased approach that our workflow enables the exploration of cellular heterogeneity within this aberrant developmental hierarchy. Our approach is capable of consistently quantifying approximately 1000 proteins per cell across thousands of individual cells using limited instrument time. Furthermore, we developed a computational workflow (SCeptre) that effectively normalizes the data, integrates available FACS data and facilitates downstream analysis. The approach presented here lays a solid foundation for implementing global single-cell proteomics studies across the world.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were resuspended for FACS sorting in fresh, ice cold PBS at 2e6 cells / ml. Cell sorting was done on a FACSAria I or III instrument, controlled by the DIVA software package and operating with a 100 μm nozzle. Cells were sorted at single-cell resolution, into a 384-well Eppendorf LoBind PCR plate (Eppendorf AG) containing 1 μl of our custom lysis buffer (80 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 20% TFE, 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA). Directly after sorting, plates were briefly spun, snap-frozen on dry ice and then boiled at 95°C in a PCR machine (Applied Biosystems Veriti 384-well) for 5mins. Plates were again snap-frozen on dry ice and stored at -80°C until further sample preparation. After thawing, protein lysates from the single cells were digested with 2 ng of Trypsin (Sigma cat. nr. T6567), dissolved in 1 μl of 100mM TEAB pH 8.5 containing Benzonase (Sigma cat. nr. E1014) diluted 1:500 (vol/vol) to digest any DNA that would interfere with downstream processing. For the booster plates, the amount of trypsin was increased to 10 ng in order to digest the protein content of each well containing 500 cells. Plates were vortexed and kept at 37°C overnight to complete the protein digestion. All dispensing steps in this protocol were done using the Dispendix I-DOT One instrument. After digestion, peptides were labelled with TMTPro reagents. Some example labelling layouts can be found in Supplementary Table 1. 6 mM of each label was added to the single-cell wells, while the 500-cell booster plate wells were labelled with 13 mM of TMTPro-126 reagent (in 1 μl volume) in each well or in case of the reference channel with TMTPro-127N. Subsequently, plates were kept at RT for 1h. The labelling reaction was quenched with 1 μl of 2.5% Hydroxylamine for 15 min, after which peptides were acidified with 1 μl of 2% TFA. For the empty wells, all steps were the same except no cells were sorted into the wells. Subsequently, the booster plates were pooled according to cell differentiation stage (blasts, progenitors and LSC), and desalted as five (including two reference channels: 1:1:1 & bulk) individual pools using a SOLAμ C18 96-well plate. Eluted and desalted peptides were concentrated to dryness in an Eppendorf Speedvac, after which they were resuspended in 1% TFA, mixed 1:1:1 in case of the 1:1:1 booster and diluted to a final concentration of the peptide equivalent of 35 cells / μl. Final TMT samples were then mixed from 14 or 13 single cells plus the equivalent of 200 booster channel cells and in case of the reference channel plus the equivalent of 10 cells. This pooling was performed using the Opentrons OT-2 liquid handler, except for the ‘medium’ and ‘high’ plates, which were pooled with a handheld multichannel pipette. The resulting peptide mix was concentrated once more in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile, containing iRT peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) for individual Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Single cell raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with the built-in TMTPro Reporter ion quantification workflows. Default settings were applied, with Trypsin as enzyme specificity. Spectra were matched against the 9606 human database obtained from Uniprot (Swiss-Prot with isoforms). Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), and Acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification, together with the TMTPro tag on both peptide N-termini and K residues. Spectra were searched using the Sequest search engine and validated with Percolator. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR. For the reporter ion quantification, normalization mode and scaling mode were set to None and average reporter s/n threshold was set to 0. Isotopic error correction was applied. MS3 bulk data was analyzed using the standard settings of the Tribrid TMTpro SPS MS3 workflow using Sequest and Percolator and the Reporter Quantification Consensus workflow. Log2-fold-changes were calculated by Proteome Discoverer from the three technical replicates (three reporter channels) per differentiation stage.

### Publication Abstract
Large-scale single-cell analyses are of fundamental importance in order to capture biological heterogeneity within complex cell systems, but have largely been limited to RNA-based technologies. Here we present a comprehensive benchmarked experimental and computational workflow, which establishes global single-cell mass spectrometry-based proteomics as a tool for large-scale single-cell analyses. By exploiting a primary leukemia model system, we demonstrate both through pre-enrichment of cell populations and through a non-enriched unbiased approach that our workflow enables the exploration of cellular heterogeneity within this aberrant developmental hierarchy. Our approach is capable of consistently quantifying ~1000 proteins per cell across thousands of individual cells using limited instrument time. Furthermore, we develop a computational workflow (SCeptre) that effectively normalizes the data, integrates available FACS data and facilitates downstream analysis. The approach presented here lays a foundation for implementing global single-cell proteomics studies across the world.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Scms, Single cell proteomics, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark  Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, DanStem, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Porse
The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark  Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark  Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Biology, DanStem, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


