### Accession
PXD031522

### Title
Widespread consumption of the common food additive xanthan gum by the human gut microbiota

### Description
The diets of industrialized countries reflect the increasing use of processed foods, often with the inclusion of novel food additives. Xanthan gum is a complex polysaccharide with unique rheological properties that have established its use as a widespread stabilizer and thickening agent. Xanthan gum’s chemical structure is distinct from the host and dietary polysaccharides that are more commonly expected to transit the gastrointestinal tract, and little is known about its direct interaction with the gut microbiota, which plays a central role in digestion of other dietary fiber polysaccharides. Here, we show that the ability to digest xanthan gum is surprisingly common in industrialized human gut microbiomes and appears contingent on a single uncultured bacterium in the family Ruminococcaceae. Our data reveal that this primary degrader cleaves the xanthan gum backbone before processing the released oligosaccharides using additional enzymes. Surprisingly, some individuals harbor a Bacteroides intestinalis that is incapable of consuming polymeric xanthan gum but grows on oligosaccharide products generated by the Ruminococcaceae. Feeding xanthan gum to germfree mice colonized with a human microbiota containing the uncultured Ruminococcaceae supports the idea that this additive can drive expansion of this primary degrader along with exogenously introduced Bacteroides intestinalis. Our work demonstrates the existence of a potential xanthan gum food chain involving at least two members of different phyla of gut bacteria and provides an initial framework to understand how widespread consumption of a recently introduced food additive influences human microbiomes.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1 L of xanthan gum culture was grown until it had completely liquified (~2-3 days). Supernatant was collected by centrifuging at 18,000 g and vacuum filtering through a 0.2 µm PES filter. 4M ammonium sulfate was added to 200-400 mL of filtrate to a final concentration of 2.4M and incubated for 30-60 mins at RT or, for one sample, overnight at 4 C. Precipitated proteins were harvested by centrifugation at 18,000 g for 30-60 mins, then resuspended in 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5). Three different fractionation protocols were followed, but after every fractionation step, active fractions were identified by mixing ~500 µL with 10 mg/mL xanthan and incubating at 37 C overnight; active-fractions were identified by loss of viscosity or production of xanthan oligosaccharides as visualized by TLC (method previously described).  1. Resuspended protein was filtered and applied to a HiTrapQ column, running a gradient from 0-100% B (Buffer A: 50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5; Buffer B: 50 mM sodium phosphate, 1 M NaCl, pH 7.5). Active fractions were pooled and concentrated with a 10 kDa MWCO centricon and injected onto an S-200 16/60 column equilibrated in 50 mM sodium phosphate, 200 mM NaCl, pH 7.5. The earliest fractions to elute with significant A280 absorbance were also the most active fractions; these were pooled and submitted for proteomics. 2. Resuspended protein was filtered and applied to an S-500 column equilibrated in 50 mM sodium phosphate, 200 mM NaCl, pH 7.5. Active fractions eluted in the middle of the separation were pooled and submitted for proteomics. 3. Resuspended protein was filtered and applied to an S-500 column equilibrated in 50 mM sodium phosphate, 200 mM NaCl, pH 7.5. Pooled fractions were applied to a 20 mL strong anion exchange column running a gradient from 0-100% B (Buffer A: 50 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5; Buffer B: 50 mM sodium phosphate, 1 M NaCl, pH 7.5). Active fractions were pooled and applied to a 1 mL weak anion exchange column (ANX) running a gradient from 0-100% B (Buffer A: 50 mM sodium phosphate, 10% glycerol, pH 7.5; Buffer B: 50 mM sodium phosphate, 1 M NaCl, 10% glycerol, pH 7.5). Active fractions were pooled and submitted for proteomics. Cysteines were reduced by adding 50 ml of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45 °C for 30 min.  Samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating with 65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, under darkness, for 30 min at room temperature.  An overnight digestion with 1 ug sequencing grade, modified trypsin was carried out at 37 C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer.  Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using manufacturer’s protocol (Waters).  Samples were completely dried using vacufuge.  Resulting peptides were dissolved in 8 ml of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution and 2 µls of the peptide solution were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 180 min (2-25% buffer B in 110 min, 25-40% in 20 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 10 min and requilibration with Buffer A for 30 min).  Eluent was directly introduced into Q exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source.  MS1 scans were acquired at 60K resolution (AGC target=3x106; max IT=50 ms).  Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~28%; 15K resolution; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data against a database of all proteins identified in the Sample 0 culture metagenomes using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were considered as potential modifications.  False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with an FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiota, Xanthan gum, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
Matthew Ostrowski

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Charles Martens
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


