### Accession
PXD019754

### Title
The proteomic landscape of centromeric chromatin reveals an essential role for the Ctf19 complex in meiotic kinetochore assembly.

### Description
Faithful gamete formation during meiosis requires that kinetochores take on new functions that impact homolog pairing/recombination and their attachments to microtubules. We used a proteomics pipeline to determine the global composition of centromeric chromatin and kinetochores at distinct meiotic stages. Our datasets uncover an unanticipated role for the Ctf19CCAN inner kinetochore sub-complex in gametogenesis. We show that components of the Ctf19 complex that are dispensable for mitotic growth become critical for assembly of a functional kinetochore upon meiotic entry. Consequently, in the absence of these factors, chromosomes fail to attach to meiotic spindles and produce inviable gametes due to gross segregation errors. Our evidence suggests that functional kinetochore assembly is driven by Ctf19CCAN complex-dependent Ipl1AURORA B positioning at the inner kinetochore. Thus, our global view of kinetochore composition in meiosis reveals the extent of kinetochore remodelling during gametogenesis and uncovers a kinetochore assembly pathway that becomes critical in meiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were briefly run into an SDS-PAGE gel (NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies, UK), in NuPAGE buffer (MES) and visualised using InstantBlueTM stain (Sigma Aldrich, UK). The stained gel areas were excised and de-stained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and 100% v/v acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and proteins were digested with trypsin (Shevchenko et al, 1996). In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5 ng/μL trypsin (Pierce, UK). Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA.  For CEN- and CEN*-chromatin samples, as well as for the no tag sample in Dsn1 immunoprecipitation, LC-MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL/min according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 150 min, then to 95% in 11 min. Survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4E5. MS2 was performed in the Ion trap at rapid scan mode with ion target of 2E4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27 (Olsen et al., 2007). The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.   For the Dsn1 immunoprecipitation samples (except the no tag sample which was processed as described above), MS-analyses were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK), coupled on-line to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical column with a self-assembled particle frit (Ishihama et al., 2002) and C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch, GmbH) was packed into a spray emitter (75-μm ID, 8-μm opening, 300-mm length; New Objective, UK) using an air-pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems, UK). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL/min according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 180 min, then to 95% in 16 min. The resolution for the MS1 scans was set to 70,000 and the top 10 most abundant peaks with charge ≥ 2 and isolation window of 2.0 Thomson were selected and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (Olsen et al., 2007) with normalised collision energy of 30. The maximum ion injection time for the MS and MS2 scans was set to 20 and 60 ms respectively and the AGC target was set to 1E6 for the MS scan and to 5E4 for the MS2 scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform version 1.6.1.0 (released in April 2018) was used to process raw files and searches were conducted against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain SK1) complete/reference proteome set of the Saccharomyces Genome Database (released in May, 2019), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm, while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was set to 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. LFQMS analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm) (Cox et al., 2014). For peptide and protein identifications FDR was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Kinetochores direct chromosome segregation in mitosis and meiosis. Faithful gamete formation through meiosis requires that kinetochores take on new functions that impact homolog pairing, recombination, and the orientation of kinetochore attachment to microtubules in meiosis I. Using an unbiased proteomics pipeline, we determined the composition of centromeric chromatin and kinetochores at distinct cell-cycle stages, revealing extensive reorganization of kinetochores during meiosis. The data uncover a network of meiotic chromosome axis and recombination proteins that bind to centromeres in the absence of the microtubule-binding outer kinetochore sub-complexes during meiotic prophase. We show that the Ctf19c<sup>CCAN</sup> inner kinetochore complex is essential for kinetochore organization in meiosis. Our functional analyses identify a Ctf19c<sup>CCAN</sup>-dependent kinetochore assembly pathway that is dispensable for mitotic growth but becomes critical upon meiotic entry. Therefore, changes in kinetochore composition and a distinct assembly pathway specialize meiotic kinetochores for successful gametogenesis.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Label-free quantitation., Kinetochores, Meiosis, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Adele Marston

### Lab Head
Dr Adele Marston
WCCB, University of Edinburgh


