### Accession
PXD036005

### Title
Saccharomyces cerevisiae LC-MSMS

### Description
IP-MS detection of proteins pulled down by Glc7-FLAG by mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Yeast strains with Glc7-FLAG tagged was harvested from 2 liters cultures cultured in rich media overnight to an optical density at 600 (OD600) of 1.0,washed and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Thawed cell pellets were ground with glass beads by using a Biospec bead beater [30 sec ON, 90 sec OFF] in cold room for ca. 45 min in IP buffer (40 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 10% Glycerol). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 45000 rpm at 4℃ for 90 min and the supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) at 4℃ for 10h. The beads were washed extensively in IP buffer for on-bead trypsin digestion. Briefly, immunoprecipitated protein was disulphide-reduced by adding DTT to final concentration of 25mM and reacted in an incubator shaker at 37℃ for 40min. Cysteines were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min. Immunoprecipitated protein was digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme : substrate) ratio at 37℃ and the supernatant peptides ware then desalted using C18 columns (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC column (Thermo Fisher) utilizing a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 LC system (Thermo Fisher) connected to QEHF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were eluted with a 5–20% gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. The MS1 scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000 over a mass range of 380–1,560 m/z,with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 1 × 10^6. The MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 15,000, with the normalized collision energy set to 24, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target of 2 × 10^5.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database from Uniport (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002311) using Sequest HT, MS Amanda and ptmRS algorithms in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher). The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass was 0.02 Da. Only fully tryptic peptides with up to two mis-cleavages and a false-detection rate of 1% using the percolator validator algorithms were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
How cells adapt their gene expression to nutritional changes remains poorly understood. Histone H3T11 is phosphorylated by pyruvate kinase to repress gene transcription. Here, we identify the protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), Glc7 as the enzyme that specifically dephosphorylates H3T11. We also characterize two novel Glc7-containing complexes and reveal their roles in regulating gene expression upon glucose starvation. Specifically, the Glc7-Sen1 complex dephosphorylates H3T11 to activate the transcription of autophagy-related genes. The Glc7-Rif1-Rap1 complex dephosphorylates H3T11 to derepress the transcription of telomere-proximal genes. Upon glucose starvation, Glc7 expression is up-regulated and more Glc7 translocates into the nucleus to dephosphorylate H3T11, leading to induction of autophagy and derepressed transcription of telomere-proximal genes. Furthermore, the functions of PP1/Glc7 and the two Glc7-containing complexes are conserved in mammals to regulate autophagy and telomere structure. Collectively, our results reveal a novel mechanism that regulate gene expression and chromatin structure in response to glucose availability.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Hubei University
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan,Hubei 430062, China

### Submitter
Yinsheng Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Shanshan Li
State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Hubei University, Wuhan,Hubei 430062, China


