### Accession
PXD018383

### Title
Proximal Biotinylation Based Combinatory Approach for Isolating Plasma Membrane Proteins

### Description
Comprehensive profiling of the cell surface proteome has been challenging due to the lack of tools for an effective and reproducible way to isolate plasma membrane proteins from mammalian cells. Here, we employ a proximity-dependent biotinylation approach to label and isolate plasma membrane proteins without an extra in vitro labeling step that we called plasma membrane-BioID. The lipid modified BirA* enzyme (MyrPalm BirA*) was targeted to the plasma membrane where it effectively biotinylates plasma membrane proteins. Biotinylated proteins were then affinity purified and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Our analysis demonstrates that combining conventional sucrose density gradient centrifugation and plasma membrane-BioID is ideal to overcome the inherent limitations of identification of integral membrane proteins and yields highly pure plasma components for downstream proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bound streptavidin beads were washed with urea solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5). After denaturing proteins with urea, proteins were reduced with 100 mM DTT in urea solution for 30 minutes at 56°C. The reduction step was followed by alkylation with chloroacetamide solution (50 mm 2-Chloroacetamide in urea solution) for 20 minutes at room temperature. To remove urea solution, the beads were washed with ammonium bicarbonate solution (50 mM NH4CO3) twice for 15 minutes. The beads were then incubated with trypsin for 16 hours at 37°C for proteolytic digestion. The digested peptides were then collected using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate solution by centrifugation. This process was repeated, and the beads were washed. Finally, the pooled peptides were acidified by using formic acid and were concentrated via Speed-Vac (SPD1010, Thermo). Concentrated samples were desalted by using Empore Octadecyl C18 (66883-U, Empore Sigma) columns.  The pI-based IEF peptide separations were performed with a 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). Before electro focusing, the peptide samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, #WAT054925). IPG gel strips of the 3100 OFFGEL High-resolution kit pH 3-10 (Agilent Technologies, #5188-6424 ) with a 24-well set-up were used according to the manufacturer's instructions. All 24 fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 and 2.3 using Sequest HT for protein identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N-termini) and oxidation of methionine were used as variable modifications. Maximal two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01. The other parameters were used with default settings. The database search was performed against the human Uniprot database (release 2016).  Spectral counts of identified proteins were used to calculate the Bayesian false discovery rate (BFDR) and the probability of possible protein-protein interactions by SAINTexpress v.3.6.3 with -L option 19. Proteins were filtered out according to the SAINTscore (>0.5) and BFDR (<0.05). Identified proteins were annotated using Gene Ontology terms. Annotations were acquired from Uniprot Database.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive profiling of the cell-surface proteome has been challenging due to the lack of tools for an effective and reproducible way to isolate plasma membrane proteins from mammalian cells. Here we employ a proximity-dependent biotinylation approach to label and isolate plasma membrane proteins without an extra <i>in vitro</i> labeling step, which we call Plasma Membrane-BioID. The lipid-modified BirA* enzyme (MyrPalm BirA*) was targeted to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, where it effectively biotinylated plasma membrane proteins. Biotinylated proteins were then affinity-purified and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Our analysis demonstrates that combining conventional sucrose density gradient centrifugation and Plasma Membrane-BioID is ideal to overcome the inherent limitations of the identification of integral membrane proteins, and it yields highly pure plasma components for downstream proteomic analysis.

### Keywords
Sucrose density fractionation, Biotinylation, Plasma membrane, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey
Koç University

### Submitter
Altuğ Kamacıoğlu

### Lab Head
Dr Nurhan Ozlu
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Koc University, Istanbul, Turkey


