### Accession
PXD031844

### Title
LncRNA LINC01186 directly bingding proteins in Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
We conducted an RNA pulldown assay in Hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 using in vitro-transcribed full-length LINC01186 RNA accompanied with a control EGFP RNA. The specific binding proteins of LINC01186 was identified using high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry process: 1). Cut the target strip with a glue cutting pen and place it in the centrifuge tube. 2) Wash twice with 50 µ l double distilled water for 10 min each time. 3) Add 50 µ l decolorizing solution (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate / acetonitrile (1:1)), decolorize at 37 ° C for 20 # min. 4) . repeat step 3 until the blue color fades. 5) Add 50 µ l acetonitrile to dehydrate the adhesive strip to white, and vacuum dry for 10 # min. 6) . add 10 mm DTT (prepared with 25mm ammonium bicarbonate) 50 µ L, 56 ° C water bath for 1 # H. 7) . cool the sample to room temperature, remove the solution, quickly add 30-40 mM IAA (prepared with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate) 50 µ L, and place it in a dark room for 45  min. 8) Clean the adhesive strip twice with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate + 50% acetonitrile for 10 min each time, dehydrate with acetonitrile until the adhesive strip turns white, and vacuum dry for 10 min. 9) Dilute 0.1 µ g / µ l trypsin enzyme solution 10-20 times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, add 2-3 µ l to each tube, centrifuge briefly, let the enzyme solution fully contact with the adhesive strip, and place it at 4 ° C for 30 minutes. After the enzymatic hydrolysate is completely absorbed, add 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to the total volume of 10-15 µ l at 37 ° C overnight. 10) Add 2 µ l 0.1% TFA to terminate the reaction, shake and mix well, centrifuge, collect the enzymatic hydrolysate and point the target.

### Data Protocol
1. Obtain the original data: according to the results measured by different machines, the original data format is different, more common. WIFF and RAW. Open it with the relevant software and you can see each sample, and the chromatograms and mass spectrograms of each sample; 2. Pretreatment: The WIFF format data is taken as an example, including extraction of primary and secondary mass spectrometry information, peak alignment, removal of isotope peak, peak area normalization, and RSD screening; 3. Multivariate statistical analysis: Principal component analysis (PCA), partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) 4. Differential screening: firstly, according to VIP>1, and then according to p-value<0.05, the differential metabolites were screened out. If the selected differential metabolites were still more, the screening could be carried out according to Fold Change. 5. Material qualitative: it can be divided into second-level qualitative and first-level qualitative, which can be through self-built database and public database such as Metlin. First-level qualitative has HMDB database, etc.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common subtype of liver cancer and the second most fatal cancer in the world despite the great therapeutic advances in the past two decades, which reminds us of the gap in fully understanding the oncogenic mechanism of HCC. To explore the key factors contributing to the progression of HCC, we identified a LncRNA, termed SALIS (Suppression of Apoptosis by LINC01186 Interacting with STAT5A), functions in promoting the proliferation, colony formation, migration and invasion while suppressing apoptosis in HCC cells. Mechanistic study indicated SALIS physically associates with transcription factor STAT5A and binds to the promoter regions of IGFBP3 and Caspase-7 to transcriptionally repress their expression and further inhibit apoptosis. Our findings identified SALIS as an oncogene to promote HCC by physically binding with STAT5A to inhibit the expression of pro-apoptotic IGFBP3 and Caspase-7, which suggests novel therapeutic targets for HCC treatments.

### Keywords
Human, Hcc, Linc01186, Hplc-ms

### Affiliations
Southern Medical University
Department of Occupational Health and Occupational Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
Xingyuan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xingyuan Liu
Department of Occupational Health and Occupational Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China


