### Accession
PXD001765

### Title
Time and compartment resolved proteome profiling of the extracellular niche in lung injury and repair

### Description
The extracellular niche is a key regulator of tissue morphogenesis and repair, however, its composition is currently not well characterized. Quantitative mass spectrometry resolved the dynamics of 8366 proteins from total tissue and bronchioalveolar lavage fluid in the consecutive phases of repair upon bleomycin induced lung injury. Joint analysis of proteome and transcriptome revealed posttranscriptional events during tissue remodeling. We developed a quantitative detergent solubility profiling method (QDSP), which enabled comprehensive characterization of the extracellular matrix and its interactions with secreted proteins, and showed the drastically altered association of morphogens, such as basement membrane netrins, to the insoluble matrix upon injury. We discovered several ECM proteins, including Emilin-2 and Collagen-XXVIII, as constituents of the provisional repair matrix. Our space and time resolved proteomics identified a host of tissue repair factor candidates with potential to promote the early events of progenitor cell mobilization or late events of repair pathways including the resolution of fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 2 μg of peptides were separated in a four hour gradient on a 50-cm long (75-μm inner diameter) column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 240-min gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B for 3 min and reequilibrated with buffer A for 3 min. Column temperature was kept at 50 °C by an in-house designed oven with a Peltier element (REF: Thakur) and operational parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQc software (Scheltema and Mann, 2012). MS data were acquired with a standard shotgun proteomics workflow, where in each cycle a full scan, providing an overview of the full complement of isotope patterns visible at that particular time point, is follow by up-to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans on the most abundant not yet sequenced isotopes (top10 method) (Michalski et al., 2011). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 charges in the 300−1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. Isolation of precursors was performed with the quadrupole at window of 3 Th. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25 % (the appropriate energy is calculated using this percentage, and m/z and charge state of the precursor). MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400 with an ion target value of 1 × 105, a maximum injection time of 120 ms, and fixed first mass of 100 Th. Repeat sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 40 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) (version 1.4.1.12) and peak lists were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (version May 2013), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). As fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation and as variable modifications hydroxylation of proline and methionine oxidation was used. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation up to 4.5 ppm after time-dependent mass calibration and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. For label free quantification in MaxQuant [MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014)] the minimum ratio count was set to two. For matching between runs the retention time alignment window was set to 30 minutes and the match time window was 1 minute.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a key regulator of tissue morphogenesis and repair. However, its composition and architecture are not well characterized. Here, we monitor remodeling of the extracellular niche in tissue repair in the bleomycin-induced lung injury mouse model. Mass spectrometry quantified 8,366 proteins from total tissue and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) over the course of 8 weeks, surveying tissue composition from the onset of inflammation and fibrosis to its full recovery. Combined analysis of proteome, secretome, and transcriptome highlighted post-transcriptional events during tissue fibrogenesis and defined the composition of airway epithelial lining fluid. To comprehensively characterize the ECM, we developed a quantitative detergent solubility profiling (QDSP) method, which identified Emilin-2 and collagen-XXVIII as novel constituents of the provisional repair matrix. QDSP revealed which secreted proteins interact with the ECM, and showed drastically altered association of morphogens to the insoluble matrix upon injury. Thus, our proteomic systems biology study assigns proteins to tissue compartments and uncovers their dynamic regulation upon lung injury and repair, potentially contributing to the development of anti-fibrotic strategies.

### Keywords
Regeneration, Proteomics, Fibrosis, Matrisome, Repair

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department for Proteomics and Signal Transduction

### Submitter
Herbert Schiller

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Department for Proteomics and Signal Transduction


