### Accession
PXD036226

### Title
The Proteomic Landscape of Soft Tissue Sarcomas

### Description
Soft tissue sarcomas (STS) are rare and diverse mesenchymal cancers with limited treatment options. Here we undertake comprehensive proteomic profiling of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tumour specimens from 321 STS patients representing 11 histological subtypes. 

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples were histologically reviewed, and sections with >75% tumour cell content taken. Each sample was deparaffinised with xylene washes, rehydrated in an ethanol gradient (100%, 96%, 70%), and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Lysis buffer (0.1M Tris-HCL pH8.8, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.35% (w/v) sodium lauryl sulphate) was added at 200ul/mg of dried tissue, samples homogenised by 3x30s pulses with a LabGen700 blender, sonicated on ice for 10 min, and heated to 95⁰C for 1h. Lysis was performed for 2h shaking at 750rpm at 80⁰C. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000xg at 4⁰C for 15min, supernatant retained, and concentration measured by bicinchoninic acid assay. Tissue extracts were digested by Filter-Aided Sample Preparation. Briefly, samples were concentrated in Amicon-Ultra 4 centrifugal filter units, and detergents removed with 8M urea washes. Samples were transferred to Amicon-Ulta 0.5 filters, reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol for 1h at 56⁰C, and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were washed with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and digested with trypsin (1:100ug sample) at 37⁰C overnight. Peptides were collected by three centrifugations at 14,000xg with 100mM ABC, desalted using SepPak C18 Plus cartridges, and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Dried peptides were labelled with TMT 11-Plex. For channel 131C, a pooled reference was used. Briefly, samples were incubated with TMT labels for 1h at room temperature, and the reaction quenched with 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried in a SpeedVac concentrator, and desalted with SepPak C18 Plus cartridges. All samples were fractionated off-line by Dionex UltiMate3000 HPLC system. Each sample was dissolved in 100µl of solvent A (0.1% NH4OH in water), sonicated for 5 minutes and centrifuged at 15,000xg for 2min. Supernatant was loaded onto a 2.1x150mm, 5µm XBridge C18 column (5µm particles) at a flowrate of 200µl/min and peptides were separated using gradient of 5-40% of solvent B (0.1% NH4OH in acetonitrile) for 30min followed by 40-80% of solvent B in 5min and held at 80% for additional 5min. 90 fractions (30s per fraction) were collected by automatic fraction collector into a 96 well-plate and combined into 10 fractions with a stepwise concatenation strategy. Pooled fractions were dried in SpeedVac concentrator. The liquid chromatography (LC)/MS analysis was performed on a Dionex UltiMate3000 HPLC coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer. Each peptide fraction was dissolved in 40μL of 0.1% formic acid and 10μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100μm × 2cm C18, 5μm, trapping column with a flow rate 10μL/min. Peptides were then separated with the EASY-Spray C18 capillary column (75μmx50cm, 2μm) at 45°C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient method at flow rate of 300nL/min included the following steps: for 120min gradient from 5% to 38% B, for 10min up to 95% B, for 5min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5min, for 10min isocratic at 5% B. The precursor ions were selected at 120k mass resolution, with automatic gain control 4×105 and ion trap for 50ms for collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with isolation width 0.7Th and collision energy at 35% in the top speed mode (3sec). Quantification spectra were obtained at the MS3 level with higher-energy C-trap dissociation fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection with quadrupole isolation width 0.7Th, collision energy 65% and 50k resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The SequestHT search engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 or 2.3 was used to search the raw mass spectra against reviewed UniProt human protein entries (v2018_07 or later) for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 missed cleavages. TMT6plex at N-terminus/lysine and Carbamidomethyl at cysteine were selected as static modifications. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine/glutamine. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included an integration window tolerance of 15ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise >3 were used for protein quantification. Proteins with an FDR <0.01 and a minimum of two peptides were used for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sarcoma, Ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
Leader of the Molecular and Systems Oncology Team in the Division of Molecular Pathology at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Paul Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
Leader of the Molecular and Systems Oncology Team in the Division of Molecular Pathology at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK


