### Accession
PXD043133

### Title
Inhibition of GPX4 enhances CDK4/6 inhibitor activity in breast cancer.

### Description
CDK4/6 inhibition is the standard of care for estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer, although cytostasis is frequently observed, and new treatment strategies that enhance efficacy are required. We performed a genome-wide CRISPR screen to identify genetic determinants of CDK4/6 inhibitors sensitivity. Multiple genes involved in oxidative stress and ferroptosis modulated palbociclib sensitivity. Depletion or inhibition of GPX4 increased sensitivity to palbociclib in ER+ breast cancer models, and sensitised triple negative breast cancer models to palbociclib, with GPX4 null xenografts being highly sensitive to palbociclib. Palbociclib induced oxidative stress and disordered lipid metabolism with lipid peroxidation, leading to a ferroptosis-sensitive state. Lipid peroxidation relied on a peroxisome AGPAT3-dependent pathway in ER+ breast cancer models, rather than the classical ACSL4 pathway. Our data demonstrate that CDK4/6 inhibition creates vulnerability to ferroptosis that could be exploited through combination with GPX4 inhibitors, enhancing sensitivity to CDK4/6 inhibition in breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 or T47D cells were seeded in T25 flasks and treated with vehicle or 1uM palbociclib for 7 days. Media and drugs were changed every 72 hrs. Cells were rinsed in PBS, harvested, and washed twice in PBS. The cell pellets were frozen at -80C and used for downstream proteomic analysis. For sample preparation and TMT labelling, cell pellets were dissolved in 150 μL lysis buffer of 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10% isopropanol, 50mM NaCl and Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (100X) (Thermo, #78442) on ice with pulsed probe sonication for 15 sec followed by boiling at 90 °C for 5 min and re-sonication for 5 sec. Protein concentration was measured with the Coomassie Plus Bradford Protein Assay (Pierce) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Protein aliquots of 60 μg were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h at 60 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Pierce) at 75 ng/μL overnight. The peptides were labelled with the TMTpro reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  For High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation and LC-MS Analysis, peptides were fractionated with the XBridge C18 column (2.1 x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Waters) on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system at high-pH. Mobile phase A was 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide. The TMTpro labelled peptide mixture was fractionated using a multi-step gradient elution at 0.2 mL/min. The separation method was: for 5 minutes isocratic at 5% B, for 35 min gradient to 35% B, gradient to 80% B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 minutes and re-equilibration to 5% B. Fractions were collected every 42 sec and vacuum dried.  LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex UltiMate 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide fractions were reconstituted in 40 μL 0.1% formic acid and 10 μL were loaded to the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, trapping column at 10 μL/min flow rate. The samples were then analysed with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) C18 capillary column at 45 °C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The gradient method at flow rate 300 nL/min was: for 90 min gradient from 5%-38% B, for 10 min up to 95% B, for 5 min isocratic at 95% B, re-equilibration to 5% B in 5 min, for 10 min isocratic at 5% B. Precursor ions within 375-1,500 m/z were selected at mass resolution of 120K in top speed mode (3 sec cycle) and were isolated for CID fragmentation with quadrupole isolation width 0.7 Th, collision energy 35% and max IT 35 ms. MS3 spectra were obtained with further HCD fragmentation of the top 5 most abundant CID fragments isolated with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). Collision energy was applied at 55% with 86 ms IT and 50K resolution. Targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further activation for 45 seconds with 7 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, the mass spectra were submitted to SequestHT for database search in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using reviewed UniProt  homo sapiens protein entries. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.5 Da for fully tryptic peptides. TMTpro at N-terminus/K and Carbamidomethyl at C were selected as static modifications. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of M and Deamidation of N/Q. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node and peptides were filtered for q-value<0.01 based on target-decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMTpro quantification method with an integration window of 15 ppm at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification, considering protein groups for peptide uniqueness. Peptides with average reporter signal-to-noise >3 were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdk4/6 inhibitor, Gpx4, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
ICR
Functional Proteomics, ICR

### Submitter
Graeme Benstead-Hume

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Functional Proteomics, ICR


