### Accession
PXD041401

### Title
A biotin targeting chimera (BioTAC) system to map small molecule interactomes in situ

### Description
Understanding how small molecules bind to specific protein complexes in living cells is critical to understanding their mechanism-of-action. Unbiased chemical biology strategies for direct readout of protein interactome remodelling by small molecules would provide advantages over target-focused approaches, including the ability to detect previously unknown ligand targets and complexes. However, there are few current methods for unbiased profiling of small molecule interactomes. To address this, we envisioned a technology that would combine the sensitivity and live-cell compatibility of proximity labelling coupled to mass spectrometry, with the specificity and unbiased nature of photoaffinity labelling. In this manuscript, we describe the BioTAC system, a small-molecule guided proximity labelling platform that can rapidly identify both direct and complexed small molecule binding proteins. We benchmark the system against µMap, photoaffinity labelling, affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry and proximity labelling coupled to mass spectrometry datasets. We also apply the BioTAC system to provide interactome maps of Trametinib and analogues. The BioTAC system overcomes a limitation of current approaches and supports identification of both inhibitor bound and molecular glue bound complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative Proteomics (Data-Dependent Acquisition)
9 million HEK293 cells were plated into 15 cm dishes (Corning, 430599) containing 12 mL of media and incubated overnight. Cells were transfected with 1 mL of OptiMEM containing 10 µg of BioTAC plasmid and 30 µL of TransIT-2020 transfection reagent for 24 hr. Following a media change, cells were pre-treated with parental molecules at indicated concentrations or vehicle (1% DMSO) for 10 min, then treated with 1 µM of bifunctional compound or vehicle (0.1% DMSO) for 10 min, and finally labeled with 100 µM biotin for indicated times (n = 3 biologically independent samples per condition). Cells were washed 5 times with DPBS then harvested by scraping on ice into 1.5 mL low-binding tubes (Eppendorf, 0030108442). Cells were lysed with 1.2 mL RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100) containing fresh 1x HALT inhibitor cocktail, 100 µM PMSF, and 125 U/mL benzonase, then sonicated with 15 x 1 second pulses at 40% power using a 5/64’’ probe (Qsonica) then chilled on ice for 15 min. Lysates were clarified by centrifuging at 16,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C, then protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. 3 mg protein was normalized to 1 mL in RIPA lysis buffer and rotated overnight at 4 °C with 250 µL of streptavidin magnetic beads that was pre-washed twice in RIPA lysis buffer. Beads were washed twice with RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1 M KCl, once quickly with 0.1 M sodium carbonate, once quickly with 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8, twice with RIPA lysis buffer, and finally 4 times in 50 mM Tris pH 8. On the final wash, beads were transferred to clean tubes and frozen at -80C.
Beads were resuspended in 1x TNE buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) containing 0.1% RapiGest SF (Waters, 186002122) then boiled at 95 °C for 5 min. Samples were reduced with 1 mM TCEP for 30 min at 37 °C, then carboxymethylated with 0.5 mg/mL of iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C, and neutralized with 2 mM TCEP. Samples were digested with 5 µg trypsin (Thermo, 90058) overnight at 37 °C. RapiGest SF was degraded and removed by treating the samples with 250 mM HCl at 37 °C for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. The soluble fraction was then added to a new tube and the peptides were extracted and desalted using C18 desalting columns (Thermo Scientific, PI-87782). Peptides were quantified using BCA assay and a total of 1 µg of peptides were injected for LC-MS analysis.
Trypsin-digested peptides were analyzed by ultra high pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization. The nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a Orbitrap fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Thermo Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System) using a 25 cm, 75-micron ID glass capillary packed with 1.7-µm C18 (130) BEHTM beads (Waters corporation). Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5–80%) of ACN (Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 375 μl/min for 1.5 h. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectrometer parameters are as follows: an MS1 survey scan using the orbitrap detector, mass range (m/z): 400-1500 (using quadrupole isolation), 120000 resolution setting, spray voltage of 2200 V, ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C, AGC target of 400000, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS1 survey scan was followed by data dependent scans using top speed for most intense ions, with charge state set to only include +2-5 ions, and 5 second exclusion time, while selecting ions with minimal intensities of 50000, in which the collision event was carried out in the high energy collision cell (HCD Collision Energy of 30%), and the fragment masses where analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer (With ion trap scan rate of turbo, first mass m/z was 100, AGC Target 5000 and maximum injection time of 35ms).

Quantitative Proteomics (Data-Independent Acquisition)
1.6 million HEK293 cells were plated into 6 cm dishes (Corning, 430196) containing 3 mL media and incubated overnight. Cells were transfected with 300 µL of OptiMEM containing 3 µg of BioTAC plasmid and 9 µL of TransIT-2020 transfection reagent for 24 hr. Following a media change, cells were pre-treated with parental molecules at indicated concentrations or vehicle (0.2% DMSO) for 10 min, then treated with 1 µM of bifunctional compound or vehicle (0.1% DMSO) for 10 min, and finally labeled with 100 µM biotin for indicated times (n = 3 biologically independent samples per condition). Cells were washed 3 times with DPBS then directly lysed with 300 µL RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100) containing fresh 1x HALT inhibitor cocktail, 100 µM PMSF, and 125 U/mL benzonase. Cells were transferred to 1.5 mL low-binding tubes and sonicated with one 5 second pulse at 40% power using a 5/64’’ probe then chilled on ice for 15 min. Lysates were clarified by centrifuging at 16,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C, then protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. 600 µg protein was normalized to 1 mL in RIPA lysis buffer and rotated overnight at 4 °C with 50 µL of streptavidin magnetic beads that was pre-washed with RIPA lysis buffer. Beads were washed twice with RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1 M KCl, once quickly with 0.1 M sodium carbonate, once quickly with 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris pH 8, twice with RIPA lysis buffer, and finally 3 times in 50 mM Tris pH 8. On the final wash, beads were transferred to clean tubes.
Beads were resuspended in 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 5 µl 5% RapiGest SF in 10x TNE buffer (500 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 M NaCl, 10 mM EDTA) then boiled at 95 °C for 10 min. Samples were reduced and carboxymethylated in one step by adding 200 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing fresh 3 µL 0.5 M TCEP and 9 µL 0.5 M chloroacetamide then shaking at 900 RPM on a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were digested with 1 µg trypsin at 900 RPM on a ThermoMixer overnight at 37 °C. RapiGest SF reagent was degraded and removed by adding 40 µL 1 M HCl (Sigma, H9892) and shaking at 900 RPM on a ThermoMixer at 37 °C for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 45 min at 4 °C. Beads were collected on a magnetic rack, then supernatants were carefully transferred to clean tubes and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C. Beads were collected on a magnetic rack and peptides were desalted with 0.6 µL C18 ZipTips (MilliporeSigma, ZTC18S096). Briefly, tips were equilibrated twice with 100% ACN then twice with 0.1% formic acid in water. Tips were loaded by aspirating and dispensing sample 10 times, then tips were washed three times with 0.1% formic acid in water. Peptides were eluted into clean tubes by aspirating and dispensing 5 times with 10 µL 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. Peptides were quantified by NanoDrop and 250 ng loaded onto Evotips (Evosep, EV2011) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, tips were equilibrated with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in ACN, soaked in isopropanol for 60 seconds, and equilibrated with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in water. Tips were loaded with peptides diluted in 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in water, then washed three times with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in water. Tips were briefly spun down with 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in water and soaked in 0.1% formic acid in water at 4 °C until analysis.
The Evosep One LC system (Evosep) coupled with a timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer (Bruker) was used to measure all samples. The 30 SPD (samples per day) methods required a 10 cm x 150 μm reverse-phase PepSep column packed with 1.5 μm C18 beads (Bruker) at 58 °C. The analytical columns were connected with a 10 μm ID fused silica emitter (Bruker) inside a CaptiveSpray nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker). The mobile phases comprised 0.1% formic acid in water as solution A and 0.1% formic acid in ACN as solution B. The dia-PASEF method covered an MS1 m/z range from 100 to 1700 for proteome measurements. Each method included one IM window per dia-PASEF scan with variable isolation windows at 20 amu segments (table of PASEF windows in Supplementary Dataset 1). Mass step per cycle was set to 34. The accumulation and ramp times were specified as 100 ms for all experiments. The ion mobility (IM) settings were 0.85 for Start IM [1/K0], and 1.3 for End IM [1/K0]. As a result, each MS1 scan and each MS2/dia-PASEF scan lasted 100 ms plus additional transfer time, and dia-PASEF scans had a cycle time of 1.38 s. The collision energy was set to 10 ev. 

### Data Protocol
Quantitative Proteomics (Data-Dependent Acquisition)
Protein identification was carried out in PEAKS Studio 10.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions) with the human reference proteome and the following parameters: semi-specific tryptic peptides, three missed cleavages, three variable modifications per peptide, 10 ppm parent mass error tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment mass error tolerance, and a 1% FDR cutoff. Missing values from identified proteins were imputed using the average of the lowest detected quantity in each sample. Quantities were DMSO normalized, then uploaded to Protigy 1.1.5 (Broad Institute) where data was log2 transformed and median-MAD scaled. A two-sample moderated T test and F test with nominal P-value filter of 0.05 was used to test for significant proteins.

Quantitative Proteomics (Data-Independent Acquisition)
Protein identification was carried out in DIA-NN 1.8.1 with an in silico spectral library generated from the human reference proteome (UP000005640_9606, version 2023-05-19). Default parameters, including 1% precursor FDR, were used except the following: canonical tryptic specificity (--cut K*,R*,!*P), two missed cleavages, two variable modifications per peptide, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation included as variable modifications, 10 ppm mass accuracy, 10 ppm MS1 accuracy, and heuristic protein inference not selected. Missing values from proteotypic identifications (unique_genes_matrix.tsv) were imputed using the average of the lowest detected quantity in each sample. Quantities were DMSO normalized, then uploaded to Protigy 1.1.5 (Broad Institute) where data was log2 transformed and median-MAD scaled. A two-sample moderated T test with nominal P-value filter of 0.05 was used to test for significant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding how small molecules bind to specific protein complexes in living cells is critical to understanding their mechanism-of-action. Unbiased chemical biology strategies for direct readout of protein interactome remodelling by small molecules would provide advantages over target-focused approaches, including the ability to detect previously unknown ligand targets and complexes. However, there are few current methods for unbiased profiling of small molecule interactomes. To address this, we envisioned a technology that would combine the sensitivity and live-cell compatibility of proximity labelling coupled to mass spectrometry, with the specificity and unbiased nature of chemoproteomics. In this manuscript, we describe the BioTAC system, a small-molecule guided proximity labelling platform that can rapidly identify both direct and complexed small molecule binding proteins. We benchmark the system against &#xb5;Map, photoaffinity labelling, affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry and proximity labelling coupled to mass spectrometry datasets. We also apply the BioTAC system to provide interactome maps of Trametinib and analogues. The BioTAC system overcomes a limitation of current approaches and supports identification of both inhibitor bound and molecular glue bound complexes.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
University of California, San Diego

### Submitter
Andrew Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Fleur Ferguson
University of California, San Diego


