### Accession
PXD038381

### Title
Dissecting detergent-insoluble proteome in Alzheimer's disease by improved TMT-MS of high accuracy

### Description
Protein aggregation of amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides and tau are pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), which are often resistant to detergent extraction and thus enriched in the insoluble proteome. However, additional proteins that co-accumulate in the detergent-insoluble AD brain proteome remain less studied. Here we comprehensively characterized key proteins and pathways in the detergent-insoluble proteome from human AD brain samples by differential extraction, coupled with tandem mass tags labeling and two-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
All tissue samples (human brain) were homogenized in 10 vol (w/v) in low salt buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, brought to 1% sarcosyl, sonicates and sequentially centrifuged. The pellets were resuspended in urea buffer containing 0.5% sodium deoxycholate for mass spectrometric and western blot analysis. The proteins were then in-gel digested and further labeled with different TMT tags. The pooled TMT labeled peptides were resolved and fractionated by an offline basic pH reverse-phase RPLC and analyzed by Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 20 data-dependent high-resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt human database. Searches were performed using 15 ppm mass tolerance and allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Protein aggregation of amyloid-&#x3b2; peptides and tau are pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), which are often resistant to detergent extraction and thus enriched in the insoluble proteome. However, additional proteins that coaccumulate in the detergent-insoluble AD brain proteome remain understudied. Here, we comprehensively characterized key proteins and pathways in the detergent-insoluble proteome from human AD brain samples using differential extraction, tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling, and two-dimensional LC-tandem mass spectrometry. To improve quantification accuracy of the TMT method, we developed a complement TMT-based strategy to correct for ratio compression. Through the meta-analysis of two independent detergent-insoluble AD proteome datasets (8914 and 8917 proteins), we identified 190 differentially expressed proteins in AD compared with control brains, highlighting the pathways of amyloid cascade, RNA splicing, endocytosis/exocytosis, protein degradation, and synaptic activity. To differentiate the truly detergent-insoluble proteins from copurified background during protein extraction, we analyzed the fold of enrichment for each protein by comparing the detergent-insoluble proteome with the whole proteome from the same AD samples. Among the 190 differentially expressed proteins, 84 (51%) proteins of the upregulated proteins (n&#xa0;= 165) were enriched in the insoluble proteome, whereas all downregulated proteins (n&#xa0;= 25) were not enriched, indicating that they were copurified components. The vast majority of these enriched 84 proteins harbor low-complexity regions in their sequences, including amyloid-&#x3b2;, Tau, TARDBP/TAR DNA-binding protein 43, SNRNP70/U1-70K, MDK, PTN, NTN1, NTN3, and SMOC1. Moreover, many of the enriched proteins in AD were validated in the detergent-insoluble proteome by five steps of differential extraction, proteomic analysis, or immunoblotting. Our study reveals a resource list of proteins and pathways that are exclusively present in the detergent-insoluble proteome, providing novel molecular insights to the formation of protein pathology in AD.

### Keywords
Alzheimer's disease; neurodegenerative disease; insoluble proteome; splicing; proteomics; mass spectrometry; tandem mass tag;

### Affiliations
St jude children's research hospital
Department of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA

### Submitter
FNU MASIHUZZAMAN

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
Department of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA


