### Accession
PXD022624

### Title
Systemic metabolic alterations correlate with islet-level prostaglandin E2 production and signaling mechanisms that predict beta-cell dysfunction in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes

### Description
The transition from β-cell compensation to β-cell failure is not well understood. Previous works by our group and others have demonstrated a role for Prostaglandin EP3 receptor (EP3), encoded by the Ptger3 gene, in the loss of functional β-cell mass in T2D. The primary endogenous EP3 ligand is the arachidonic acid metabolite, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). Pancreatic islet EP3 expression, expression of PGE2 synthetic enzymes, and/or PGE2 excretion itself have all been shown as up-regulated in primary mouse and human islets isolated from animals or human organ donors with established T2D as compared to non-diabetic controls.  In this study, we took advantage of a rare and fleeting phenotype in which a subset of Black and Tan BRachyury (BTBR) mice homozygous for the Leptinob/ob mutation—a strong genetic model of T2D—were entirely protected from fasting hyperglycemia even with equal obesity and insulin resistance as their hyperglycemic littermates. Utilizing this model, we found numerous alterations in full-body metabolic parameters in T2D-protected mice (e.g., gut microbiome composition, circulating pancreatic and incretin hormones, and markers of systemic inflammation) that correlate with improvements in EP3-mediated β-cell dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
For metabolite extraction, a 2:1 methanol:plasma extraction was applied as reported previously. Frozen mouse plasma samples were thawed on ice in a cold room (4 C). Thirty-microliter plasma aliquots were mixed with 60 µl of chilled LC-MS grade methanol (MeOH) followed by vortexing for 10 s. The samples were placed on a nutating mixer for 20 min and then centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4 C. Fifty microliters of supernatant was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube and mixed with 50 µl of water for FIE-FTICR MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were processed and analyzed using DataAnalysis 4.3 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Bucket (mass) lists in the positive and negative modes were generated using the T-ReX 2D workflow in MetaboScape 4.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The mzDelta was set to 0.50 mDa, max. The maximum charge state was set to 3, and the intensity threshold was set to 0. The minimum number of features for the result was set to 5. The bucket lists in the positive and negative modes were merged into one bucket list with 1.0 ppm m/z tolerance. Features with a ratio of sample average:blank average < 10 were deleted. The merged bucket list was annotated with the SmartFormula function in MetaboScape 4.0 with 2.0 ppm as the narrow Δm/z cutoff, 5.0 ppm as the wide Δm/z cutoff, 20 as the narrow mSigma cutoff, and 50 as the wide mSigma cutoff. Elements were set to CHNOPS, and element ratio filters were applied with common element ratio presets in MetaboScape 4.0, including 0.2-3.1 H/C ratio, 0-1.3 N/C ratio, 0-1.2 O/C ratio, 0-0.3 P/C ratio, 0-0.34 P/O ratio, and 0-0.8 S/C ratio. Electron configuration was set to Even (Senior and Lewis). Heuristic element count probability check was applied. Statistical analysis was performed using MetaboScape 4.0 and the online software MetaboAnalyst. The putative metabolites were annotated by METLIN with a 2 ppm mass error cutoff. In most cases, the isomer with the lowest METLIN number was reported. Lipids and lipid-like molecules were reported as a combined general chemical name with total fatty acid carbon number:number of double bonds. For carbohydrates, short peptides, fatty acids, glycerophosphocholines and glycerophosphoethanolamines, more than one isomers with similar structures and chemical properties may be reported for one mass. SmartFormula and METLIN MS based annotations provide information on the chemical formulas and tentative chemical names, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The transition from &#x3b2;-cell compensation to &#x3b2;-cell failure is not well understood. Previous works by our group and others have demonstrated a role for Prostaglandin EP3 receptor (EP3), encoded by the <i>Ptger3</i> gene, in the loss of functional &#x3b2;-cell mass in Type 2 diabetes (T2D). The primary endogenous EP3 ligand is the arachidonic acid metabolite prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> (PGE<sub>2</sub>). Expression of the pancreatic islet EP3 and PGE<sub>2</sub> synthetic enzymes and/or PGE<sub>2</sub> excretion itself have all been shown to be upregulated in primary mouse and human islets isolated from animals or human organ donors with established T2D compared to nondiabetic controls. In this study, we took advantage of a rare and fleeting phenotype in which a subset of Black and Tan BRachyury (BTBR) mice homozygous for the <i>Leptin<sup>ob/ob</sup> </i> mutation-a strong genetic model of T2D-were entirely protected from fasting hyperglycemia even with equal obesity and insulin resistance as their hyperglycemic littermates. Utilizing this model, we found numerous alterations in full-body metabolic parameters in T2D-protected mice (e.g., gut microbiome composition, circulating pancreatic and incretin hormones, and markers of systemic inflammation) that correlate with improvements in EP3-mediated &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction.

### Keywords
Prostaglandin e2; gut microbiota; metabolomics; adipokines; incretins; insulin secretion

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology Department of Chemistry Director of Mass Spectrometry Human Proteomics Program University of Wisconsin-Madison
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Yanlong Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ge
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology Department of Chemistry Director of Mass Spectrometry Human Proteomics Program University of Wisconsin-Madison


