### Accession
PXD016186

### Title
The long noncoding RNA Caren protects against heart failure via suppressing the Hint1-ATM signaling pathway

### Description
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have potential as novel therapeutic targets in cardiac disease, but their function in heart failure (HF) is not yet fully understood. Using a gene trapping approach in mouse embryonic stem cells, we identified a novel cytoplasmic lncRNA, dubbed Caren (cardiomyocyte-enriched noncoding transcript), which was predominantly expressed in cardiomyocytes. Caren was markedly downregulated in the mouse failing heart that was subjected to transverse aortic constriction (TAC). The ablation of Caren in the mouse heart accelerated HF-related phenotypes by TAC, whereas mice overexpressing Caren (CAG-Caren Tg mice) resisted TAC-induced HF. Proteomic analysis identified histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (Hint1) as a Caren target protein, while bioinformatic analysis of proteome revealed that Caren regulates the proteins involved in mitochondrial energetics in the heart. Furthermore, we found that Caren suppressed Hint1 expression at the translational level and that Hint1 overexpression reduced mitochondrial respiration capacity. Similar to CAG-Caren Tg mice, the reduced Hint1 expression in mice exerted cardioprotective effects on TAC-induced HF, which was associated with the decreased level of ATM serine/threonine kinase phosphorylation, known to activate DNA damage responses. Overall, we identify a novel cytoplasmic lncRNA that protects against the development of HF through suppressing the Hint1-ATM signaling, which presumably maintains mitochondrial energetics and prevents the DNA damage under pathological stress.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed as described in our previous work (Shibayama J, PLoS One 2015; Warren JS, PNAS 2018). Briefly,the extracted proteins from frozen ventricular tissue samples were reduced, alkylated, then digested with trypsin (1 ug trypsin: 40 ug proteins) overnight at 37°C on the filter in a humid environment. Peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer interfaced with an EASY-nlc nLC1000 UPLC outfitted with a PicoFrit reversed phase column (15 cm x 75 um inner diameter, 3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore diameter, New Objective).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the mouse Uniprot database using the database search algorithms in the MaxQuant software (1.6.0.16). The database search was carried out using the inbuilt Andromeda search engine and label-free quantification was carried out using MaxLFQ module. A mass tolerance of 20 ppm for MS1 and 0.5 Da for MS2 was used. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification and methione oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart failure, Mouse, Lncrna

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Department of Internal Medicine - Cardiology Division Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute, Univeristy of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA

### Submitter
Anna Bakhtina

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Franklin
Department of Internal Medicine - Cardiology Division Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute, Univeristy of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA


