### Accession
PXD014043

### Title
Temporal quantitative proteomics of mGluR-induced protein translation and phosphorylation in neurons

### Description
At neuronal synapses, activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1/5) triggers a form of long-term depression (mGluR-LTD) that relies on new protein synthesis and the internalization of AMPA-type glutamate receptors. Dysregulation of these processes has been implicated in the development of mental disorders such as autism spectrum disorders and therefore merit a better understanding on a molecular level. Here, to study mGluR-induced signaling pathways, we integrated quantitative phosphoproteomics with the analyses of newly synthesized proteins via bio-orthogonal amino acids (azidohomoalanine) in a pulsed labeling strategy in cultured hippocampal neurons stimulated with DHPG, a specific agonist for group I mGluRs. We identified several kinases with important roles in DHPG-induced mGluR activation, which we confirmed using small molecule kinase inhibitors. Furthermore, changes in the AMPA receptor endocytosis pathway in both protein synthesis and protein phosphorylation were identified, whereby Intersectin-1 was validated as a novel player in this pathway. This study revealed several new insights into the molecular pathways downstream of group I mGluR activation in hippocampal neurons, and provides a rich resource for further analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphorylated peptides At DIV14-17 neurons were stimulated with 100 µM DHPG for 0, 5, 10, or 20 minutes. Neurons were washed three times with PBS and harvested directly in 8 M Urea lysis buffer supplemented with phosphatase inhibitor and protease inhibitor. Neurons were lysed at 4°C by sonicating for 15 cycles of 30 sec. Protein content was determined with a Pierce BCA protein quantification assay. Equal amounts of protein were heated at 95°C for 5 minutes and then reduced (4 mM DTT) for 20 minutes at 56°C and alkylated (8 mM IAA) for 25 minutes in the dark at room temperature. The proteins were the digested with Lys-C (1:75, Wako) for 4h at 37°C, after which the samples were diluted to a urea concentration of 2M and trypsin (1:50, Sigma Aldrich) was added overnight. The peptides were acidified to a total concentration of 1% Formic Acid. Samples were cleaned up using OASIS sample cleanup cartridges (Waters) and dried in vacuo. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using Fe(III)-NTA cartridges in an automated fashion using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent technologies). The cartridges were primed with 0.1% TFA in ACN and equilibrated with loading buffer (80% ACN/0.1% TFA). Samples were suspended in loading buffer and loaded onto the cartridge. The peptides bound to the cartridges were washed with loading buffer and the phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 1% ammonia directly into 10% FA. The phosphorylated peptide enriched samples were analyzed with an UHPLC 1290 system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Before separation peptides were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm x 100 μm) and then separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm x 75 μm). Trapping was performed for 10 min in solvent A (0.1% FA) and the gradient was as follows; 4 - 8% solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) in 2 min, 8 - 24% in 71 min, 24 - 35% in 16 min, 35 - 60% in 7 min, 60 - 100% in 2 min and finally 100 % for 1 min. Flow was passively split to 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. At a resolution of 35.000 m/z at 400 m/z, MS full scan spectra were acquired from m/z 375–1600 after accumulation to a target value of 3e6. Up to ten most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalised collision energy of 25% after the accumulation to a target value of 5e4. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 17,500.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion list of 500 and a duration of 18s.  pAHA & TMT DIV12 hippocampal neurons were incubated in NB media supplemented with B27, 0.5 µM glutamine and penicillin/streptomycin and either with 4 mM L-AHA or 4 mM L-Methionine and in parallel stimulated with 100 µM DHPG or vehicle for 5 minutes at 37°C/5% CO2. Neurons were then moved into freshly supplemented NB media with either 4 mM L-AHA or 4 mM L-methionine and incubated at 37°C/5% CO2 until the end of the experiment (15, 45, and 90 minutes after initial DHPG stimulation).  Harvest followed three washes with PBS, directly into urea lysis buffer (Click-it Protein enrichment kit, Invitrogen C10416) supplemented with protease inhibitor. Neurons were lysed at 4°C by sonicating for 10 cycles of 30 sec. Protein content was determined with a Pierce BCA protein quantification assay. Newly synthesized proteins were then enriched from 100 µg of protein material per sample using the Click-it protein enrichment kit for chemistry capture of azide modified proteins following the manufactures protocol with small modifications. Sample cleanup was performed using the OASIS sample cleanup cartridges. TMT labeling was performed using the TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific). Labeled mixtures were cleaned using the OASIS sample cleanup cartridges. Fractions were reconstituted in 10% FA and analyzed in two technical replicates with a UHPLC 1290 system (Agilent technologies) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an in house made trap column (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18 column, 3 µm, 2 cm x 100 µm) and separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 µm, 50 cm x 75 µm). Trapping was performed for 5 min in solvent A (0.1% FA) and separation was performed using a 85 min linear gradient from 15% to 45% solvent B. Flow was passively split to 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. At a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z, MS full scan spectra were acquired from 375 – 1600 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3e6. Up to 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after accumulation to a target value of 5e4. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 60,000, with a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 12s.

### Data Protocol
Phosphorylated peptides RAW data files were processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1 92) and MS2 spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the TrEMBL protein database of Rattus Norvegicus (28,080 entries, downloaded 08/08/2017) spiked with common contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as enzyme and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Filtering was done at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide level. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for the precursor ions and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed, and “match between runs” was enabled. The data was further processed using Perseus 1.6.0.7, WebLogo, MotifX, and SynGO.  pAHA & TMT RAW data files were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.338) and Mascot search engine (v2.6.1), allowing for variable methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and methionine replacement by AHA. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The protein database consisted of the TrEMBL protein database of Rattus Norvegicus (28,080 entries, downloaded 08/08/2017) spiked with common contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set for trypsin, with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was 50 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. TMT 10plex was set as quantification method, and only unique peptides were used for quantification. Normalization mode was disabled, and reporter abundances were based on signal to noise values in all cases. Results were filtered using a 1% FDR cut-off at the protein and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
At neuronal synapses, activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR1/5) triggers a form of long-term depression (mGluR-LTD) that relies on new protein synthesis and the internalization of AMPA-type glutamate receptors. Dysregulation of these processes has been implicated in the development of mental disorders such as autism spectrum disorders and therefore merit a better understanding on a molecular level. Here, to study mGluR-induced signaling pathways, we integrated quantitative phosphoproteomics with the analyses of newly synthesized proteins via bio-orthogonal amino acids (azidohomoalanine) in a pulsed labeling strategy in cultured hippocampal neurons stimulated with DHPG, a specific agonist for group I mGluRs. We identified several kinases with important roles in DHPG-induced mGluR activation, which we confirmed using small molecule kinase inhibitors. Furthermore, changes in the AMPA receptor endocytosis pathway in both protein synthesis and protein phosphorylation were identified, whereby Intersectin-1 was validated as a novel player in this pathway. This study revealed several new insights into the molecular pathways downstream of group I mGluR activation in hippocampal neurons, and provides a rich resource for further analyses.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Synaptic plasticity, Proteomics, Ampa receptor, Tandem mass tags, Bioorthogonal amino acid tagging, Protein translation, Mglur-ltd, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Charlotte van Gelder

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
1 Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2 Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


