### Accession
PXD038281

### Title
Proteomics analysis of the corneal amyloid disaggregation effects by brain chaperone L-PGDS

### Description
TGFBIp-related corneal dystrophy (CD) is the most common form of stromal corneal dystrophy. Although CD is a group of inheritable and progressive corneal diseases, non-inheritable cases of corneal amyloid deposition are reported. TGFBIp-CD is characterized by the accumulation of insoluble protein deposits consisting smaller proteolytic fragments of TGFBIp in the corneal tissues, eventually leading to progressive corneal opacity. Maximum density of these aggregates is in the corneal center implicating the local absence of amyloid controlling factors. Currently, no other treatment options are available besides the surgical replacement of the affected corneal tissues with a donor’s cornea. Here we show that neuroprotective ATP-independent amyloid β chaperone L-PGDS abundant in cerebrospinal fluid but absent in the corneal tissues can effectively disaggregate amyloids in vitro and in the surgically excised human cornea of patients with TGFBIp-CD.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were added with Lysis buffer (EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit, Thermo Scientific, USA) to extract the proteins.  The lysates were then centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4oC.  The supernatant of the respective samples was aliquot into new tubes. Protein quantitation was done using DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., USA) for control sample. The protein solutions were then reduced, alkylated, digested and cleaned-up according to manufacturer’s instruction (EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit, Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were reconstituted in 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water and peptide concentration was determined by Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ Quantitative Fluorescent Peptide Assay.

### Data Protocol
The reconstituted samples were then analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to Orbitrap ExplorisTM  480 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The Easy-nLC system was equipped with an in-line trap column of PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, 75 μm x 2cm and Easy-spray Pepmap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 25cm x 75 μm column.  The EASY-nLC was operated at a flowrate of 300nL/min.  Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B was made up of 0.1%formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water.  The gradient comprised of a 35min step gradient from 5% to 18% mobile phase B, 20min from 18% to 50% solvent B and lastly 5min from 50% to 95% solvent B.  Orbitrap ExplorisTM  480 mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent and positive ionization mode.  MS measurements were performed as described below:  MS1 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120k with MaxIT mode set to auto.  The m/ z scan range was 350 to 1200 for full scan. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to custom with normalized AGC target at 300%.  Peptides were then selected for tMS2 using HCD Collision energy at 30% with a fixed collision energy mode and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30k with auto MaxIT.  The isolation window was set to custom with m/z set to 45.7.  The scan range mode was set to ‘Define First Mass’ at m/z 110.  The AGC target was set to custom with normalized AGC target set to 1000%.  The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Spectronaut (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) DirectDIA analysis.

### Publication Abstract
TGFBI-related corneal dystrophy (CD) is characterized by the accumulation of insoluble protein deposits in the corneal tissues, eventually leading to progressive corneal opacity. Here we show that ATP-independent amyloid-&#x3b2; chaperone L-PGDS can effectively disaggregate corneal amyloids in surgically excised human cornea of TGFBI-CD patients and release trapped amyloid hallmark proteins. Since the mechanism of amyloid disassembly by ATP-independent chaperones is unknown, we reconstructed atomic models of the amyloids self-assembled from TGFBIp-derived peptides and their complex with L-PGDS using cryo-EM and NMR. We show that L-PGDS specifically recognizes structurally frustrated regions in the amyloids and releases those frustrations. The released free energy increases the chaperone's binding affinity to amyloids, resulting in local restructuring and breakage of amyloids to protofibrils. Our mechanistic model provides insights into the alternative source of energy utilized by ATP-independent disaggregases and highlights the possibility of using these chaperones as treatment strategies for different types of amyloid-related diseases.

### Keywords
Corneal dystrophy, Amyloid disaggregation, L-pgds, Atp independent, Tgfbi-related corneal dystrophy

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 637551 
Assoc Prof Konstantin Pervushin SCHOOL OF BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES, Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Kimberly Jia Yi Low

### Lab Head
Dr Konstantin Pervushin
Assoc Prof Konstantin Pervushin SCHOOL OF BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES, Nanyang Technological University


