### Accession
PXD044360

### Title
AMPK activator 991 specifically activates SnRK1 and thereby affects seed germination in rice

### Description
Sucrose non-fermenting-1-related protein kinase 1 (SnRK1) is a central regulator of metabolism and developmental transition in plant. Compound 991 is a well-known 5′-adenosine monophosphate activated protein kinase (AMPK) activator in mammals. SnRK1 and AMPK are highly conserved. However, whether 991 could also act as a SnRK1 activator is unknown. Adding 991 significantly increased the activity of SnRK1 in desalted extracts from germinating rice seeds in vitro. To determine whether 991 has biological activity in plant, rice seeds were treated with different concentrations of 991. Low concentration of 991 promoted rice seed germination, while high concentration of 991 inhibited rice germination. The effect of 991 on rice germination is similar to the effect of OsSnRK1a overexpression on germination. To explore whether 991 affects germination by specifically affecting SnRK1, the germination status of the snrk1a mutant and WT under 1 μM 991 treatment were compared. The snrk1a mutant exhibited insensitivity to 991. Through phosphoproteomic analysis, we found that the differential phosphopeptides caused by 991 treatments and overexpression of OsSnRK1a are largely overlapped. Phosphoproteomic analysis also revealed that SnRK1 might affect rice germination by regulating the phosphorylation levels of S285-PIP2;4, S1013-SOS1 and S110-ABI5. These results showed that 991 is a specific and workable SnRK1 activator in rice. The promotion and inhibition of 991 treatments on germination also exist in wheat seeds. 991 is expected to be used for exploring the function of SnRK1 in more detail and depth and chemical regulation of growth and development in crops.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples for phosphoproteomic analysis Germinating seeds were first ground with liquid nitrogen. Total protein was extracted from 300 mg powder using 2 mL lysis buffer containing 1% TritonX-100, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail. After being sonicated three times on ice, the mixture was added with 2 mL Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0). After centrifugation at 5,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, the upper phase was transferred to a new tube. 8 mL ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol was added into the new tube to precipitate proteins. After centrifugation at 4,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was discarded. The proteins were washed with precooled methanol and acetone. The sample was redissolved in 8 M urea. Bradford quantification and SDS-PAGE were performed for extraction quality control. 100 μg of protein solution per sample was diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 by 4 times volumes. The protein solution was added with 2.5 μg of Trypsin enzyme in the ratio of protein: enzyme = 40:1 and digested for 4 h at 37 °C.  The phosphopeptides were enriched by Titanium dioxide (TiO2). The TiO2 beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) were first suspended in loading buffer [5% TFA, and 1 M glycolic acid, 80% acetonitrile (ACN)] for 15 min. 1 mg peptides were added with 4 mg prepared TiO2 beads. The mixture was shaken at 37 °C for 20 min. After centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature, the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed with 2 mL loading buffer three times. The phosphopeptides were eluted from TiO2 beads with 600 μL elution buffer (0.3 M NH4OH, 50% acetonitrile). The phosphopeptides were desalted using an Ultra Filter and vacuumed to dryness. The dry peptides were reconstituted with ddH2O for LC-MS/MS. DDA and DIA analysis by nano-LC-MS/MS The separation of peptide samples was performed by nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) using a self-packed C18 column (7.5×250 mm, 1.8 μm). The liquid chromatography mobile phases were water (mobile phase A) and acetonitrile (mobile phase B) with 0.1% FA. The effective gradient was as followed: 2% to 22% mobile phase B for 45 min, 22% to 35% mobile phase B for 5 min, 35% to 80% mobile phase B for 5 min, and holding at 80% mobile phase B for 5 min. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. The end of nanoElute was directly connected to timsTOF Pro2 mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) for DDA (Data Dependent Acquisition) Library Construction and DIA Mass Spectrometry Detection. After being ionized by the CaptiveSpray source, the aliquoted sample mixture was entered into timsTOF Pro2 for DDA mode detection. The ion source voltage was set to 1.5kV. The primary MS scanning range was set at 100-1,700m/z. The scanning range was 100-1700m/z. The screening conditions for the precursor ions of the secondary fragmentation were: the first 10 ions whose charge was 0 to 5+, and whose peak intensity exceeds 10,000, would be detected only when the peak intensity was higher than 2,500. The accumulation time of the primary scan was 100ms, the accumulation time of the secondary scan was 100ms, the ion fragmentation mode was CID, and the fragment ions were detected in TOF. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30s. After being ionized by the CaptiveSpray source, the aliquoted individual samples were entered into timsTOF Pro2 for DIA mode detection. The ion source voltage was set to 1.5kV. The primary MS scanning range was set at 452-1152m /z. The 452-1152m/z range was divided into 4 steps and each step was divided into 7 windows. The number of Mobility Windows was set to 2. The 56 windows were used for continuous window fragmentation and information collection. The fragmentation mode was CID. The mass width of each window was set to 25 and the cycle time of one DIA scan was set to 1.59s.

### Data Protocol
Database selection and data analysis Raw data were analyzed by DIA-NN algorithm (Demichev et al., 2020) and searched against Oryza sativa subsp. japonica in the UniProt protein database. The phosphorylated peptides were filtered based on the phosphosites probability from the result file of DIA-NN. The phosphosites with localization probability < 0.75 were removed. The samples were normalized after collating quantitative information from different samples. Two-sided Student's T-test and equal variance were used to test the significance of phosphopeptides between the set comparison groups. The differential phosphopeptides were screened with the fold change>2 and Pvalue<0.05. The motif of sequences was analyzed using MoMo (motif-x algorithm; Cheng et al., 2019). The width of motifs was set to 15. The minimum number of occurrences was set to 15. GO enrichment analysis was performed using OmicShare Tools, a free online platform for data analysis. Time series analysis was performed using the Mfuzz software package (Kumar and E. Futschik, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Germination, Snrk1, Ampk activator, Rice

### Affiliations
College of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China
College of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University.

### Submitter
Hu Yuxiang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuxiang Hu
College of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China


