### Accession
PXD048511

### Title
Proteomic analysis of serum small extracellular vesicles identifies diagnostic biomarkers for neuroblastoma

### Description
The search for new biomarkers for neuroblastoma diagnosis is driven by the need for improved accuracy, early detection, and personalized treatment of this particular type of cancer. Neuroblastoma is a pediatric cancer that primarily affects young children, and its diagnosis can be challenging due to its diverse clinical presentation and variable outcomes. Small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) have gained attention as potential tumor biomarkers due to their unique characteristics and their ability to reflect the molecular profile of the parent tumor cells. sEVs released by tumor cells can carry a cargo of proteins, nucleic acids (such as DNA and RNA), and other molecules that reflect the molecular diversity of the tumor. By analyzing the content of sEVs, researchers can gain insights into the heterogeneity of the tumor and potentially identify specific biomarkers associated with tumor subtypes or disease progression. sEVs can be found in various body fluids, this accessibility makes sEVs a promising source for non-invasive or minimally invasive diagnostic and monitoring approaches. sEVs are protected by a lipid bilayer membrane, which shields their cargo from degradation by enzymes and other harsh conditions in the extracellular environment. This stability allows sEVs to circulate in body fluids for extended periods, making them suitable for biomarker analysis. Here, we performed mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of serum sEVs to identify and validate potential protein biomarkers for diagnosis of NB.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen serum samples were thawed and then centrifuged. The supernatant was subjected to sEVs extraction using qEV size exclusion columns (qEVoriginal/70 nm Legacy, IZON Science, Christchurch, New Zealand). sEVs was collected and then concentrated to 250 µL using an Amicon® Ultra 10K centrifugal filter (Millipore, Burlington, MA). Purified sEVs were lysed and digested with trypsin using the standard filter-aided proteome preparation protocol.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using the settings for the human protein database UniProt. Reverse and potential contaminant proteins were removed. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) were variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and two missed cleavages were set as the maximum peptide length. The results were filtered at a 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and 0.05 FDR for proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomic, Extracellular vesicles, Liquid biopsy, Neuroblastoma

### Affiliations
Wayen Biotechnologies
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Children’s Medical Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Dongrui  Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Yang
Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Children’s Medical Center, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University


