### Accession
PXD006040

### Title
Leaf proteomics of drought-sensitive and -tolerant genotypes of fennel

### Description
To understand the drought responsive mechanisms and the harmful effects of stress, it is necessary to develop drought tolerant genotype. In this study, drought-sensitive and -tolerant fennel genotypes were selected. Using these materials, a gel-free/label-free proteomic technique was performed to identify responsive proteins in fennel leaf under drought stress

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of fennel were obtained from the Isfahan Center for Research of Agricultural Science and Natural Resources, Iran. Nineteen fennel genotypes were planted in a randomized complete block design with 3 blocks. Each block consisted of 19 rows 4 m length; spaced 0.25 m apart. In control condition, plants were daily watered through the cropping period. Drought stress was imposed on 50-day-old plants by withholding water at flowering stage and preventing rainwater using a rainout shelter. The third most fully expanded leaf was collected at 60 days after drought stress as sample.A portion (0.5 g) of samples was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. The powder was transferred to solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The mixture was vortexed, sonicated for 10 min, and then incubated for 1 h at -20°C with vortexing every 15 min. The suspension was centrifuged at 9000 x g for 20 min at 4°C, and the pellet was washed twice with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The pellet was dried using a Speed-Vac concentrator (Savant Instruments, Hickville, NY, USA), and resuspended in lysis buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM tributylphosphine by vortexing for 1 h at 25°C. The suspension was centrifuged at 20000 x g for 20 min at 25°C and the supernatant was collected as crude extract. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) fractionation of proteins was performed. A portion (0.5 g) of samples was homogenized in 5 mL of extraction buffer consisting of 0.5 M Tri-HCl (pH 7.8), 2% Triton X-100, 20 mM MgCl2, 2% 2-mercaptoethanol, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and 1 mM EDTA. The resulting slurry was sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 12000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The stock solution with 50% PEG (MW 4000) was added to the resulting supernatant to give a final concentration of 8%. The PEG-suspended solution was placed on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 1500 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The stock solution was added to the supernatant to give a final concentration of 16%. The PEG suspended resulting solution was placed on ice for 30 min, centrifuged at 12000 x g for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was precipitated with 4 volumes of cold trichloroacetic acid/acetone for 1 h at -20°C. After centrifugation of the solution at 12000 x g for 15 min at 4°C, the resulting pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer. The suspension was centrifuged at 20000 x g for 20 min at 25°C and the supernatant was collected as fractionated protein sample. Proteins (100 µg) were added to 400 µL of methanol and mixed thoroughly with each samples before further adding 100 µL of chloroform and 300 µL of water. After mixing, the samples were centrifuged at 20000 x g for 10 min to achieve phase separation. The upper aqueous phase was discarded and 300 µL of methanol was added slowly to the lower phase. The samples were further centrifuged at 20000 x g for 10 min, and the resulting pellets were dried. Dried samples were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C, and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37°C in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin (Wako, Osaka, Japan) at 1:100 enzyme/protein concentrations for 16 h at 37°C. The resulting peptides were acidified with formic acid (pH<3) and centrifuged at 20000 x g for 10 min. Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto an Ultimate 3000 nanoliquid chromatography (LC) system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) equipped with a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm; Dionex). Peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D x 120 mm; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. Peptide ions were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometry (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the LTQ Orbitrap MS over 400-1500 m/z with a resolution of 30000. The ions C24H39O+4 (m/z 391.28429), C14H46NO7Si+7 (m/z 536.16536), and C16H52NO8Si+8 (m/z 610.18416) were used as the lock mass standards. Values for the ion isolation window were set as follows: activation type was collision-induced dissociation; default charge state was 2; isolation width was 2.0 m/z; normalized collision energy was 35%; and activation time was 30 ms. Values for dynamic exclusion were determined as follows: repeat count was 2; repeat duration was 30 sec; exclusion list size was 500; exclusion duration was 90 sec; and exclusion mass width was ± 1.8 Da. The ten most intense precursor ions above the threshold value of 500 were selected for collision-induced fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against an Arabidopsis peptide database (TAIR10, http://www.arabidopsis.org/). For Mascot search, the parameters were as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation/methionine oxidation was set as a fixed modification/variable modification; trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme; 1 missed cleavage was allowed; peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da; and peptide charges were set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot results were filtered with the Mascot percolator to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification (Brosch et al., 2009). False discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were less than 1.0%. Peptides with a percolator ion score of more than 13 (p<0.05) were used for protein identification.The Mascot search results were exported in msf format for SIEVE analysis (version 2.1.377; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The relative abundances of peptides and proteins were compared between samples. For the analysis, the chromatographic peaks detected by MS were aligned, and the peptide peaks were detected as a frame using a frame time width of 5 min and a frame m/z width of 10 ppm. All produced frames for the parent ions were scanned by MS/MS. Chromatographic peak areas of each sample within a single frame were compared, and the ratios between samples in each frame were determined. The frames detected in the MS/MS scan were matched to the imported Mascot search results. The ratio of peptides between samples was determined from the relative variance-weighted average of the ratios in the frames that matched the peptides in the MS/MS spectrum. The ratios of the peptides were further integrated to determine the ratios of the corresponding proteins. In the differential analysis of protein abundance, total ion current was used for normalization. The minimum requirement for the identification of a protein was 2 matched peptides and a p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Fennel is attracted attention as a useful resource as researching medicinal plant for drought tolerance. To elucidate the response mechanism in drought-sensitive and -tolerant genotypes of fennel leaf, a gel-free/label-free proteomic technique was used. Fifty-day-old plants were subjected to drought stress for 60days. The relative water and proline contents were decreased and increased in sensitive genotypes, respectively; however, they were not a big change in tolerant genotypes. Photosynthesis was decreased in the sensitive genotypes under drought; however, it was increased in the tolerant genotype. In both drought-sensitive and -tolerant genotypes, proteins related to protein metabolism and cell organization were predominately affected under drought stress. The abundance of phosphoribulokinase and phosphoglycerate kinase enzymes were decreased and increased in drought-sensitive and -tolerant genotypes, respectively; however, the abundance of RuBisCO and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase enzymes were increased and decreased in drought-sensitive and -tolerant genotypes, respectively. Under drought stress, the abundance of glycolysis-related proteins was decreased in sensitive genotypes; however, they were increased in tolerance genotypes. Commonly changed proteins with polyethylene glycol fractionation such as cobalamin-independent methionine synthase were decreased and increased in drought-sensitive and -tolerant genotypes, respectively. These results suggest that cobalamin-independent methionine synthetase is involved in the tolerance of drought-tolerant fennel leaf under drought stress.

### Keywords
Fennel, Proteomics, Leaf, Drought

### Affiliations
National Institute of Crop Science
NARO Institute of Crop Science

### Submitter
Wang Xin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
National Institute of Crop Science


