### Accession
PXD023676

### Title
Proteomic analysis identifies novel BRCA1-associated protein 1 binding proteins

### Description
BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) is a tumor suppressor and its loss can result in mesothelioma, uveal and cutaneous melanoma, clear cell renal cell carcinoma and bladder cancer. BAP1 is a deubiquitinating enzyme of the UCH class that has been implicated in various cellular processes like cell growth, cell cycle progression, ferroptosis and ER metabolic stress response. Here, we identify novel BAP1 interacting proteins in the cytoplasm by expressing GFP-tagged BAP1 in an endogenous BAP1 deficient cell line using affinity purification followed by mass spec (AP-MS) analysis. Among these novel interacting proteins are all subunits of the heptameric coat protein complex I (COPI) that is involved in vesicle formation and protein cargo binding and sorting.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) containing 4.5 g/L glucose and supplemented with 10% v/v fetal bovine serum, 10 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 U/mL streptomycin. HeLa FRT wild-type or ΔBAP1 cells were cultured in medium supplemented with 5 µg/mL blasticidin and 200 µg/mL zeocin. FRT-mediated recombined cells were cultured in medium supplemented with 5 µg/mL blasticidin and 1 µg/mL puromycin. Extracts containing GFP-fusion proteins were incubated on GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek) for 20 minutes at 4°C on a rotating wheel in presence of Ethidium Bromide. After incubation, samples were spun at 1500 g for 2 minutes and supernatant was removed. Samples were washed 3 times using WCE or C300 buffer for WCE or cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts respectively. On the final wash, the final volume was removed using gel loader tips.Extracts containing only endogenous proteins were incubated overnight with the preferred antibody at 4°C on a rotating wheel in presence of Ethidium Bromide. Next day the lysate was transferred to SureBeads Protein G Magnetic beads for 2 hours at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Samples were washed three times using WCE buffer and a SureBeads Magnetic Rack (Bio-Rad) .Roller bottles with a surface area of 2125 cm2 were inoculated with cells from a confluent 15 cm petri dish in a total volume of 160 mL. Doxycycline was added to the medium after 48h and left for 24h - 48h to induce protein expression. Roller bottles were washed twice with PBS and cells were collected using trypsin. Cells were collected in 50 mL tubes and washed three times with PBS. Cytoplasmic and nuclear extract preparation and protein concentration was determined  using Bradford. Beads containing IP samples were washed three times using PBS to remove residual IGEPAL CA-630 and then completely aspirated using a gel-loader tip. Proteins were alkylated using 2-chloroacetamide (C0267-100G, Sigma-Aldrich) in elution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2 M urea, 10 mM DTT). Proteins were digested by 2 h Trypsin/Lys-C mix incubation (V5073, Promega) and collected. Beads were eluted again and eluates were combined and Trypsin/Lys-C digested overnight. Tryptic digests were desalted using Stage-Tips. Tryptic peptides were eluted twice from Stage-Tips using mass spectrometry buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were dried and dissolved in 8 µL 10% formic acid of which 3 µL (37.5%) was injected. Tryptic peptides were separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) mounted with a C18 analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 2.4 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH); 75 µm x 500 mm) operating online with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 90-min gradient, containing a 74-min linear increase from 6% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 15-min wash at 100% solvent B. Peptides were fragmented in the ion trap by HCD, the mass spectrometer running in ‘top speed’ mode with 3 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from the raw data using MaxQuant  version 1.6.0.1 using the UniProt human FASTA database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, whereas Acetyl (Protein N-term), GlyGly (K) and Oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications with a limit of 5 modifications per peptide. Data were analyzed using Perseus version 1.6.0.7 and visualized using R version 4.0.2 with Rstudio version 1.3.1093.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-ms, Ap-ms, Deubiquitination, Proteomics, Bap1

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute
The Netherlands Cancer Institute Proteomics Facility

### Submitter
Onno Bleijerveld

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
The Netherlands Cancer Institute Proteomics Facility


