### Accession
PXD007071

### Title
The impact of commonly used alkylating agents on artefactual peptide modification

### Description
Iodoacetamide is by far the most commonly used agent for alkylation of cysteine during sample preparation for proteomics.  An alternative, 2-chloroacetamide, has been recently suggested to reduce the alkylation of residues other than cysteine, such as the N-terminus, Asp, Glu, Lys, Ser, Thr and Tyr.  Here, we show that although 2-chloroacetamide reduces the level of off-target alkylation, it exhibits a range of adverse effects.  The most significant of these was methionine oxidation, which increases to a maximum of 40% of all Met containing peptides compared to 2-5% with iodoacetamide.  Increases were also observed for mono and dioxidised tryptophan.  No additional differences between the alkylating reagents were observed for a range of other post-translational modifications and digestion parameters.  The adverse impact of 2-chloroacetamide on methionine oxidation suggest it is not the ideal alkylating reagent for proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The isolation of organs from animals was done with approval from the Animal Care and Ethics Committee for the Children's Medical Research Institute, Sydney, Australia (project number C116).  Rat testis were collected, placed in liquid nitrogen and transferred to -80ºC until required.  Samples were processed in 2 groups of 8 over 3 separate experiments, for a total of 24 samples per condition.  Tissue punches (1-2 mg) were taken whilst testis were on dry ice, placed into Barocycler tubes and processed by pressure cycling technology (PCT) using a modified version of the PCT-SWATH protocol11.  6 M urea, in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8 was added to the tissue punches and a micropestle used to cap the tube12.  The tissue was homogenised and cells lysed using 60 cycles of 45 kpsi for 50 sec, followed by 10 sec at atmospheric pressure at 35ºC in a Barocycler 2320EXT (Pressure Biosciences Inc, Boston, MA).  Reduction and alkylation was performed during this process with either tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and IOA (Sigma ≥99% purity), or TCEP and CA (Sigma ≥98% purity)13,14.  The TCEP was used at a final concentration of 10 mM and the IOA or CA were used at a final concentration of 40 mM.  Following homogenisation, proteins were digested using Lys-C (Wako) for 45 cycles of 20 kpsi for 50 sec, followed by 10 sec at atmospheric pressure at 35ºC in a Barocycler 2320EXT.  The micropestle was replaced with a microcap (150 μL), the urea diluted to 1.1 M with 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8 and the peptides further digested with trypsin (Promega) for 90 cycles of 20 kpsi for 50 sec, followed by 10 sec at atmospheric pressure at 35ºC in a Barocycler 2320EXT.  In a one-off experiment to compare proteolytic digestion with Barocycler technology and digestion at atmospheric pressure, 16 samples (rat testis punches of 1-2 mg) were lysed in the Barocycler as outlined above.  Eight of these samples (4 alkylated with IOA and 4 with CA) were digested with Lys-C and trypsin as indicated above (45 then 90 min respectively).  The remaining 8 samples (4 alkylated with IOA and 4 with CA) were treated as above for the Lys-C and trypsin digests except that the Lys-C digest as at 35ºC, for 4 hrs at 1 atm and the trypsin digest was at 35ºC for 16 hrs at 1 atm. All digests were made up to a final volume of 1 mL with 0.5 % (v/v) formic acid in water and passed through an Empore™ C18 4 mm/1 mL SPE cartridge to concentrate and desalt the peptides.  Peptides were eluted and dried in a speed-vac, resuspended in 20 μL 0.5% (v/v) formic acid in water and their concentration assessed using A280 with an Implen NP80 nanophotometer.  Two micrograms of lysate were injected per sample onto the LC-MS/MS system. Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Sciex 6600 mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent Ekspert nanoLC 415 HPLC system.  Samples were loaded onto a trapping column (SGE C18G, 200 Å, 3 μm, 10 mm × 300 μm) before separation on an analytical column (SGE C18G, 200 Å, 3 μm, 250 mm × 300 μm) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for a total run time of 90 min.  The top 30 peptides were subjected to MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against a rat only sequence database, extracted from Uniprot (37,596 entries), using ProteinPilot 5.015 with settings of: urea denaturation, Thorough ID search and FDR analysis (set at 1% global FDR for protein identification).  The ProteinPilot FULL report option was used since it includes considerable information not included in the standard reporting template.  Cys-CAM was used for Cys modification when either IOA or CA were used for alkylation.  The Thorough ID search setting automatically searches for many known PTMs, including off-target alkylation of the N-terminus and Asp, Glu, His, Lys, Ser, Thr and Tyr residues.  Additionally, we examined oxidation of Met, Trp and dioxidation of Trp, along with deamidation (Asn, Gln), pyro-Glu(E), pyroGlu(Q) and carbamylation of the N-terminus and Lys.  Digestion efficiency was assessed using the percentage of canonical tryptic peptides, peptides with a missed cleavage and semi-tryptic cleavage.  A local FDR of 5% was used at the peptide level to assess these parameters.  In ProteinPilot, a 5% local FDR setting is more stringent than a 1% global FDR setting.  A two-tailed student’s t-test was used to assess significance, with the threshold set at <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Iodoacetamide is by far the most commonly used agent for alkylation of cysteine during sample preparation for proteomics. An alternative, 2-chloroacetamide, has recently been suggested to reduce the alkylation of residues other than cysteine, such as the N-terminus, Asp, Glu, Lys, Ser, Thr, and Tyr. Here we show that although 2-chloroacetamide reduces the level of off-target alkylation, it exhibits a range of adverse effects. The most significant of these is methionine oxidation, which increases to a maximum of 40% of all Met-containing peptides, compared with 2-5% with iodoacetamide. Increases were also observed for mono- and dioxidized tryptophan. No additional differences between the alkylating reagents were observed for a range of other post-translational modifications and digestion parameters. The deleterious effects were observed for 2-chloroacetamide from three separate suppliers. The adverse impact of 2-chloroacetamide on methionine oxidation suggests that it is not the ideal alkylating reagent for proteomics.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, N-terminal alkylation, Artefact, Alkylation, Cysteine alkylation

### Affiliations
ProCan and the Cell Signalling Units, Children’s Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney, 214 Hawkesbury Rd, Westmead, NSW Australia, 2145.
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Peter Hains

### Lab Head
Dr Philip J Robinson
ProCan and the Cell Signalling Units, Children’s Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney, 214 Hawkesbury Rd, Westmead, NSW Australia, 2145.


