### Accession
PXD032037

### Title
Hsp multichaperone complex buffers pathologically modified Tau

### Description
Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder in which misfolding and aggregation of pathologically modified Tau is critical for neuronal dysfunction and degeneration. The two central chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp90 coordinate protein homeostasis, but the nature of the interaction of Tau with the Hsp70/Hsp90 machinery has remained enigmatic. Here we show that Tau is a high-affinity substrate of the human Hsp70/Hsp90 machinery forming a 710 kDa client-loading complex. Complex formation involves extensive intermolecular contacts, blocks Tau aggregation and depends on Tau’s aggregation-prone repeat region. The Hsp90 co-chaperone p23 directly binds Tau and stabilizes the multichaperone/substrate complex, whereas the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase CHIP efficiently disassembles the machinery targeting Tau to proteasomal degradation. Because phosphorylated Tau binds the Hsp70/Hsp90 machinery but is not recognized by Hsp90 alone, the data establish the Hsp70/Hsp90 multichaperone complex as a critical regulator of Tau in neurodegenerative disorders.

### Sample Protocol
The Hsp70:Hop:Hsp90:Tau:p23 complex was mixed in a ratio of 1:1:1:5:5 in a final volume of 300 µL (35 µM chaperone concentration) and crosslinked with 1 mM disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS; ThermoFisher Scientific; stock solubilized in DMSO) or 10 mM 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimehtylaminopropyl) (EDC; with 25 mM Sulfo-NHS; ThermoFisher Scientific; stock solubilized in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.4/ 100 mM KCl/ 5 mM MgCl2/ 1 mM TCEP) at 25 ˚C. The cross-linking reaction was quenched after 30 min (DSS) and 60 min (EDC) with 20 mM Tris pH 7.4. The crosslinked products were separated by sucrose gradient purification (50 µL sample per 4 mL sucrose gradient (10-25 %) in 25 mM HEPES pH 7.4/ 100 mM KCl/ 5 mM MgCl2/ 1 mM TCEP) centrifuged for 16 h at 4 ˚C with 38000 rpm (SW 60 Ti rotor; Beckman Coulter). Fractions of 200 µL were taken top down and protein contents were analyzed by SDS page (4-15 % gradient gel).  Fractions containing the complex were pooled from six gradients of the same kind. Pooled fractions were adjusted to 8 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10 mM DTT and incubated 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were alkylated in the presence of 40 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min at 37 °C in the dark. The volume was adjusted to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Aliquots of 650 µL of sample are mixed each with 50 µL SP3 beads and proteins are precipitated with 650 µL of 100 % ethanol in the presence of the beads, incubated for 5 min at room temperature, spun down and the beads were washed twice with  500 µL of 80 % (v/v) ethanol. After complete removal of residual ethanol solution, beads were resuspended in 400 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0. Trypsin digest was performed overnight at 37 °C with 2.5 μg trypsin (Promega, V5111). Peptides were acidified with 4 µL of 100 % formic acid (FA), desalted on MicroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus) following manufacturer’s instructions and vacuum-dried. Dried peptides were dissolved in 50 µL 30 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % TFA and peptide size exclusion (pSEC, Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column on an ÄKTAmicro system, GE Healthcare) was performed to enrich for crosslinked peptides at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. Fractions of 50 µL were collected. The first 8 or 9 fractions (after EDC or DSS cross-linking, respectively) containing cross-linked peptides were vacuum-dried and dissolved in 5 % acetonitrile / 0.05 % TFA (v/v) for analysis by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS).  Crosslinked peptides derived from pSEC were analysed as technical duplicates on a Q ExactiveTM HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM and Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometers (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an in-house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Samples were separated applying the following 58 min gradient: mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid (v/v), mobile phase B of 80 % acetonitrile / 0.08 % formic acid (v/v). The gradient started at 5 % B, increasing to 10 % B within 3 min, followed by 10–42 % B within 35 min, 42-65 % within 7.9 min, then increasing B to 90 % within 0.6 min and keeping B constant at 90 % for 4.5 min. After each gradient the column was again equilibrated to 5 % B for 7.5 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap covering a mass range of 350–2000 m/z. Injection time was set to 70 ms or 50 ms on ExactiveTM HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM and Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer, respectively, and automatic gain control target to 3 × 106. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec. Only precursors with a charge state of 3–8 were included. MS2 spectra were recorded with a resolution of 30,000 in the Orbitrap, injection time was set to 250 ms, automatic gain control target to 5 × 105 and the isolation window to 1.4 m/z. Fragmentation was enforced by higher-energy collisional dissociation at 30 %. MS data were collected with Xcalibur v4.4.

### Data Protocol
For identification of crosslinked peptides, raw files were analysed by pLink (v. 2.3.9), pFind group51 using DSS or EDC as cross-linker and trypsin/P as digestion enzyme with maximal three missed cleavage sites. The search was conducted against a customized protein database containing all proteins within the complex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionines and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as a variable modifications. Searches were conducted in combinatorial mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 (separate mode). Spectra of both technical duplicates were combined and evaluated manually. For further analysis only interaction sites with 3 cross-linked peptide spectrum matches were taken into account.  Cross-linked sites were plotted as networks with xiView and mapped onto structures using Xlink Analyzer combined with UCSF Chimera. Intramolecular cross-links were affirmed as valid according to the cross-linker length with a distance threshold set to 29.4 Å for DSS (= 11.4 Å cross-linker arm + 2 x 6 Å for the two lysine side chains + 6 Å accounting for backbone flexibility) and to 17 Å for EDC (= 0 Å cross-linker arm + 6 Å for the two lysine side chain + 5 Å for the carboxylic acid side chain + 6 Å accounting for backbone flexibility).

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder in which misfolding and aggregation of pathologically modified Tau is critical for neuronal dysfunction and degeneration. The two central chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp90 coordinate protein homeostasis, but the nature of the interaction of Tau with the Hsp70/Hsp90 machinery has remained enigmatic. Here we show that Tau is a high-affinity substrate of the human Hsp70/Hsp90 machinery. Complex formation involves extensive intermolecular contacts, blocks Tau aggregation and depends on Tau's aggregation-prone repeat region. The Hsp90 co-chaperone p23 directly binds Tau and stabilizes the multichaperone/substrate complex, whereas the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase CHIP efficiently disassembles the machinery targeting Tau to proteasomal degradation. Because phosphorylated Tau binds the Hsp70/Hsp90 machinery but is not recognized by Hsp90 alone, the data establish the Hsp70/Hsp90 multichaperone complex as a critical regulator of Tau in neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Alzheimer´s disease, Hsp, Multichaperone, Tau

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany University Medical Center Goettingen, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics, Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany
Max-Plank Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Henning Urlaub

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Henning Urlaub
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany University Medical Center Goettingen, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Bioanalytics, Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany


