### Accession
PXD004113

### Title
Proteome and Secretome Analysis Reveals Differential Post-Transcriptional Regulation of Toll-Like Receptor Responses

### Description
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are essential sensors in innate immunity and among the first to detect invading pathogens. Many studies of TLR responses have focused on the intracellular signaling events that occur upon receptor stimulation. However, proteins released from the cell play a key role in cell-cell communication during an immune response. We have used mass spectrometry-based proteomic methods to investigate both the intracellular and extracellular responses of macrophages stimulated with individual TLR2, TLR4, and TLR7 ligands and whole pathogens. We performed global quantitative analyses of the mouse macrophage proteome and secretome using stable isotope labeling with amino acids and high-resolution mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
RAW264.7 mouse macrophages (3-plex SILAC) were stimulated with 100 ng/ml LPS, 1 uM Pam3Cys, 1 uM R848, or whole pathogens for 0 h (Arg0, Lys0), 6 h (Arg6, Lys4), or 12 h (Arg10, Lys8) for the proteome. For the secretome, cells were switched to serum-free media prior to stimulation and untreated for 24 h (Arg0, Lys0), or treated for 6 h (Arg6, Lys4) or 24 h (Arg10, Lys8). Proteome and secretome samples were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and processed for mass spectrometry analysis by in-gel iodoacetamide alkylation followed by trypsin digestion. Extracted peptides were analyzed using a nanoLC-LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos using shotgun or targeted MS.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.4.1.2 with a 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The innate immune system is the organism's first line of defense against pathogens. Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) are responsible for sensing the presence of pathogen-associated molecules. The prototypic PRRs, the membrane-bound receptors of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family, recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and initiate an innate immune response through signaling pathways that depend on the adaptor molecules MyD88 and TRIF. Deciphering the differences in the complex signaling events that lead to pathogen recognition and initiation of the correct response remains challenging. Here we report the discovery of temporal changes in the protein signaling components involved in innate immunity. Using an integrated strategy combining unbiased proteomics, transcriptomics and macrophage stimulations with three different PAMPs, we identified differences in signaling between individual TLRs and revealed specifics of pathway regulation at the protein level.

### Keywords
Targeted ms, Lc-msms, Mouse, Raw264.7, 3plex silac, Secretome, Tlr, Macrophage

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
NIAID

### Submitter
Aleksandra Nita-Lazar

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA


