### Accession
PXD042167

### Title
PolQ peptide 4S-P (1482-P/86-P/88-P/93-P) binding partners identification

### Description
We characterized residus of PolQ which are phosphorylated during mitotis. We aimed to identify the partners of the phosphorylated residus of PolQ.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated Polθ peptides containing desired serines phosphorylated or not were purchased from Genecust (4S and 4S-P peptides), and were re-suspended at concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 2 mg/ml in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were coupled to streptavidin beads in 150 mM NaCl on a wheel at room temperature, during 1 hour. Beads were washed twice in 150 mM NaCl prior to use in pull-down assays. For Polθ peptide 4S-P (1482-P/1486-P/1488-P/1493-P) binding partners identification by mass spectrometry (MS), nuclear extracts from HeLa cells (666 μg) were incubated with 1 nmol of 4S-P streptavidin beads-coupled peptide, on a rotating wheel for 2 hours at room temperature. After incubation, the beads were washed three times using 150 mM NaCl buffer and twice using 300 mM NaCl. All buffers used were supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors. Finally, beads were resuspended in 100 μL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 and digested by adding 0.2 μg of trypsin-LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips packed by stacking three AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 CH3CN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness with a SpeedVac device. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 of injection buffer in 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. MS analysis was performed on five independent pull-downs. Pull-downs of Polθ unphosphorylated peptide (1482/1486/1488/1493) and pull-downs of streptavidin beads incubated in Hela nuclear extract were used as control.   Peptides sequences are:  4S-P (1482/86/88/93):  Biotin-GSG-EGENLPVPETpSLNMpSDpSLLFDpSFSDDY 4S (1482/86/88/93):   Biotin-GSG-EGENLPVPETSLNMSDSLLFDSFSDDYS

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens UP000005640_9606 database (downloaded 04/2022 containing 20509 entries) using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS [PMID: 17610305; https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms] v.3.9.3. False-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator [PMID: 27572102] and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Label-free quantification was performed using peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ [PMID: 21751374] v.2.2.1. For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) and with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization at peptide level was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are deleterious lesions that challenge genome integrity. To mitigate this threat, human cells rely on the activity of multiple DNA repair machineries that are tightly regulated throughout the cell cycle<sup>1</sup>. In interphase, DSBs are mainly repaired by non-homologous end joining and homologous recombination<sup>2</sup>. However, these pathways are completely inhibited in mitosis<sup>3-5</sup>, leaving the fate of mitotic DSBs unknown. Here we show that DNA polymerase theta<sup>6</sup> (Pol&#x3b8;) repairs mitotic DSBs and thereby maintains genome integrity. In contrast to other DSB repair factors, Pol&#x3b8; function is activated in mitosis upon phosphorylation by Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). Phosphorylated Pol&#x3b8; is recruited by a direct interaction with the BRCA1 C-terminal domains of TOPBP1 to mitotic DSBs, where it mediates joining of broken DNA ends. Loss of Pol&#x3b8; leads to defective repair of mitotic DSBs, resulting in a loss of genome integrity. This is further exacerbated in cells that are deficient in homologous recombination, where loss of mitotic DSB repair by Pol&#x3b8; results in cell death. Our results identify mitotic DSB repair as the underlying cause of synthetic lethality between Pol&#x3b8; and homologous recombination. Together, our findings reveal the critical importance of mitotic DSB repair in the maintenance of genome integrity.

### Keywords
Polq, Phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


