### Accession
PXD024591

### Title
PGC-1alpha mediates a metabolic host defense response in human airway epithelium during rhinovirus infections

### Description
Human rhinoviruses (HRV) are common cold viruses associated with exacerbations of lower airways diseases. Although viral induced epithelial damage mediates inflammation, the molecular mechanisms responsible for airway epithelial damage and dysfunction remain undefined. Using experimental HRV infection studies in humans and highly differentiated human bronchial epithelial cells grown at air-liquid interface (ALI), we examined the links between viral host defense, cellular metabolism, and epithelial barrier function. We observed that early HRV-C15 infection induced a transitory barrier-protective metabolic state characterized by glycolysis that ultimately becomes exhausted as the infection progresses and leads to cellular damage. Pharmacological promotion of glycolysis induced ROS-dependent upregulation of the mitochondrial metabolic regulator, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha), thereby restoring epithelial barrier function, improving viral defense, and attenuating disease pathology. Therefore, PGC-1alpha regulates a metabolic pathway essential to host defense that can be therapeutically targeted to rescue airway epithelial barrier dysfunction and potentially prevent severe respiratory complications or secondary bacterial infections.

### Sample Protocol
Air-liqui interface (ALI) cultures (n = 6 lung donors) were infected with HRV-C15 or mock diluted in 25 mM HEPES in F12 for 2 h. ALI insert was lysed in 1% SDS, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM EDTA, and 1X protease inhibitors. Protein was briefly sonicated on ice, centrifuged at 10,000 × g and stored at -80°C until TMTsixplex Isobaric Labeling. Protein concentrations were determined by a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer at 280 nm. 100 ug of protein was mixed with lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM EDTA, and 1X protease inhibitors) to a final volume of 100 uL. Samples were reduced in 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), for 1 hour at 55°C, reduced cysteines were alkylated by incubation with iodoacetamide solution (50 mM) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were precipitated by acetone/methanol, and 600 uL ice-cold acetone was added followed by incubation at -20 °C overnight. A protein pellet was obtained by centrifugation (8000 × g, 10 minutes, 4°C) followed by acetone drying (2-3 minutes). Precipitated pellet was resuspended in 100 uL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer followed by trypsin digestion (5 ug trypsin per 100 ug of protein) overnight at 37°C. TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Labeling Reagents (90061, ThermoFisher) were resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile and added to each sample (41 uL TMT reagent per 100 uL sample) and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. The TMT labeling reaction was quenched by 2.5 % hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. TMT labeled samples were combined and acidified in 100% trifluoroacetic acid to pH < 3.0 and subjected to C18 chromatography (Sep-Pak) according to manufacturer recommendations. Samples were stored at -80 °C before lyophilization, followed by resuspension in 1% formic acid before liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow liquid chromatography) 1200 System. Tryptic peptides (2 ug) were loaded onto a C18 trap (75 um x 2 cm; Acclaim PepMap 100, P/N 164946; ThermoFisher) at a flow rate of 2 uL/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade H2O). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 uL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 um x 50 cm; PepMap RSLC C18; P/N ES803A; ThermoScientific). Peptides were then electrosprayed using 2.1 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300 °C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a m/z between 375 and 1,575 and a +2 to +4 charge. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain Control) and the maximum injection time were set at 4x10^5 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 second cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 2x10^4 were isolated using the quadrupole (Isolation window (m/z) of 0.7) and fragmented using HCD (38% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. The AGC and the maximum injection time were set at 1x10^5 and 105 ms, respectively. The first mass for the MS2 was set at 100 to acquire the TMT reporter ions. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 seconds to avoid of the acquisition of same precursor ion having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm). Data analysis was performed using Metascape https://metascape.org.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Lung, Metabolism, Airway

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology 
Dufour Lab, University of Calgary, department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Antoine Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Dufour Lab, University of Calgary, department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology


