### Accession
PXD032319

### Title
Toxoplasma gondii PRU ROP1-HA Co-Immunoprecipitation

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite that can infect many different host species and is a cause of significant human morbidity worldwide. T. gondii secretes a diverse array of effector proteins into the host cell which are critical for infection; however, the vast majority of these secreted proteins are uncharacterised. Here, we carried out a pooled CRISPR knockout screen in the T. gondii Prugniaud strain in vivo to identify secreted proteins which contribute to parasite immune evasion in the host. We identify 22 putative virulence factors and demonstrate that ROP1, the first-identified rhoptry protein of T. gondii, has a previously unrecognised role in parasite resistance to interferon gamma-mediated innate immune restriction. This function is conserved in the highly virulent RH strain of T. gondii and contributes to parasite growth in both murine and human macrophages. While ROP1 affects the morphology of rhoptries, from where the protein is secreted, it does not affect rhoptry secretion. Instead, ROP1 interacts with the host cell protein C1QBP, which appears to facilitate parasite immune evasion. In summary, we identify 22 secreted proteins which contribute to parasite growth in vivo and show that ROP1 is an important and previously overlooked effector in counteracting both murine and human innate immunity.

### Sample Protocol
Primary MEFs/HFFs were grown to confluence in T175 flasks and infected with 5 million parasites per flask for 24 h. The flasks were washed twice with chilled PBS and lysed in 1 mL IP buffer on ice (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2% v/v Triton X-100, 2x cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 7.5). For mass spectrometry analysis, the lysates were incubated with 40 uL per sample of Pierce anti-HA agarose matrix (Thermo) overnight at 4 °C, following which the matrix was washed three times with IP buffer and the bound proteins eluted with 30 μL 3x Sample Loading Buffer (NEB) at 95 °C for 10 min. Samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by in-gel tryptic digestion. Briefly, the eluted proteins were run 1 cm into a NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The gel was cut into 1 mm cubes, destained using 50% ethanol, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and dehydrated with 100% ethanol. Proteins were then simultaneously reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 40 mM chloroacteamide in water at 70 °C for 5 min. The gel cubes were washed in 50% ethanol, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated as above. Proteins were digested with 250 ng of mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (Thermo) in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8, at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel into acetonitrile and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Digested samples were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto Evotips (according to manufacturer’s instructions). Following a wash with aqueous acidic buffer (0.1% formic acid in water), samples were loaded onto an Evosep One system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher Scientific).  The Evosep One was fitted with a 15 cm column (PepSep) and a predefined gradient for a 44-minute method was employed.  The Orbitrap Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode (1 second cycle time), acquiring IT HCD MS/MS scans in rapid mode after an OT MS1 survey scan (R=60,000). The MS1 target was 4E5 ions whereas the MS2 target was 1E4 ions. The maximum ion injection time utilized for MS2 scans was 300 ms, the HCD normalized collision energy was set at 32 and the dynamic exclusion was set at 15 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann 2008). Peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Toxoplasma gondii (ToxoDB) and Mus musculus (UniProt) proteomes using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). Methionine oxidation, Acetyl (N-term), and Deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability (PEP) to achieve a 1% false discovery rate on protein, peptide and site level. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. ‘Unique and razor peptides’ mode was selected to allow identification and quantification of proteins in groups (razor peptides are uniquely assigned to protein groups and not to individual proteins). Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) in MaxQuant was performed using a built-in quantification algorithm (Cox and Mann 2008) enabling the ‘Match between runs’ option (time window 0.7 minutes) within replicates. MaxQuant output files were processed with Perseus, v1.5.0.9 (Tyanova et al. 2016) and Microsoft Office Excel 2016 (Supplementary Data 2). Data were filtered to remove contaminants, protein IDs originating from reverse decoy sequences and only identified by site.  iBAQ intensities and the total intensity were log2 and log10 transformed, respectively. Samples were grouped according to sample type (control or ROP1-HA) and the iBAQ intensities were filtered for the presence of 2 valid values in at least one group. Next, missing values were imputed from the normal distribution in order to generate log2 fold-changes (L2FCs) between tested conditions and perform statistical analysis (Welch’s  t-test, p < 0.05, -3 > L2FC > 3). The L2FC threshold was set at 3 times median absolute deviation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii

### Affiliations
Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Simon Butterworth

### Lab Head
Dr Moritz Treeck
Signalling in Apicomplexan Parasites Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW1 1AT, UK


