### Accession
PXD023853

### Title
OXI1 coordinates programmed cell death by promoting salicylic acid, N-hydroxypipecolic acid and reactive oxygen species accumulation in Arabidopsis

### Description
The protein kinase OXI1 is induced by a large number of stress conditions and regulates the interaction of plants with pathogenic and beneficial microbes but little is yet known on the underlying mechanisms. In this work, we generated Arabidopsis OXI1 knock out and overexpression lines and show by transcriptome, proteome and metabolome analysis. Our work revealed that OXI1 regulates biosynthesis of SA via CBP60g-induced expression of isochorismate synthase SID2. OXI1 also induces the transcription factor WRKY33 and its downstream target PAD3, resulting in accumulation of camalexin. Moreover, OXI1 regulates ALD1, SARD4 and FMO1 to promote the biosynthesis of pipecolic acid (Pip) and N-hydroxy pipecolic acid (NHP), mediating systemic acquired resistance to bacterial infection. In contrast to OXI1 overexpressor plants, OXI1 knock out plants show enhanced expression of nuclear and chloroplast genes of photosynthesis, and accordingly enhanced growth under ambient conditions. Overall, these results show that OXI1 plays a key role in regulating the trade-off between growth and defense in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plants were grown on soil in a climate chamber at 22°C with 10h light/14h dark and 60% relative humidity. Rosette of 4 weeks-old plants were harvested by cutting of roots and were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C until further sample preparation. Four to 5 rosettes were pooled as biological replicate, and 4 biological replicates were analyzed. Frozen leaves were grinded in a Retsch mill with Zirkonia beads for 5 min at 30 Hz. Then, 600-800 µL of urea/DTT extraction buffer (8M urea/5mM DTT in 100mM Tris, pH 8.5/ protease inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma) (20 µL/mL)) was added to the finely ground plant materials, and samples were mixed and incubated for 30 min at RT. After centrifugation for 10 min (10k x g) at RT, supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes. This procedure was repeated up to 3 times until no visible pellet was retained.  Protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660 nm protein assay. Samples were alkylated using chloroacetamide (CAA) (550 mM stock, 14 mM final concentration) for 30 min at RT in the dark, after which an aliquot corresponding to 500 µg total protein was subjected to in-solution digestion. In brief, samples were diluted to be 300 µL with 100mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1mM CaCl2, and then 5 µg Lys-C (WAKO) was added. Samples were incubated for 4h at 37°C with shaking, after which 1.8 mL 100mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 and 5 µg trypsin were added. Samples were incubated o/n at 37 °C with shaking. Samples were acidified with 15 µL 50% TFA and desalted using C18 SepPaks (1cc cartridge, 100 mg (WAT023590)).  In brief, SepPaks were conditioned using methanol (1 mL), buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) (1 mL), and buffer A (0.1% TFA) (2 mL). Samples were loaded by gravity flow, washed with buffer A (1 x 1 mL, 1x 2 mL) and eluted with buffer B (2 x 400 µL). 40 µL of eluates were used for peptide measurement and concentrated for total proteome analysis. Peptide concentration was determined by Nanodrop. Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides (0.5 µg) were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al., 2008) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Tyanova et al., 2016). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/)(Tyanova et al., 2016). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had four valid values in one of the genotypes. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (1.8 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5% and an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Expression of OXIDATIVE SIGNAL-INDUCIBLE1 (OXI1) is induced by a number of stress conditions and regulates the interaction of plants with pathogenic and beneficial microbes. In this work, we generated Arabidopsis OXI1 knockout and genomic OXI1 overexpression lines and show by transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome analysis that OXI1 triggers ALD1, SARD4, and FMO1 expressions to promote the biosynthesis of pipecolic acid (Pip) and N-hydroxypipecolic acid (NHP). OXI1 contributes to enhanced immunity by induced SA biosynthesis via CBP60g-induced expression of SID2 and camalexin accumulation via WRKY33-targeted transcription of PAD3. OXI1 regulates genes involved in reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation such as RbohD and RbohF. OXI1 knock out plants show enhanced expression of nuclear and chloroplast genes of photosynthesis and enhanced growth under ambient conditions, while OXI1 overexpressing plants accumulate NHP, SA, camalexin, and ROS and show a gain-of-function (GOF) cell death phenotype and enhanced pathogen resistance. The OXI1 GOF phenotypes are&#xa0;completely suppressed when compromising N-hydroxypipecolic acid (NHP) synthesis in the fmo1 or ald1 background, showing that OXI1 regulation of immunity is mediated via the NHP pathway. Overall, these results show that OXI1 plays a key role in basal and effector-triggered plant immunity by regulating defense and programmed cell death via biosynthesis of salicylic acid, N-hydroxypipecolic acid, and camalexin.

### Keywords
Oxi1, Arabidopsis, Programmed cell death

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


