### Accession
PXD040972

### Title
Proteomic analysis chain-elongating microorganisms

### Description
The study by Allaart et al. (2023) investigates whether different environmental conditions can alter chain-elongating microbial communities to exhibit different catabolic stoichiometries. In support of the study, we provide whole-cell lysate shotgun proteomics data that compare the tested conditions. Contact: M.T.Allaart@tudelft.nl

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and proteolytic digestion: Cell pellet slurries were resuspended in 250 µL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 1% (w/w) NaDOC and 250 µL B-PER™ Bacterial Protein Extraction Reagent. Cells were lysed by glass bead beating and vortexing 6 times for 1.5 min alternated with 0.5 min rest on ice. The samples were kept in a thermoshaker for 3 minutes at 80°C and 1000 rpm and placed in an ultrasonic bath for 10 minutes for protein extraction. The proteins were precipitated by adding Trichloroacetic (TCA) solution in a 1:4 ratio to the supernatant and vortexing. Samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 4°C and spun down for 15 minutes at 14.000 rcf for precipitation. The protein pellet was washed with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 6 M Urea in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The extracted proteins were reduced by addition of 10 mM and incubated for 1 h at 37°C and 300 rpm in an Eppendorf ThermoMixer. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark by addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide. Proteolytic digestion was performed using Sequencing Grade Trypsin 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio (v/v), and incubated at 37°C and 300 rpm overnight. Solid phase extraction was performed with an Oasis HLB 96-well μElution plate. Peptide fractions were eluted using MeOH buffer. Eluates were dried using a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. Dried peptides were resuspended in 3% ACN / 0.01% TFA prior to MS-analysis. Whole cell lysate shotgun proteomics. An aliquot of approx. 250 ng protein digest per sample was analysed in triplicates using a one-dimensional shotgun proteomics approach. Briefly, the samples were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano-LC 1200 equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm), and an QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nL/min over a linear gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B over 88 minutes, and finally to 55% B over 60 minutes. Data were acquired from 0 to 175 min. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operating in data dependent acquisition mode measuring peptide signals form 385‒1250 m/z at 70 K resolution with a max IT of 75 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. The top 10 signals were isolated at a window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented using a NCE of 28. Fragments were acquired at 17 K resolution with a max IT of 75 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. Unassigned, singly and >6 times charged mass peaks were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Database searching. Mass spectrometric raw data were analysed using the proteome database for Clostridium kluyveri (strain ATCC 8527/DSM 555/NCIMB 10680) obtained from Uniprot/Proteomes using PEAKS X allowing for 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 m/z fragment ion mass error, 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered for 1% false discovery rate and protein identifications with ≥ 2 unique peptides were accepted as significant. Label free quantification was performed using the PEAKS Q module. A comparison of the protein expression level between conditions was performed on identified peptide spectra filtered for 1% false discovery rate, a mass error equal or less to 10 ppm and a maximum retention time shift between runs of 5 minutes. The significance of protein abundance changes within the groups (conditions) was determined using ANOVA. Considered proteins required at least 2 unique peptide identifications per protein sequence.

### Publication Abstract
Hexanoate is a valuable&#xa0;chemical that can be produced by microorganisms that convert short-chain- to medium-chain carboxylic acids through a process called chain elongation.&#xa0;These microorganisms usually produce&#xa0;mixtures of butyrate and hexanoate from ethanol and acetate, but direct conversion of ethanol to hexanoate&#xa0;is theoretically possible. Steering microbial communities to ethanol-only elongation to hexanoate circumvents&#xa0;the need for acetate addition and simplifies&#xa0;product separation. The biological feasibility of ethanol elongation to hexanoate&#xa0;was validated in batch bioreactor experiments with a Clostridium kluyveri-dominated enrichment culture incubated with ethanol, acetate&#xa0;and butyrate in different ratios. Frequent liquid sampling combined with high-resolution off-gas measurements allowed to monitor&#xa0;metabolic behavior. In experiments with an initial&#xa0;ethanol-to-acetate ratio of 6:1, acetate&#xa0;depletion occurred after&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;35&#xa0;h of fermentation, which triggered a metabolic shift to direct conversion of ethanol to hexanoate despite the availability of butyrate&#xa0;(&#xb1;&#x2009;40 mCmol&#xa0;L<sup>-1</sup>). When only ethanol and no external electron acceptor was supplied, stable ethanol to hexanoate conversion could be maintained until 60-90 mCmol&#xa0;L<sup>-1</sup> of hexanoate was produced. After this, transient production of either acetate and butyrate or butyrate and hexanoate was observed, requiring a putative reversal of the Rnf complex. This was not observed before acetate depletion or in presence of low concentrations (40-60 mCmol&#xa0;L<sup>-1</sup>) of butyrate, suggesting a stabilizing or regulatory role of butyrate or butyrate-related catabolic intermediates. This study sheds light on previously unknown versatility of chain elongating microbes and provides new avenues for optimizing (waste) bioconversion for hexanoate production.

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Chain-elongation, Shotgun proteomics, Clostridium kluyveri

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


