### Accession
PXD016047

### Title
A comprehensive CHO SWATH-MS spectral library for accurate quantitative profiling of 10k proteins

### Description
A comprehensive Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)-cell specific spectral library, containing extensive information of high-quality spectral ions covering more than 10k CHO cell proteins, was constructed to provide confident and reproducible protein identification and quantification in data-independent SWATH-MS analysis. The applicability of CHO spectral library was tested in the analyses of different CHO samples including whole cell lysate, harvested cell culture fluids, and downstream processing samples. The portability of CHO spectral library was also demonstrated in the processing and analyses of SWATH-MS data sets collected from multiple LC-MS instrumental setups and various CHO cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular organelles of CHO-K1 cells, including mitochondria, nucleus and heavy-membrane fractions, were pre-fractionated using a micro ultracentrifuge (Hitachi, CS150FNX). All protein lysate samples were trypticly digested using the high-recovery suspension-trap mini spin columns (ProtiFi) and subsequently subjected to high pH reverse-phase peptide fractionation using UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptide samples were analysed using TripleTOF 6600 (Ab Sciex) in data-dependent acquisition mode for the spectral library generation. Both TripleTOF 6600 and TripleTOF 5600+ were used for SWATH-MS data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data acquired in data-dependent mode were searched individually against CHO refseq database (BioProject PRJNA389969 Assembly GCF_003668045.1, release 103, released on 18th Dec 2018, updated on 9th Aug 2019) in ProteinPilot (version 5.0) using Paragon RapidID method (default settings). CHO spectral library were generated using Ab Sciex OneOmics Project SWATH-MS processing pipeline (https://research.oneomics.net, beta version). The SWATH-MS data sets were extracted against the CHO spectral library in SWATH2.0 microApp or OneOmics Project. Downstream data processing and analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel, MarkerView (v1.3.1), python and KEGG pathway mapping tool.

### Publication Abstract
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ion spectra (SWATH) is a data-independent acquisition (DIA) strategy that requires a specific spectral library to generate unbiased and consistent quantitative data matrices of all peptides. SWATH-MS is a promising approach for in-depth proteomic profiling of Chinese hamster Ovary (CHO) cell lines, improving mechanistic understanding of process optimization, and real-time monitoring of process parameters in biologics R&amp;D and manufacturing. However, no spectral library for CHO cells is publicly available. Here we present a comprehensive CHO global spectral library to measure the abundance of more than 10,000 proteins consisting of 199,102 identified peptides from a CHO-K1 cell proteome. The robustness, accuracy and consistency of the spectral library were validated for high confidence in protein identification and reproducible quantification in different CHO-derived cell lines, instrumental setups and downstream processing samples. The availability of a comprehensive SWATH CHO global spectral library will facilitate detailed characterization of upstream and downstream processes, as well as quality by design (QbD) in biomanufacturing. The data have been deposited to ProteomeXchange (PXD016047).

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Swath-ms, Tripletof 6600, Chinese hamster ovary cells

### Affiliations
Bioprocessing Technology Institute, A*STAR
Proteomics Laboratory, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, A*STAR, Singapore

### Submitter
Kae Hwan Sim

### Lab Head
Dr Xuezhi Bi
Proteomics Laboratory, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, A*STAR, Singapore


