### Accession
PXD013360

### Title
The changes of Proteomeand Protein Phosphorylation reveals the protective roles of exogenous nitrogen in alleviating cadmium toxicityin poplar plants

### Description
Phytoremediation soil polluted by heavy metal has been drawn on a worldwide attention from human society. However, how to improve the efficiency of plant remediation of soil contaminated by cadmium remains unknown. Previous studies showed that nitrogen (N) significantly enhanced cadmium uptake in poplar plants. In order to further explore the key role of N in the detoxification against cadmium stress in plants, this study try to investigate the poplar proteome and phosphoproteome difference between Cd stress and Cd+N treatment. In total, 5838 of the 6573 identified were quantified. With a fold-change threshold >1.3 and p-value<0.05, 375 and 108 proteins were up- and down-regulated by Cd stress when compared to the control, 42 and 89 proteins were up- and down-regulated, respectively, in Cd+N / Cd group, 522 and 127 proteins were up- and down-regulated, respectively, in Cd+N / CK group. In addition, the phosphoproteome data was obtained after the proteomic difference was normalized, and 1471phosphosites in 721 proteins were quantified. Based on a fold-change threshold >1.2, P-value <0.05, the Cd stress up-regulated 8 phosphosites in 8 proteins and down-regulated 69 phosphosites in 58 proteins, whereas N+Cd treatment up-regulated 95 phosphosites in 86 proteins and down-regulated 17 phosphosites in 17 proteins when compared to sole Cd stress. In addition, N+Cd treatment up-regulated 74 phosphosites in 60 proteins and down-regulated 42 phosphosites in 37 proteins when compared to the control.Several putative responses to stress proteins, transcriptional and translational regulation factors were up-regulated by addition ofexogenous nitrogen followed Cd stress at the proteome and phosphoproteome levels. Especially, heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), peroxidase (POD), zinc finger protein (ZFP), ABC transporter protein (ABC), eukaryotic translation initiation factor (elF) and splicing factor 3B subunit 1-like (SF3BI) were up-regulated by Cd+N treatment whether at the proteome or at the phosphoproteome levels, which was need to further study. In a word, taken together of proteome and phosphoproteome data, nitrogen serves a protective role in plants treated with Cd by multiple ways.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and methods Plant material and treatment The cutting Yunnan poplar (Populusyunnanensis) plants were selected as the experimental materials. The P. yunnanensis were obtained from native habitats in Butuo county of Liangshan prefecture Sichuan province. Analysis of differentially expressed proteins and phosphorylated proteins Tandem mass tag (TMT) technique was performed to examine the differentially expressed proteins in poplar leaves. TMT labeling and IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography) enrichment were used to identified the differentially phosphorylated proteins. Three replicates were measured for each treatment. LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA), and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMapRSLC,Thermo Scientific). The gradient was as follows: 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile (ACN) for 25 min, from 25% to 38% for 8 min then increased to 80% over 3 min, and then held at 80% for 3 min. The gradient was generated at a constant flow rate of 350 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to a nano electrospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using using Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using Normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 28, and ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 10 precursor ions above a threshold ion count 5e3 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion Orbitrap; 5e4 ions were accumulated for the generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was from 350 to 1550m/z. Fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS Data Analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched againstthe Populustrichocarpaprotein databaseprotein databaseconcatenatedwith a reverse decoy database.Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to fourmissing cleavages.Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and0.02 Da for fragmentions.Carbamidomethylation onCys was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation onMet and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specifiedas variable modifications.False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds forproteins, peptides and modification sites were set at 1%. Minimum score for peptides was set >40.All the other MaxQuant parameters were set to default values. Only the phosphopeptides with >0.75 site localizationwas considered for analysis. Bioinformatics analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was applied to determine proteincategories that were enriched. If some identified proteins were not annotated by the UniProt-GOA database,then InterProScan software was used to annotate GO function based on the protein sequence alignmentmethod. KEGG pathway mapping of phosphoproteins was performed using KEGG online service toolsKAAS.Phosphorylation motif was analyzed by motif-x algorithm.There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used.

### Publication Abstract
Phytoremediation soil polluted by cadmium has drawn worldwide attention. However, how to improve the efficiency of plant remediation of cadmium contaminated soil remains unknown. Previous studies showed that nitrogen (N) significantly enhances cadmium uptake and accumulation in poplar plants. In order to explore the important role of nitrogen in plants' responses to cadmium stress, this study investigates the poplar proteome and phosphoproteome difference between Cd stress and Cd + N treatment. In total, 6573 proteins were identified, and 5838 of them were quantified. With a fold-change threshold of &gt; 1.3, and a <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05, 375 and 108 proteins were up- and down-regulated by Cd stress when compared to the control, respectively. Compared to the Cd stress group, 42 and 89 proteins were up- and down-regulated by Cd + N treatment, respectively. Moreover, 522 and 127 proteins were up- and down-regulated by Cd + N treatment compared to the CK group. In addition, 1471 phosphosites in 721 proteins were identified. Based on a fold-change threshold of &gt; 1.2, and a <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05, the Cd stress up-regulated eight proteins containing eight phosphosites, and down-regulated 58 proteins containing 69 phosphosites, whereas N + Cd treatment up-regulated 86 proteins containing 95 phosphosites, and down-regulated 17 proteins containing 17 phosphosites, when compared to Cd stress alone. N + Cd treatment up-regulated 60 proteins containing 74 phosphosites and down-regulated 37 proteins containing 42 phosphosites, when compared to the control. Several putative responses to stress proteins, as well as transcriptional and translational regulation factors, were up-regulated by the addition of exogenous nitrogen following Cd stress. Especially, heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), 14-3-3 protein, peroxidase (POD), zinc finger protein (ZFP), ABC transporter protein, eukaryotic translation initiation factor (elF) and splicing factor 3 B subunit 1-like (SF3BI) were up-regulated by Cd + N treatment at both the proteome and the phosphoproteome levels. Combing the proteomic data and phosphoproteomics data, the mechanism by which exogenous nitrogen can alleviate cadmium toxicity in poplar plants was explained at the molecular level. The results of this study will establish the solid molecular foundation of the phytoremediation method to improve cadmium-contaminated soil.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Plants, Exogenous nitrogen

### Affiliations
Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China
zhejiang scientific technology universitiy

### Submitter
xiaonan fu

### Lab Head
Dr Fan Zhang
Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu 611130, Sichuan, China


