### Accession
PXD011701

### Title
Detailed sub-proteome analysis of a cheese-isolated Enterococcus faecalis, provide insights into probiotic value and food safety

### Description
Enterococci are normal inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tracts of humans and animals and thanks to their capability to tolerate different environmental conditions and their high rates of gene transfer, they are able to colonize various ecological niches, as food matrices. Enterococcus faecalis bacteria are defined as “border line” microorganisms. From one side they are used as food starters, bio-control agents and probiotics to improve human or animal health. From the other side, in the last 2 two decades enterococci have emerged as important nosocomial pathogens, because bearing high-level of resistance to antibiotics and several putative virulence factors. In this study the proteomic (LC-MS/MS) and the phenotypic characterization (enzymatic methods) of three strains of E. faecalis with different origin were performed in order to investigate the differences and/or similarities occurring between pathogenic and health promoting bacteria. The E. faecalis D27 isolated as cheese contaminant, E. faecalis Symbioflor 1 a probiotic strain and E. faecalis UW3114 a clinical isolate involved in urinary tract infection were the objects of the study. The comparison of cytosolic protein expression profiles of the three strains, highlighted statistically significant changes in the abundance of proteins mainly involved in specific metabolic pathways, nutrient transport, stress response and cell wall modulation. Moreover, especially in the food contaminant and the clinical isolate, several proteins with potential pathogenic implications were found. The analysis of the extracellular proteome provided interesting results concerning proteins involved in bacterial communication, such as pheromones and conjugative elements and also proteins able to interact with human components.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures were grown in the BHI medium at 37°C with slight agitation (180 rpm). Cells were recovered by centrifugation (10000xg, 10 min, 4 °C)  in the early stationary growth phase. Cell pellet was washed with TE buffer and lysed by glass beads (diameter: 0.1-0.11 mm) using a Precellys 24 Homogenizator (Peq Lab, Erlangen, Germany). In-solution digestion of protein extracts with trypsin was done according to the method described previously: Proteins were dissolved in 50 mM TEAB/0.1% RapiGest™SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), reduced with TCEP (tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) for 45 min at 60 °C and alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany) for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with 0.5 mg trypsin in a 1:200 ratio (Promega, Madison, MA, USA) for 6 h under gentle agitation at 37 °C. Desalting of peptides was achieved using a standard protocol. For absolute quantification, a tryptic digest of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH1, Waters, USA) was added into the samples to final concentration of 50 fmol/µL.The separation of the peptide mixture from intracellular proteins was performed using a nanoACQUITY™ UPLC™ system (Waters, USA) following the protocol described by Zühlke and coworkers (2016).

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were searched against a randomized Uniprot E. faecalis OG1RF database (version January 2011) with added laboratory contaminants and yeast ADH1 sequence and sequences from the proteins encoded by the pathogenicity island of E. faecalis MMH594 (5,446 5,490 entries). For positive protein identification the following criteria had to be met: 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, 1 peptide matched per protein; 2 missed cleavages allowed, primary digest reagent: trypsin, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C (+57.0215), variable modifications: deamidation N, Q (+0.9840), oxidation M (+15.9949), pyrrolidonecarboxylacid N-TERM (−27.9949). The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 5%. For the final analyses only identifications based on at least two peptides were considered. A protein had to be identified in at least two out of three technical replicates per biological replicate. In addition, for the final analysis protein had to be present in two out of three biological replicates per time point, which reduced FDR on protein level to less than 0.7%.

### Publication Abstract
Enterococci are common inhabitants of the gastrointestinal tracts of humans and animals and thanks to their capability to tolerate different environmental conditions and their high rates of gene transfer, they are able to colonize various ecological niches, as food matrices. <i>Enterococcus faecalis</i> bacteria are defined as controversial microorganisms. From one side they are used as food starters, bio-control agents and probiotics to improve human or animal health. From the other side, in the last two decades enterococci have emerged as important nosocomial pathogens, because bearing high-level of resistance to antibiotics and several putative virulence factors. In this study, the soluble proteome quantitation data (LC-MS/MS) of the food-isolated strain <i>E. faecalis</i> D27 (dairy-isolate) was compared with the soluble proteome quantitation data of the pathogenic <i>E. faecalis</i> UW3114 (urinary tract infection isolate) and with the one of the health promoting strain <i>E. faecalis</i> Symbioflor1, respectively. The comparison of cytosolic protein expression profiles highlighted statistically significant changes in the abundance of proteins mainly involved in specific metabolic pathways, nutrient transport, stress response, and cell wall modulation. Moreover, especially in the dairy isolate and the clinical isolate, several proteins with potential pathogenic implications were found, such as serine proteases, von Willebrand factor, serine hydrolase with beta lactamase activity, efflux transporter, and proteins involved in horizontal gene transfer. The analysis of the extracellular proteome provided interesting results concerning proteins involved in bacterial communication, such as pheromones and conjugative elements and also proteins able to interact with human components. The phenotypic characterization evaluating (i) biofilm formation (ii) hemolytic activity on blood agar plates (iii) protease activity (iv) gelatinase (v) antibiotic resistance pattern, enabled us to elucidate the risks associated with the poor characterized foodborne <i>E. faecalis</i> D27.

### Keywords
Host interaction, Virulence, Foodborne bacteria, Antibiotic resistance, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Kathrin Riedel
Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald


