### Accession
PXD033532

### Title
Retinal proteomic analysis in a mouse model of endotoxin-induced uveitis using a data-independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry

### Description
Endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU) in rodents is a good animal model to study uveitis and associated acute retinal inflammation. To understand the pathogenic mechanism of uveitis and screen the potential targets for treatment, we analyzed the retinal proteomic profiles of EIU and normal C57BL/6J mice using a data-independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS).

### Sample Protocol
C57BL/6J mice aged 6-8wk were used. The EIU model was established by giving a single intraperitoneal injection of 5mg/kg body weight LPS (Sigma) diluted in PBS in LPS-treated groups and the same volume of PBS in control groups. The mice were sacrificed for neural retina collection 24 h after LPS administration.  The retina was transferred to a homogenization tube with prefilled beads (CKMix-2ml, P000918-LYSK0-A, Bertin), and 200μl of lysis buffer containing 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to the tube. The retina sample was homogenized at 4℃, 5800rpm for 30s x 4 cycles with 20s of intervals in the tissue homogenizer (Precellys Evolution, Bertin). After centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined by Pierce Rapid Gold BCA Protein Assay (A53225, Thermo)  Aliquots of 50µg of protein lysate were used for peptide preparation using the S-Trap method. The lysate was reduced in 20mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95℃ for 10 min, and then alkylated in 40mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 10 min at RT. Next, the solution was acidified with 12% aqueous phosphoric acid and diluted with S-Trap protein binding buffer. The S-Trap micro spin column (ProtiFi, USA) was used to trap the protein in the membrane, and protein was digested with trypsin (1:25, w/w, trypsin: protein) on the filter at 47℃ for 1 h. After digestion, the peptides were eluted with consecutive reagents: 1) 50mM TEAB, 2) 0.2% aqueous formic acid (FA), 3) 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.2% FA. The eluted solution was dried out with a vacuum concentrator (Labconco, USA) at 4℃. The peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and measured with Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Cat no.23275, Thermo). The peptide sample was normalized with 0.1% FA to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/ul for mass spectrometry identification and quantification.

### Data Protocol
The MS analysis was conducted on TripleTOF 6600 system (Sciex) with Analyst TF1.7 software (Sciex). For ion library building based on information-dependent acquisition (IDA), 1.5µg of peptide solutions from each sample were pooled together, and a total of 2ug of the peptide mixture was injected to generate the ion library with 2 technical replicates. For SWATH-MS acquisition, 2µg of each individual peptide sample was injected with 2 technical replicates. Peptides were first loaded onto a trap column (100 μm i.d. × 2 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å) with loading buffer (0.1% FA, 2 % ACN) at 2 µl/min for 15 min. Later, the peptides were further separated on a nano-LC column (NanoLC 415, Eksigent). For IDA, the MS spectra were set as 350 m/z to 1800 m/z with 250 ms accumulation time. The ions with a threshold over 125 cycle/s will be counted for MS/MS. For SWATH-MS, the TOF-MS was set for a variable isolation window with the mass range from 100 m/z to 1800 m/z of 100 overlapping variable windows. The accumulation time was 30 ms for each fragment ion, and the total duty cycle was 3.0 sec.  Protein identification was conducted using the ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software (Sciex). The IDA data were processed by the Paragon™ algorithms and searched against the mus musculus (mouse) Uniprot database (UP000000589, updated on June 4, 2021, reviewed). The searching parameters settings include trypsin as the enzyme for digestion, IAA for cysteine alkylation, thorough search effort and biological modification, and a 1% FDR as the filter. We set the pooled protein IDA result as the ion library for SWATH quantification. PeakView 2.2 (Sciex) was used to generate and calibrate the peaks with parameters setting as: 10 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, 90% peptide confidence threshold, 1% FDR, 10 min XIC extraction window and 75 ppm width. Protein differential expression analysis was carried out with the help of MarkerView 1.3 software (Sciex).

### Publication Abstract
Uveitis is a group of sight-threatening ocular inflammatory diseases, potentially leading to permanent vision loss in patients. However, it remains largely unknown how uveitis causes retinal malfunction and vision loss. Endotoxin-induced uveitis (EIU) in rodents is a good animal model to study uveitis and associated acute retinal inflammation. To understand the pathogenic mechanism of uveitis and screen potential targets for treatment, we analyzed the retinal proteomic profile of the EIU mouse model using a data-independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS). After systemic LPS administration, we observed activation of microglial cells accompanied with the elevation of pro-inflammatory mediators and visual function declines. In total, we observed 79 upregulated and 90 downregulated differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Among the DEPs, we found that histone family members (histone H1, H2A, H2B) and blood proteins including haptoglobin (HP), hemopexin (HPX), and fibrinogen gamma chain (FGG) were dramatically increased in EIU groups relative to those in control groups. We identified phototransduction and synaptic vesicle cycle as the top two significant KEGG pathways. Moreover, canonical pathway analysis on DEPs using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis revealed top three most significant enriched pathways related to acute phase response signaling, synaptogenesis signaling, and eif2 signaling. We further confirmed upregulation of several DEPs associated with the acute phase response signaling including HP, HPX, and FGG in LPS-treated retinas by qPCR and Western blot. In summary, this study serves as the first report to detect retinal proteome changes in the EIU model. The study provides several potential candidates for exploring the mechanism and novel therapeutic targets for uveitis and other retinal inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
Swath-ms; uveitis; lipopolysaccharide; retina; inflammation

### Affiliations
School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

### Submitter
Daqian LU

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. LIN Bin
School of Optometry, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China


