### Accession
PXD027309

### Title
Neo-peptides identification in Ewing sarcoma cell lines using proteomics approach

### Description
Ewing sarcoma (EwS) is an adolescent and young adult sarcoma characterized by chromosome translocations between members of the FET family of RNA binding proteins and members of the ETS family of transcription factors, the most frequent fusion being EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 acts as a pioneer factor, creating de novo enhancers and activating genes located in the vicinity of EWS-FLI1-bound microsatellite sequences. recent results from our lab indicate that EWS-FLI1, which activates transcription through binding to the DNA at specific sites, can generate fully novel, unconventional transcription units in regions of the genome that are fully quiescent in normal cells (manuscript in preparation). The hypothesis of the project is that the open reading frames (ORFs) of these transcripts may encode peptides presented at the cell surface by HLA class I molecules and hence be recognized as non-self by the immune system. The aim of this study is to detect Ewing-specific neo-peptides/proteins using proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome cell samples were lysed in a buffer containing 8 M urea (Euromedex), 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC (FisherScientific) for 30 min at room temperature. Lysates were sonicated to decrease viscosity and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay (Pierce). 60 µg of total protein were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) for 30 min at 55°C, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM (Sigma) for 30 min in the dark. Samples were then diluted 10-fold with 200 mM ABC to obtain a final concentration of urea < 1 M before overnight digestion with Trypsin-LysC (Promega) at a 1:50 ratio at 37°C. Digested samples were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo) for 15 min on ice and centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 15 min. Peptides were purified using 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried with a SpeedVac apparatus. HPH-proteome samples were obtained by mixing 15 µg purified peptides of each five cell replicates. Peptide fractionation was carried out with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation kit (Cat number 84868). Peptides were eluted successively using six elution buffers containing the following percentages of acetonitrile: 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20 and 50%. Eluted peptides were then vaccum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in 0.3% TFA to a concentration of 1µg / µL prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo Sapiens (UP000005640_9606) UniProt database, Ew_NGs_ORFfinder and a database of the common contaminants using Sequest HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.6 (PMID: 17610305). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.2 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from all proteotypic peptides were used and missed cleavages were allowed. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct XICs for each biological replicate. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed following the algorithm described by Cox et al. (PMID: 24942700), with the minimum number of peptide ratios set to 1 and the large ratios stabilization feature. The LFQ values were also normalized to correct for remaining total intensity biases. The final LFQ intensities were used as protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neo-peptides, Ewing sarcoma, Proteomics, Cell lines

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Victor Laigle

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


