### Accession
PXD019580

### Title
Immunoreactive proteins in the oesophageal gland cells of Anisakis simplex sensu stricto detected by MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis

### Description
Two hundred ventricles were manually dissected from L3 stage larvae of Aniskakis simplex s.s. to allow direct protein analysis. Denaturing gel electrophoresis followed by monochromatic silver staining revealed the presence of differential (enriched) proteins when compared to total nematode extracts. Such comparison was performed by means of 1D and 2D electrophoresis. Pooled antisera from Anisakis spp allergic patients were used in western blots revealing the presence of 13 immunoreactive bands in the ventricular extracts in 1D, while 82 spots in 2D. The corresponding protein bands and spots were excised from the silver stained gel and protein assignation was made by MALDI-TOF/TOF. A total of eleven proteins (including isoforms) were unambiguosly identified. The majority of these proteins are known to be secreted by nematodes into the external environment, of which three are described as being major allergens in other organisms with different phylogenetic origin.

### Sample Protocol
In-Gel protein digestion The protein bands were excised, cut into cubes (1mm2), deposited in 96-well plates and processed automatically in a Proteineer DP (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The digestion protocol used was based on Schevchenko et al. with minor variations: gel plugs were washed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN prior to reduction with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, and alkylation was carried out with 55 mM IAA in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Gel pieces were then rinsed firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and secondly with ACN, and then were dried under a stream of nitrogen. Proteomics Grade Trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 16 ng/μl in 25% ACN/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added and the digestion took place at 37°C for 4h. The reaction was stopped by adding 50%ACN/0.5%TFA for peptide extraction. The tryptic eluted peptides were dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation and were resuspended in 4 ul of MALDI solution (30% ACN/15% isopropanol/0.5% TFA). A 0.8 l aliquot of each peptide mixture was deposited onto a 384-well OptiTOFTM Plate (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and allowed to dry at room temperature. A 0.8 µl aliquot of matrix solution (3 mg/mL α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in MALDI solution) was then deposited onto dried digest and allowed to dry at room temperature.   MALDI peptide mass fingerprinting, MS/MS analysis and database searching For MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis, samples were automatically acquired in an ABi 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) in positive ion reflector mode (the ion acceleration voltage was 25 kV to MS acquisition and 2 kV to MSMS) and the obtained spectra were stored into the ABi 4000 Series Explorer Spot Set Manager. PMF and MSMS fragment ion spectra were smoothed and corrected to zero baseline using routines embedded in ABi 4000 Series Explorer Software v3.6.

### Data Protocol
Each PMF spectrum was internally calibrated with the mass signals of trypsin autolysis ions to reach a typical mass measurement accuracy of <25 ppm. Known trypsin and keratin mass signals, as well as potential sodium and potassium adducts (+21 Da and +39 Da) were removed from the peak list. To submit the combined PMF and MS/MS data to MASCOT software v.2.6.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK), GPS Explorer v4.9 was used, searching against Anisakis simplex complex protein database from Uniprot (last update: 20200511, 25.691 sequences). The following search parameters were used: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; carbamidomethyl cystein as fixed modification by the treatment with iodoacetamide; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine; mass tolerance for precursors was set to ± 50 ppm and for MS/MS fragment ions to ± 0.3 Da. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p < 0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the identity threshold were considered correctly identified.

### Publication Abstract
In plant and animal nematode parasites, proteins derived from esophageal gland cells have been shown to be important in the host-nematodes relationship but little is known about the allergenic potential of these proteins in the genus <i>Anisakis</i>. Taking into account the increase of anisakiasis and allergies related to these nematodes, immunoreactive properties of gland cell proteins were investigated. Two hundred ventricles were manually dissected from L3 stage larvae of <i>Aniskakis simplex s.s</i>. to allow direct protein analysis. Denaturing gel electrophoresis followed by monochromatic silver staining which revealed the presence of differential (enriched) proteins when compared to total nematode extracts. Such comparison was performed by means of 1D and 2D electrophoresis. Pooled antisera from <i>Anisakis</i> spp.-allergic patients were used in western blots revealing the presence of 13 immunoreactive bands in the ventricular extracts in 1D, with 82 spots revealed in 2D. The corresponding protein bands and spots were excised from the silver-stained gel and protein assignation was made by MALDI-TOF/TOF. A total of 13 (including proteoforms) were unambiguously identified. The majority of these proteins are known to be secreted by nematodes into the external environment, of which three are described as being major allergens in other organisms with different phylogenetic origin and one is an <i>Anisakis simplex</i> allergen.

### Keywords
Allergens, Excretion, Secretion, Proteomics, Anisakis simplex, Oesphageal glands

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. Dpto Biodiversidad y Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC)

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Alfonso Navas
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. Dpto Biodiversidad y Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC)


