### Accession
PXD035350

### Title
Structure of a volume-regulated heteromeric LRRC8A/C channel

### Description
Volume-regulated anion channels participate in the cellular response to osmotic swelling. These membrane proteins are heteromers of LRRC8 family members whose composition determines permeation properties. Although structures of the obligatory LRRC8A subunit have previously defined the architecture of VRACs, the organization of heteromeric channels has remained elusive. Here we have closed this gap by the structural characterization of channels consisting of LRRC8A and C. Like homomeric LRRC8A, these proteins assemble as hexamers. Despite the twelve possible arrangements, we find a single predominant species with an A/C ratio of two. In this assembly, the four LRRCA subunits cluster in their preferred conformation observed in homomers as pairs of closely interacting proteins that stabilize a closed state of the channel. In contrast, the two interacting LRRC8C-subunits show a larger flexibility, underlining their role in the destabilization of the tightly packed A subunits, thereby enhancing the activation properties of the protein.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for LC-MS/MS analysis were processed using a commercial iST Kit (PreOmics, Germany). For each sample, 0.5-1 µg of isolated protein complexes digested for 2 h at 37 °C. Peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µl of MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Samples used for absolute quantification were spiked with heavy labeled peptides (sample-depended 25-500 fmol) before digestion. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to an M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Column temperature was 50°C. For each sample 1 µl of peptides were loaded on a commercial nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by a nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After a 3 min initial hold at 5% B, a gradient from 5 to 35 % B in 60 min was applied. For absolute quantification the mass spectrometer was operated in PRM mode with a scheduled (5 min windows) inclusion list using Xcalibur 4.5 (Tune version 4.0), with spray voltage set to 2.3 kV, funnel RF level at 40 %, heated capillary temperature at 275 °C, and Advanced Peak Determination (APD) on. Full-scan MS spectra (350−1’500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000 or for a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursors of heavy and light peptides were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter with 1 m/z isolation window and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 30 %. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30’000. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed with a cycle time of 3 seconds. Ions were isolated with a 1.2 m/z isolation window and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 30 %. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30’000 and a maximum injection time of 119 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100’000 ions. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window tolerance was set at 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
For the generation of spectral libraries from SIL peptides, acquired raw MS data were converted into Mascot Generic Format files (.mgf) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and the proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.7). Spectra were searched against a reviewed Uniprot proteome database (taxonomy 9606, version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and modification to 13C(6)15N(2) for Lysine and 13C(6)15N(4) for Arginine. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm were set. Scheduled PRM runs of spiked samples were imported into Skyline. Identity assignments were evaluated by determining spectra similarity between endogenous and SIL peptides via dot product. Endogenous peptide quantification was done by one-point calibration using the ratio of the endogenous and SIL peptides and is given in fmol on column. For each peptide at least four transitions were used for quantification. Protein ratio estimation is based on the median of all combinations of pair-wise peptide ratios between LRC8A and LRC8C similar to the protein ratio algorithm employed by MaxQuant. For DDA data, raw MS data were converted into Mascot Generic Format files (.mgf) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and the proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.7.0.1). Spectra were searched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens reference proteome (taxonomy 9606, canonical version from 2019-07-09), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a maximum of two missed-cleavages. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., version 5.10) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they achieved a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.1% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they achieved an FDR of less than 1.0 % and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Volume-regulated anion channels (VRACs) participate in the cellular response to osmotic swelling. These membrane proteins consist of heteromeric assemblies of LRRC8 subunits, whose compositions determine permeation properties. Although structures of the obligatory LRRC8A, also referred to as SWELL1, have previously defined the architecture of VRACs, the organization of heteromeric channels has remained elusive. Here we have addressed this question by the structural characterization of murine LRRC8A/C channels. Like LRRC8A, these proteins assemble as hexamers. Despite 12 possible arrangements, we find a predominant organization with an A:C ratio of two. In this assembly, four LRRC8A subunits cluster in their preferred conformation observed in homomers, as pairs of closely interacting proteins that stabilize a closed state of the channel. In contrast, the two interacting LRRC8C subunits show a larger flexibility, underlining their role in the destabilization of the tightly packed A subunits, thereby enhancing the activation properties of the protein.

### Keywords
Human, Nanobody, Lrrc8, X-ray chrystallography, Cryo-em, Exploris 480, Prm, Volume-regulated anion channels, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Antje Dittmann

### Lab Head
Dr Raimund Dutzler
Department of Biochemistry University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland


