### Accession
PXD017986

### Title
Proteomic profiling of murine biliary-derived hepatic organoids and their capacity for drug disposition, bio-activation and detoxification

### Description
Hepatic organoids are a recent innovation in in vitro modelling. Initial studies suggest organoids better recapitulate the liver phenotype in vitro compared to pre-existing proliferative cell models. However, their propensity for drug metabolism and detoxification remains poorly characterised. A global proteomic profiling of undifferentiated and differentiated hepatic murine organoids and donor-matched livers was therefore performed to assess both their similarity to liver tissue and DMET expression. iTRAQ analysis revealed 4,405 proteins commonly detected across all sample types. Differentiation of organoids significantly increased the expression of multiple CYP450s, phase II enzymes, liver biomarkers and hepatic transporters. While the final phenotype of differentiated organoids is distinct from liver tissue, they contain multiple DMET proteins necessary for liver function and drug metabolism, such as CYP450 3A, GSTA and MDR1A. Hepatic organoids may therefore represent an attractive novel model for hepatotoxicity testing, although further experimentation, optimisation and characterisation is needed relative to pre-existing models to fully contextualise their use as a putative in vitro model of DILI.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were broken from their Matrigel domes and washed three times in ice-cold PBS and pelleted at 300 x g at 4 °C for 5 min. Undifferentiated organoids, fully differentiated organoids and donor-matched liver tissue (n=4 per group) were prepared for iTRAQ analysis. Liver samples were homogenised, and all samples were mixed with dissolution buffer (0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1 % SDS, pH 8.5) and processed with a sonicator (3 x 10 s, 5 µm amplitude). The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g at 4 °C for 15 min, and the samples were diluted in dissolution buffer to a protein concentration of 5 mg/mL.  100 µg of protein from each sample was denatured, reduced, cysteine blocked, digested and labelled by iTRAQ Reagents Multiplex Kit (Applied Biosystems, UK) according to manufacturer's protocol. Unbound reagent was removed by cation exchange chromatography and fractions were desalted using a macroporous C18 column (Agilent, UK) and dried by centrifugation under vacuum (SpeedVac, Eppendorf, Germany). Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, UK), delivered into the instrument by automated in-line liquid chromatography using an Eksigent nanoLC 415 System.  Spectra were acquired in positive ion mode with up to 25 MS/MS spectra acquired per 2.5 s cycle throughout the course of the 90 min LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification were performed using ProteinPilot 5 (Sciex) with the latest version of the SwissProt database (July 2018). Proteins identified with more than 95 % confidence and within a global FDR of 1% were included in the statistical analysis. Ratios for each iTRAQ label were obtained, using the common pools as the denominator. Data from the two iTRAQ runs were merged using RStudio V.1.0.143. Ratios were converted to their natural log and data analysis was performed using Partek Genomic Suite software V.7.18.0518, (Partek, MO, US). A batch correction algorithm was applied to the data and Hierarchical clustering and PCA were performed. Proteins that were differentially expressed between the sample types were revealed using a 2-way ANOVA on the uncorrected data.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic organoids are a recent innovation in in vitro modeling. Initial studies suggest that organoids better recapitulate the liver phenotype in vitro compared to pre-existing proliferative cell models. However, their potential for drug metabolism and detoxification remains poorly characterized, and their global proteome has yet to be compared to their tissue of origin. This analysis is urgently needed to determine what gain-of-function this new model may represent for modeling the physiological and toxicological response of the liver to xenobiotics. Global proteomic profiling of undifferentiated and differentiated hepatic murine organoids and donor-matched livers was, therefore, performed to assess both their similarity to liver tissue, and the expression of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters. This analysis quantified 4405 proteins across all sample types. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD017986). Differentiation of organoids significantly increased the expression of multiple cytochrome P450, phase II enzymes, liver biomarkers and hepatic transporters. While the final phenotype of differentiated organoids is distinct from liver tissue, the organoids contain multiple drug metabolizing and transporter proteins necessary for liver function and drug metabolism, such as cytochrome P450 3A, glutathione-S-transferase alpha and multidrug resistance protein 1A. Indeed, the differentiated organoids were shown to exhibit increased sensitivity to midazolam (10-1000&#xa0;&#xb5;M) and irinotecan (1-100&#xa0;&#xb5;M), when compared to the undifferentiated organoids. The predicted reduced activity of HNF4A and a resulting dysregulation of RNA polymerase II may explain the partial differentiation of the organoids. Although further experimentation, optimization and characterization is needed relative to pre-existing models to fully contextualize their use as an in vitro model of drug-induced liver injury, hepatic organoids represent an attractive novel model of the response of the liver to xenobiotics. The current study also highlights the utility of global proteomic analyses for rapid and accurate evaluation of organoid-based test systems.

### Keywords
Hepatic phenotype, Drug metabolising enzymes and transporters, Organoid, In vitro

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Centre for Drug Safety Science, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Rosalind Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Rosalind Elspeth Jenkins
Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Centre for Drug Safety Science, University of Liverpool


