### Accession
PXD038280

### Title
Lectin-based affinity enrichment and characterization of N-glycoproteins from the human tear film by mass spectrometry

### Description
Glycosylation of proteins is one of the most common post-translational modification (PTM) and plays important regulatory functions in diverse biological processes such as protein stability or cell signaling. Accordingly, glycoproteins are also a consistent part of the human tear film proteome maintaining the proper function of the ocular surface and forming the first defense barrier of the ocular immune system. Irregularities in the glycoproteomic composition of the tear film might promote development of chronic eye diseases indicating glycoproteins as valuable source for biomarker discovery or drug target identification. The present study aimed to develop a lectin-based affinity method for the enrichment and concentration of tear glycoproteins/glycopeptides and the characterization of their specific N-glycosylation sites by high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS). For method development and evaluation, we accumulated first native glycoproteins from human tear sample pools and assessed the enrichment efficiency of different lectin column systems by 1D gel electrophoresis and specific protein stainings (Coomassie and glycoproteins). The best-performing multi-lectin column system (comprising the four lectins ConA, JAC, WGA and UEA I, termed as 4L) was applied for glycopeptide enrichment from human tear sample digests followed by MS-based detection and localization of their specific N-glycosylation sites. As main result, the present study identified in total 26 N glycosylation sites of 11 N-glycoproteins in tear sample pools of healthy individuals (n=3 biological sample pools). Amongst others, we identified tear film proteins lactotransferrin (N497 and N642, LTF), Ig heavy chain constant α-1 (N144 and 340, IGHA1), prolactin-inducible protein (N105, PIP) as well as extracellular lacritin (N105, LACRT) as highly reliable and significant N glycoproteins, which were already associated with the pathogenesis of various chronic eye diseases such as the dry eye syndrome (DES). In conclusion, the results of the present study will serve as important tear film N-glycoprotein catalogue for future studies focusing the human tear film and ocular surface-related inflammatory diseases.

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample preparation for the enrichment of tear glycopeptides 1.1 In-solution trypsin digestion Prior to glycopeptide enrichment (see method section 2.3), the tear sample pools containing 100 µg of protein were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion (n=3 biological replicates). At first, the tear sample pools were evaporated in the SpeedVac at 45 °C until dryness and resolved in 100 µL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) using a ultrasonic bath for 10 min on ice. Hence, 30 µL of 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 10 mM ABC were added to each sample followed by incubation at 56 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, 30 µl of 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 10 mM ABC were added to the sample pools and were treated for 30 min at RT in the dark. As final step, 50 µl of trypsin solution (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; 0.1 μg/μL in 10 mM ABC 10% acetonitrile (ACN)) were added to the sample pools and the reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight for at least 16 h at 37° C. Next day, all samples were evaporated in the SpeedVac at 45 °C until dryness. 1.2 Peptide purification and concentration determination The peptide purification via the SOLAµ™ SPE HRP plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) was performed after the in-solution trypsin digest (see method section 1.1) as well as prior to the MS analysis (see method section 2.5.3). At first, the crude peptide digest was dissolved in 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and treated for 10 min using an ultrasonic bath on ice. Activation of the SOLAµTM SPE membranes was performed with 100 µL of ACN followed by equilibration with 100 µL of 0.1% FA. After each step, the SOLAµTM SPE spin plate was centrifuged at 2,000 g for 1 min and the FT/eluate fractions were collected in 96-well microtiter microplates (Costar Corning Incorporated, Corning, NY, USA). The SOLAµTM SPE membranes were loaded twice with the crude sample digest followed by five washing steps with 100 µL of 0.1 % FA. Finally, the concentrated and purified peptides were eluted twice with 100 µl of 0.1% FA in 50% ACN and both eluate fractions were pooled in a new reaction tube (200 µL per sample). At the end, the purified peptide samples were evaporated in the SpeedVac at 45 °C to dryness before further processing. In addition, the peptide concentration of each sample was determined with the PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) in combination with the Multiscan Ascent photometer according the supplier’s instructions. Particularly, this was performed after glycopeptide affinity enrichment from the purified tear peptide digests (see method section 1.2). 1.3 PNGase F digest of glycopeptides To release the N-glycans from the glycopeptides, we treated the enriched tear glycopeptides (see method section 2.3) with endoglycosidase PNGase F enabling the detection of their specific N-glycosylation sites by MS. The enriched and concentrated tear glycopeptides were dissolved in 200 µL of 5X PBS and subsequently treated for 10 min using a ultrasonic bath on ice. Then, 1.5 µL of the PNGase F solution (500 Units/mL) were added to each sample and digested at 37 °C overnight. Next day, the deglycosylated peptides were evaporated in the SpeedVac at 45 °C until dryness. Prior to MS analysis, the modified (deamidated) glycopeptides were concentrated and purified with the SOLAµ™ SPE HRP plates as described in detail in method section 1.2. 1.4 MS analysis For the MS measurements of the tear glycopeptides ± PNGase F, we used the hybrid linear ion trap Orbitrap MS system (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), which was online coupled to the EASYnLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The enriched and purified glycopeptides ± PNGase F were dissovled in 0.1% FA to a peptide concentration of 0.5 µg/µL and 2 µL of this mixture were injected into the system for each run. The chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed with the PepMap C18 column system (75 µm x 150 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and the flow rate of the nanoLC system was set to 0.3 µL/min. The running buffer A was comprised of 0.1% FA and the running buffer B consisted of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. The peptides were eluted within 90 min using the following solvent gradient: 5-30% B (0-60 min), 30-100% B (60-80 min) and 100% B (80-90 min). Each sample was measured in total seven times with different MS settings (see manuscript) in order to maximize the identification rates of potential N glycosylation sites.

### Data Protocol
2.1 Data analysis & bioinformatics For the identification of the tear glycoproteins and their respective N-glycosylation sites, we used the bioinformatics software PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). This software platform encompasses a state-of-the-art de novo sequencing-assisted database search, which significantly increases the sequence coverage of proteins, and is also featured with a state-of-the-art PTM search algorithm to maximize N-glycosylation site identifications. The database-assisted protein identification was performed with the SwissProt database and the taxonomy Homo sapiens (date:, number of sequences:) using the following search parameters: peptide ion mass tolerance of ± 30 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, tryptic cleavage, maximum of two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and acetylation (N-terminal protein), oxidation and deamidation of asparagine (N) as variable modifications. Due to the release of the N-glycans from the N glycopeptides by PNGase F, the enzymatic-induced modification (deamidation) marked the original glycosylation site in the peptide/protein and was detectable by MS. All protein/peptide identifications were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. To identify only true N glycosylation sites, we only considered deamidation sites, which were at least detected with an Ascore ≥ 20 in each peptide. The Ascore is a software-specific (PEAKS) localization score assinged to modifications on the peptide. It is a -log10-adjusted p value and describes the probability of a PTM site occured at the reported position compared to other possible positions. An -log10(p)-adjusted value of 20 is equal to a p-value of 0.01. In addition, each deamidation site had to exhibit the canonical protein sequence motif N – X – serine (S) / threonine (T) / cysteine (C); X indicates any aa except proline (P). Since deamidation sites can also occur as natural PTMs or might be chemically induced during sample preparation, we also included enriched, non-modified N-glycopeptides (CTRL group) in this analysis. The respective deamidation site was only acknowledged as reliable and true protein N-glycosylation site (enzymatic induced by PNGase F), if it was not detected in the untreated CTRL group.

### Publication Abstract
The glycosylation of proteins is one of the most common post-translational modifications (PTMs) and plays important regulatory functions in diverse biological processes such as protein stability or cell signaling. Accordingly, glycoproteins are also a consistent part of the human tear film proteome, maintaining the proper function of the ocular surface and forming the first defense barrier of the ocular immune system. Irregularities in the glycoproteomic composition of tear film might promote the development of chronic eye diseases, indicating glycoproteins as a valuable source for biomarker discovery or drug target identification. Therefore, the present study aimed to develop a lectin-based affinity method for the enrichment and concentration of tear glycoproteins/glycopeptides and to characterize their specific N-glycosylation sites by high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS). For method development and evaluation, we first accumulated native glycoproteins from human tear sample pools and assessed the enrichment efficiency of different lectin column systems by 1D gel electrophoresis and specific protein stainings (Coomassie and glycoproteins). The best-performing multi-lectin column system (comprising the four lectins ConA, JAC, WGA, and UEA I, termed 4L) was applied to glycopeptide enrichment from human tear sample digests, followed by MS-based detection and localization of their specific N-glycosylation sites. As the main result, our study identified a total of 26 N glycosylation sites of 11 N-glycoproteins in the tear sample pools of healthy individuals (<i>n</i> = 3 biological sample pools). Amongst others, we identified tear film proteins lactotransferrin (N497 and N642, LTF), Ig heavy chain constant &#x3b1;-1 (N144 and 340, IGHA1), prolactin-inducible protein (N105, PIP), and extracellular lacritin (N105, LACRT) as highly reliable and significant N glycoproteins, already associated with the pathogenesis of various chronic eye diseases such as dry eye syndrome (DES). In conclusion, the results of the present study will serve as an important tear film N-glycoprotein catalog for future studies focusing on human tear film and ocular surface-related inflammatory diseases.

### Keywords
N-glycoproteins, Tear film, Multi-lectin column, Pngase f, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany
Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Care Centre Mainz

### Submitter
Carsten Schmelter

### Lab Head
Dr Franz H. Grus
Department of Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany


