### Accession
PXD006122

### Title
Proteomics on post-mortem human brain tissue of patients with Alzheimer`s, Parkinson`s and Lewy body dementias.

### Description
We have used HiRIEF (High Resolution Isoelectric Focusing) LC-MS proteomics with isobaric tags (TMT10plex) to compare 32 post-mortem human brains in the prefrontal cortex (Brodmann area 9) of prospectively followed patients with Alzheimer`s disease (AD), Parkinson`s disease with dementia (PDD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and older adults without dementia.

### Sample Protocol
The tissues were lysed in SDS-lysis buffer, and processed through filter aided sample prep (FASP) to the peptide level using first LysC followed by trypsin for proteolytic digestion. The 32 samples (8 controls, 8 Parkinson, 7 DLB, 9 Alzheimer) were randomized into four TMT10plex sets, using two TMT channels in each set as internal standard (made from pooling of equal amounts from all 32 samples at peptide level). Sample pooling was done as follows: TMT Set Channel disease TMT Set Channel disease TMT Set Channel disease TMT Set Channel disease 1 126 IS 2 126 IS 3 126 IS 4 126 IS 1 127N DLB 2 127N PDD 3 127N DLB 4 127N AD 1 127C DLB 2 127C C 3 127C PDD 4 127C C 1 128N PDD 2 128N DLB 3 128N AD 4 128N C 1 128C C 2 128C PDD 3 128C DLB 4 128C DLB 1 129N C 2 129N DLB 3 129N C 4 129N PDD 1 129C PDD 2 129C AD 3 129C AD 4 129C AD 1 130N AD 2 130N C 3 130N C 4 130N PDD 1 130C AD 2 130C AD 3 130C PDD 4 130C AD 1 131 IS 2 131 IS 3 131 IS 4 131 IS The tissues were lysed in SDS-lysis buffer, and processed through filter aided sample prep (FASP) to the peptide level using first LysC followed by trypsin for proteolytic digestion. The 32 samples (8 controls, 8 Parkinson, 7 DLB, 9 Alzheimer) were randomized into four TMT10plex sets, using two TMT channels in each set as internal standard (made from pooling of equal amounts from all 32 samples at peptide level). Sample pooling was done as follows: TMT Set Channel disease TMT Set Channel disease TMT Set Channel disease TMT Set Channel disease 1 126 IS 2 126 IS 3 126 IS 4 126 IS 1 127N DLB 2 127N PDD 3 127N DLB 4 127N AD 1 127C DLB 2 127C C 3 127C PDD 4 127C C 1 128N PDD 2 128N DLB 3 128N AD 4 128N C 1 128C C 2 128C PDD 3 128C DLB 4 128C DLB 1 129N C 2 129N DLB 3 129N C 4 129N PDD 1 129C PDD 2 129C AD 3 129C AD 4 129C AD 1 130N AD 2 130N C 3 130N C 4 130N PDD 1 130C AD 2 130C AD 3 130C PDD 4 130C AD 1 131 IS 2 131 IS 3 131 IS 4 131 IS  Each TMT set was prefractionated by HiRIEF (pH range 3-10) into 72 fractions, which were then run on Reversed Phase LCMS on a Qexactive instrument (Thermo) using 50min gradients on a nano EASY-Spray column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm internal diameter, 50cm long, Thermo). FTMS master scans with 70,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1600 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35,000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and 150ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1.5s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 60s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched by MSGF+/Percolator using a target-decoy strategy. The reference database used was the human subset of the Swiss-Prot database (42122 canonical and isoform protein entries, downloaded from uniprot.org on 2015.08.12). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysine residues and N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues; a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Peptide and PSM FDR were recalculated after merging the percolator groups of 8 search results into one result per TMT set. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer 57 (v2.0). PSMs found at 1% PSM- and peptide-level FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities, which were quantified using the medians of PSM quantification ratios. Gene identity inferring false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method (Savitski et al, MCP 2015 (9):2394-404).

### Publication Abstract
See Attems and Jellinger (doi:10.1093/brain/awx360) for a scientific commentary on this article.Cognitive changes occurring throughout the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases are directly linked to synaptic loss. We used in-depth proteomics to compare 32 post-mortem human brains in the prefrontal cortex of prospectively followed patients with Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease with dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies and older adults without dementia. In total, we identified 10 325 proteins, 851 of which were synaptic proteins. Levels of 25 synaptic proteins were significantly altered in the various dementia groups. Significant loss of SNAP47, GAP43, SYBU (syntabulin), LRFN2, SV2C, SYT2 (synaptotagmin 2), GRIA3 and GRIA4 were further validated on a larger cohort comprised of 92 brain samples using ELISA or western blot. Cognitive impairment before death and rate of cognitive decline significantly correlated with loss of SNAP47, SYBU, LRFN2, SV2C and GRIA3 proteins. Besides differentiating Parkinson's disease dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, and Alzheimer's disease from controls with high sensitivity and specificity, synaptic proteins also reliably discriminated Parkinson's disease dementia from Alzheimer's disease patients. Our results suggest that these particular synaptic proteins have an important predictive and discriminative molecular fingerprint in neurodegenerative diseases and could be a potential target for early disease intervention.

### Keywords
Hirief, Human, Brain, Synaptic, Brodmann area 9, Proteomics, Lcms, Prefrontal cortex, Alzheimer, Parkinson, Lewy body

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet and Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden


