### Accession
PXD038337

### Title
Rio1 downregulates centromeric RNA levels to promote the timely assembly of structurally fit kinetochores

### Description
Kinetochores assemble on centromeres via histone H3 variant CENP-A and low levels of noncoding centromere transcripts (cenRNAs). The latter are ensured by transcription factor Cbf1 (S. cerevisiae), centromere-binding protein CENP-B (humans), and the local histone code downregulating RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) activity. CenRNAs levels are further adjusted by the nuclear exosome. Using S. cerevisiae, we now add kinase Rio1 to this scheme. Yeast cenRNAs are produced mostly from the periCEN regions as short (median lengths of 231nt) or long (4,458nt) transcripts, in a 1:1 ratio. Rio1 limits their production by reducing RNAPII access and transcription activity, and promotes their turnover by the 5’-3’exoribonuclease Rat1. Rio1 similarly curtails the concentrations of noncoding pericenRNAs, which nevertheless exist at a magnitude higher level than the cenRNAs. Similar to yeast, human cells depleted of orthologue RioK1 exhibit cenRNA buildup, kinetochore malformation, and chromosomal instability, suggesting that CEN regulation by Rio1/RioK1 is evolutionary conserved.

### Sample Protocol
To establish the Rio1 interactome, yeast lacking proteinase A activity (pep4∆) was transformed with a plasmid (URA3 as the selection marker) expressing ProteinA-Rio1 from a P GAL1-10 promoter. For the negative control experiment, we transformed the same plasmid expressing untagged Rio1. The strains were grown overnight (25ºC, 200 rpm) in 500ml of 0.5% glucose synthetic medium lacking uracil. In the morning, the cells were transferred to the same medium lacking any carbohydrate for 1h, after which galactose (final 2%) was added. After 2h, the cells were collected, rinsed with cold double distilled water, and then washed with and resuspended in 700µl of cold breakage buffer (50mM Tris-Cl pH7.5, 10% glycerol, 150mM NaCl, 1mM dithiothreitol, 0.4% NP-40, 1mM PMSF, and 1% of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, Cat # P8215). The cell suspension was then drop-frozen in liquid  N2 and broken by mortar and pestle. The cell debris was removed (15,000 rpm; 15 min, 4C), and the cleared lysate incubated (overnight, 4C) with 50µl rabbit IgG agarose beads (Sigma, Cat # A2909) to capture ProteinA-Rio1 and associated proteins. The beads were then washed with PBS-T (PBS, 0.02% Triton X-100; Sigma Cat # T8787) and submitted to trypsin digestion and peptide analysis at CIBIO’s Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics facility to identify the co-purifying proteins. To establish the Rat1 interactome, Rat1 was endogenously tagged at its C-terminus with Protein A. The wild-type (untagged Rat1) yeast strain was used in parallel as the negative control. The cells were grown in YPDA medium (25ºC, 200 rpm) till an OD 600 of 1.2; washed, drop-frozen in liquid N 2 ,and lysed using mortar and pestle, as described above, equally incubated with IgG-agarose beads, which were washed, and likewise subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. The PoteinA-Rio1, Rat1-ProteinA and negative control purifications were performed in triplicate, independent biological experiments.  The protein-bound IgG-agarose beads obtained from the ProteinA-Rio1 and Rat1-ProteinA purifications as well as those derived from the parallel negative-control purifications, were washed twice with 100mM NH 4 HCO 3 pH 8.3, and resuspended in 100µl 6M urea with 100mM NH 4 HCO3. The bead-associated proteins were then reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 30 min), and alkylated with 20mM C 2 H 4 INO in the dark (30 min). To digest the proteins, the beads were treated (room temperature, 4h) with 0.75μg Lys-C (Promega, Cat # VA1170) after which the solution was diluted four-fold in 50mM NH 4 HCO3. An aliquot of 1.5μg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Cat # V5111) was added to each sample before an overnight incubation at room temperature with gentle shaking. The beads were then separated from the supernatant by centrifugation, and the supernatant collected. Next, the digested peptides were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid to a pH  2.5, desalted on C18 stage-tips, and resuspended in 20μl of 0.1% formic acid buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis (see below).  The trypsin-generated peptides (see above) were separated chromatographically on an Easy-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) and loaded onto a reversed-phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2µm particle size, 100Å pore size, I.D. 75µm), heated at 40°C with a two- component mobile phase system of 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A), and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (buffer B). Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 5% to 25% over 80 min, followed by 25% to 40% over 30 min, and 40% to 98% over 15 minutes, and kept at 98% over 15 min, a flow rate of 400nl/min. Samples were injected in an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), and data acquired in data-depended mode (2100 V). Full scans were performed at 120.000 FWHM resolving power (at 200m/z) and an AGC target of 1x10e6. A mass range of 350-1100 m/z was surveyed for precursors, with first mass set at 140 m/z for fragments. Each full scan was followed by a set of MS/MS scans (HCD, collision energy of 30%) over 3 sec cycle time at 150ms maximum injection time (ion trap) and AGC target of 5x10e3.

### Data Protocol
Peptides searches were performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (ThermoFisher Scientific) against the S. cerevisiae S288c FASTA file (UniProt, June 2021) and a database containing major common contaminants. Proteins were identified using a MASCOT search engine with a mass tolerance of 10ppm for precursor and 0.6Da for product. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with 5 missed cleavages, and static modification of carbamidomethyl (C) with variable modification of oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) were incorporated in the search. False discovery rate was filtered for &lt;0.01 at PSM, peptide and protein level. The results were filters to exclude potential contaminants. Peak intensities were transformed into Log2 space. The data were normalized by the average of its abundance within each sample to account  for variation in sampling volumes 12 . The mass spectrometry data are shown in Extended Data Table 2. Significant differences in peptide enrichment were determined with the unpaired, two-tailed student t- test.

### Publication Abstract
Kinetochores assemble on centromeres via histone H3 variant CENP-A and low levels of centromere transcripts (cenRNAs). The latter are ensured by the downregulation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) activity, and cenRNA turnover by the nuclear exosome. Using S. cerevisiae, we now add protein kinase Rio1 to this scheme. Yeast cenRNAs are produced either as short (median lengths of 231&#x2009;nt) or long (4458&#x2009;nt) transcripts, in a 1:1 ratio. Rio1 limits their production by reducing RNAPII accessibility and promotes cenRNA degradation by the 5'-3'exoribonuclease Rat1. Rio1 similarly curtails the concentrations of noncoding pericenRNAs. These exist as short transcripts (225&#x2009;nt) at levels that are minimally two orders of magnitude higher than the cenRNAs. In yeast depleted of Rio1, cen- and pericenRNAs accumulate, CEN nucleosomes and kinetochores misform, causing chromosome instability. The latter phenotypes are also observed with human cells lacking orthologue RioK1, suggesting that CEN regulation by Rio1/RioK1 is evolutionary conserved.

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Centromere, Per centromere, Rat1, Riok1, Rio1

### Affiliations
University of Trento

### Submitter
Romina Belli

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Arthur Irene De Wulf
University of Trento


