### Accession
PXD012059

### Title
Ventriculomics analyses of autopsy AD tissue

### Description
Very little studies have explored the role played by the specialized choroid plexus epithelial cells and the ependymal cells that line the ventricles. In normal and pathological (AD) ageing, reports of alterations in the blood brain CSF barrier (BCSFB) integrity and membrane transporters, accompanied by deficiencies in CSF production and an enlarged ventricular volume have been documented. The molecular sequelae of events driving these age-related pathological changes remains elusive. Given the pivotal role of the ventricular system in normal brain physiology, in this study we proposed to explore their contributing role towards AD pathogenesis. To address this, we used our state-of-the-art proteomic platform, a liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC-MS) approach coupled with Tandem Mass Tag labeling technology to conduct a detailed characterization and assessment of molecular changes in protein expression levels from isolated tissue from the walls of the ventricles in autopsy AD cases, and two groups of age-matched control cases (non-agenarian’s with no AD pathology, and those with no clinical AD diagnosis but significant amyloid pathology and Braak staging).

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen brain tissue from the walls of the ventricles were weighed and homogenized in liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC/MS) grade chilled water at a volume of 2.5fold. Fifty microliters of homogenates were added to a 50l aqueous buffer solution containing 2X phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 2X sodium chloride and proteinase inhibitor. Samples in aqueous buffer were further homogenized with a probe sonicator and underwent centrifugation at 20,000g for 15 mins at 4oC. Supernatant (non-membrane fraction) was collected in a different Eppendorf tube to obtain cytosolic and nuclear protein fractions. Pelleted samples were re-suspended in an aqueous solution containing 1X volume of ice-cold methanol and centrifuged at 20,000g for 15mins at 4oC. The precipitant was further re-suspended in a 1X volume of ice-cold isopropanol and hexane at a 2:1 dilution, followed by centrifugation at 20,000g for 15mins, and membrane protein pellet fractions were re-suspended in 25mM TEAB and 0.5% SDC. Original supernatants (non-membrane fractions) from the first centrifugation step were brought up in 0.5fold volume of ice-cold methanol, centrifuged at 20,000g for 15mins, and the nuclear protein pellet fraction were re-suspended in 25mM TEAB and 0.5% SDC. Supernatant fractions from the last step was brought up in 7fold volume of ice-cold methanol, centrifuged at 20,000g for 15mins, and cytosolic protein pellets were re-suspended in 25mM TEAB and 0.5% SDC. Membrane and cytosolic proteins were used in the entire study.  Tryptic Digestion Sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin) was added to 100µg aliquots (at 1µg/µl final protein concentration) of depleted brain homogenate at a 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio and incubated at 37˚C for 16 hours.  10µl of each was transferred to a new tube following digestion and taken to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge for anhydrous TMT labeling (below).   Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling Briefly, we employed a multiplexed isobaric labeling strategy to allow for simultaneous identification and quantification of proteins from multiple biological samples. Ten-plex TMT labeling kits (ThermoScientific, NJ, USA) were used for analyses of protein samples. This format allowed all randomization of samples from all different groups to be analyzed within the same batch with the addition of an internal reference used in each batch. All samples and isobaric label tags were handled blind to the experimenter. Each TMT label was dissolved in 20ul of acetonitrile solution. Ten microliters of digested protein from each sample were taken to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge.  20µl aliquots of each label were also dried down in the speed vacuum and subsequently re-suspended in 25mM TEAB in acetonitrile solution. Re-suspended labels were added to dried protein samples, and allowed to incubate for 1hour at room temperature, and the reactions quenched with addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 1% v/v.  Labeled samples were pooled according to their respective experimental batches and subsequently taken to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge to remove acetonitrile prior to sample cleanup.     Sample clean up Residual SDC and TEAB were removed from the samples using as follows. The pooled, dried TMT-labeled protein samples were re-suspended in 100µl of 1% formic acid in water, and centrifuged at 20,000 x g RCF for one minute to remove the precipitated SDC.  The supernatants were collected in new tubes, into which 400µl of ethyl acetate was added, followed by vortexing to partition the residual SDC into the organic (upper) layer. Samples were then centrifuged at 20,000 x g RCF for 30 seconds, and upper organic layers were discarded. This was repeated three times, and the final lower phase was taken to dryness in the speed vacuum. Dried samples were re-suspended in 100ul of 0.1% formic acid. Pooled TMT-labeled samples were concentrated and de-salted using C18 reversed phase ZipTips according to manufacturer’s prortocol.  ZipTip eluates were re-suspended in 20µl of 0.1% formic acid and transferred into an auto-sampler vial, and analyzed by nano-UPLC MS on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap instrument (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Statistical Analysis of proteomics data                PMi Preview software was used to survey the data files and, if necessary, to add other modifications to the search criteria. Also, Preview results were used to choose the precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances (4 ppm, 0.02 Da, respectively) as well as dynamic modifications. The following settings were used to search the data using SEQUEST and BYONIC as the search algorithms, and Uniprot human database (02/2016).  Dynamic modifications - Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M), Methyl / +14.016 Da (E), Deamidated / +0.984 Da (N, Q), static modifications of TMT10plex / +229.163 Da (N-Terminus, K), Carbamidomethyl +57.021 (C).  Only unique peptides were considered for quantification purposes. For SEQUEST, the Percolator feature of Proteome Discoverer, and for Byonic, the target-decoy feature, were used to set a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and peptides passing this cutoff value were exported to JMP (SAS) 8.0.2 for data cleaning and statistical analysis. Proteins identified in at least half of the total number of plexes were used for the quantitative analysis. After ln transformation of the raw ion counts, each channel was normalized by central tendency normalization where medians were used. Data were analyzed by One-way ANOVA, t-test or spearman correlations. Proteins significantly altered were uploaded into ingenuity pathway analyses (IPA) where molecules and pathways that are unique to each groups can be identified. The ratios were formed by first dividing all samples with the same reference samples from the healthy-AD control group (see Table 1) used in the same plex, and subsequently log2 ratio values were generated by dividing log2 values between two groups of interest (i.e. healthy AD control/AD or healthy AD control/non agenerians or AD/non-agenerians). One-way ANOVA or t-test were used to test for significant proteins between the different groups.   IPA Analysis  Datasets of significantly modulated proteins were uploaded to the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA, Ingenuity® Systems; Kramer et al., 2014) in order to map the proteins onto known networks of protein interactions to ascertain the functional significance of AD, tau or amyloid dependent changes in protein expression in each experimental paradigm.  In IPA the uploaded protein lists are assigned to established molecular pathways (“Canonical pathways”) and biological functions in the knowledgebase.  The Core analysis settings were; Ingenuity Knowledge base as reference set, maximum number of molecules per network was 35, maximum number of networks for analysis was 25. Only experimentally observed knowledge was used. All species, data sources, tissues/cell lines included at the time of the analysis in IPA was considered.   Core analysis identified the canonical pathways that were shown to be significantly modulated in response to AD, tau or amyloid pathogenesis as a result of significant modulation of proteins represented in those pathways.  The significance of the association between the data set and the canonical pathway was measured in two ways: 1) For each canonical pathway a ratio of the number of molecules from the data set that map to that pathway divided by the total number of molecules in that canonical pathway is displayed. 2) Fisher’s exact test was used to calculate a p-value determining the probability that the association between the proteins in the dataset and the canonical pathway is explained by chance alone. P-values lower than 0.01 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lcms, Protein, Lateral ventricules

### Affiliations
Roskamp Institute, Sarasota, Florida
Roskamp Institute

### Submitter
Joseph Ojo

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Ojo
Roskamp Institute, Sarasota, Florida


