### Accession
PXD034353

### Title
Passive elution of proteoforms from polyacrylamide gels combined with anion exchange purification for in-depth top-down analysis of the human low molecular weight proteome.

### Description
We developed a novel sample preparation method by combining Passively Eluting Proteins from Polyacrylamide gels as Intact species for MS (PEPPI-MS) fractionation with Anion-Exchange disc-assisted Sequential sample Preparation (AnExSP) purification, and evaluated its performance in TDP analysis by comparing it with a conventional PEPPI workflow using Methanol-Chloroform-Water (MCW) precipitation.

### Sample Protocol
MS-compatible human protein extract (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was used as the sample for top-down proteomics in this study. The sample was subjected to reduction and alkylation prior to use. SDS-PAGE separations used NuPAGE Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gels (4–12%) and NuPAGE MES running buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 150 µL of the sample were mixed with 50 µL of NuPAGE LDS sample lysis buffer, and the mixed solution was loaded onto the NuPAGE gel at a volume of 13.3 µL per well (corresponds to 40 µg protein). Electrophoresis was performed at 23 °C at a constant voltage of 180 V and monitored with wide-view prestained protein size marker III (Wako, Osaka, Japan). After electrophoresis, the gel was placed on a disposable plastic tray and shaken with 40 mL of 40% methanol/5% acetic acid for 30 minutes. The gel was then transferred to 40 mL of aqueous CBB solution (EzStain Aqua CBB solution, ATTO, Tokyo, Japan), shaken gently for 8 minutes, and washed in 200 mL of distilled water for 1 hour. After CBB staining, the sample lane was divided into six fractions and the resulting gel fractions were processed by PEPPI-AnExSP or PEPPI-MCW. PEPPI-AnExSP (PEPPI-MS + AnExSP) The gel fractions were uniformly ground for 30 seconds using BioMasher disposable homogenizer tubes (Nippi, Tokyo, Japan). The macerated gels were shaken vigorously (1500 rpm) with 100 μL of 0.05% (w/v) SDS/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) for 10 minutes. After filtration using a Spin-X centrifuge tube filter with a 0.45-μm pore cellulose acetate membrane (Corning, Corning, NY, USA), the protein filtrate was subjected to AnExSP purification as follows: The protein filtrate was loaded onto the Amicon centrifugal 3-kDa ultrafiltration device and centrifuged at 13500 rcf for 25 minutes, followed by addition of 8 M urea to bring the total to 500 μL and another centrifugation at 13500 rcf for 25 minutes. After concentration, the latter part of the procedure was repeated by adding 8 M urea to total 500 µL and centrifuging again. 100 mM ABC was added to the concentrated solution in the filter device to make the total volume 500 μL and centrifuged at 13500 rcf for 25 minutes. After concentration, the latter part of the procedure was repeated by adding 100 mM ABC to total 500 µL again and centrifugation was repeated. The final solution in the filter device (PEPPI fraction) was used for the following AnExSP step. An anion-exchange StageTip was prepared by using a straw to punch a small circle 6 mm in diameter out of an Empore anion SPE disc (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) and packing it into a disposable 200 μL micropipette tip. The prepared StageTip was fitted with a centrifuge adapter (Catalog # 5010-21514, GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) and was set in a 2 mL microcentrifuge tube. 40 μL of methanol was first loaded onto the StageTip and centrifuged at 7000 rcf for 3 minutes, followed by 40 μL of 100 mM ABC and another centrifugation at 7000 rcf for 3 minutes. A PEPPI fraction was loaded onto the StageTip and centrifuged at 7000 rcf for 3 minutes, followed by 200 μL of 100 mM ABC and another centrifugation at 7000 rcf for 3 minutes. After centrifugation, the StageTip was transferred to a new 1.5 mL tube set in an incubator. 40 μL of 0.5% formic acid (FA)/30–50% ethanol was loaded onto the StageTip and centrifuged at 7000 rcf for 3 minutes. The recovered solution was concentrated to 5–10 μL with a centrifugal concentrator for LC-MS analysis.  PEPPI-MCW Passive extraction of intact proteins from gels was performed as in PEPPI-AnExSP. Purification of recovered proteins by MCW was performed as described previously with slight modifications: After filtration through the Spin-X centrifuge tube filter, the recovered protein was mixed with 600 μL methanol, 150 μL chloroform, and 450 μL water, and then centrifuged at 13500 rcf for 3 minutes. After discarding the upper aqueous layer, 600 μL methanol was added and centrifuged at 13500 rcf for 3 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet washed again with 600 μL methanol and centrifuged. The precipitated pellets were allowed to air-dry at room temperature and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) TFA/3% (v/v) acetonitrile for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed with ProSightPD (Version 4.0, Proteinaceous, Inc., Evanston) within Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific, Germany). Since medium/high (low resolution MS1/ high resolution MS2 scans) and high/high (high resolution MS1/ high resolution MS2 scans) data were processed with different workflows, the individual CVs of the raw files from band 1 and 2 were extracted using FreeStyle™ (1.8.51 SP1).  All high/high data were processed with the High/High crawler Node utilizing Xtract Deconvolution with default settings. The Annotated Proteoform Search Node and Subsequence Search Node with a precursor and fragment tolerance of 10 ppm and default settings were used for proteoform identifications. The medium/high data (band 1 and 2, CVs −20, 0 V) were processed with the Med/High crawler Node using ReSpect for MS1 and Xtract for fragment spectra deconvolution with default settings. Annotated Proteoform Search and Subsequence Search were performed with a precursor tolerance of 1.01 Da and a fragment tolerance of 10 ppm. For all searches, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification.  All files were analyzed together in a multi-consensus step and proteoform spectrum matches (PrSMs) and proteoforms were filtered with a 1% false discovery rate cutoff.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of liquid chromatography (LC) and gas-phase separation by field-asymmetric ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) is a powerful proteoform separation system for top-down proteomics. Here, we present an in-depth top-down proteomics workflow, GeLC-FAIMS-MS, in which a molecular-weight-based proteome fractionation approach using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis is performed prior to LC-FAIMS-MS. Since individual bands and their corresponding mass ranges require different compensating voltages (CVs), the MS parameters for each gel band and CV were optimized to increase the number and reliability of proteoform identifications further. We developed an easy-to-implement and inexpensive procedure combining the earlier established Passively Eluting Proteins from Polyacrylamide gels as Intact species (PEPPI) protocol with an optimized Anion-Exchange disk-assisted Sequential sample Preparation (AnExSP) method for the removal of stains and SDS. The protocol was compared with a methanol-chloroform-water (MCW)-based protein precipitation protocol. The results show that the PEPPI-AnExSP procedure is better suited for the identification of low-molecular-weight proteoforms, whereas the MCW-based protocol showed advantages for higher-molecular-weight proteoforms. Moreover, complementary results were observed with the two methods in terms of hydrophobicity and isoelectric points of the identified proteoforms. In total, 8500 proteoforms could be identified in a human proteome standard, showing the effectiveness of the gel-based sample fractionation approaches in combination with LC-FAIMS-MS.

### Keywords
Anion exchange, Peppi, Top-down, Sds-page, Stagetip

### Affiliations
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, 24105 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, 24105 Kiel, Germany


