### Accession
PXD016111

### Title
Comparison of the total liver proteomes of postnatal-day-7 mice with liver-specific UBA3 deficiency and their littermate controls

### Description
The total liver proteomes of postnatal-day-7 mice with liver-specific UBA3 deficiency and their littermate controls were compared by two-dimensional (2-D) electrophoresis mapping. 25 protein spots were obviously changed in their expression upon UBA3 deficiency. These 25 protein spots were excised from 2-D gels. After in-gel digestion, the tryptic digests were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis by LC–MS/MS, followed by database searching. Here, we identified ETFA expression in spot 14, which was decreased in UBA3-deficient conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissues were dissected and homogenized in cool lysis buffer (8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 40 mM Tris) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics). 2-D was then performed. Briefly, isoelectric focusing was performed with the IPGphor system (Amersham Pharmacia, Uppsala, Sweden). Immobiline 3-10 linear DryStrips (Amersham) were rehydrated for 10 h using IPG Buffer (0.5%) and reswelling buffer (8 M urea, 2% CHAPS, 20 mM DTT). SDS-PAGE was performed using 13% polyacrylamide gels without a stacking gel in the PROTEAN II cell (Bio-Rad). Following SDS-PAGE, gels were subjected to silver staining and gel image analysis was processed using Adobe Photoshop software and the Diversity One program (Amersham).
Then, protein spots excised from 2-D gels were destained by washing in 0.2 ml aliquots of 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% v/v acetonitrile for 30 min. The gel pieces were then dried in a SpeedVac Vacuum (Savant Instruments, Holbrook, NY, USA) and rehydrated at 4 degree for 30 min in 0.01 ml digestion solution (0.01 mg/ml modified sequence-grade trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3), 0.01 ml of digestion solution without trypsin was then added to keep the gel pieces wet during the digestion. After overnight incubation at 37 degree, the digestion was stopped with 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 20 min. Peptides were extracted by 0.02 ml 5% TFA for 1 h at 37 degree and then by 0.02 ml 2.5% TFA/50% acetonitrile for 1 h at 37 degree. The combined supernatants were evaporated in the SpeedVac Vacuum and dissolved in 0.004 ml 0.5% aqueous TFA. 
The tryptic digests were analyzed by NanoLC-HDMS MS/MS on an AcquityTM Nano UPLC system (Waters Corp., Milford, USA) and Synapt high-definition mass spectrometry (HDMS) was performed with a nanospray ion source (Waters). The HDMS was operated in a data-dependent mode with MS/MS scans (2 seconds). The voltage of non-coated capillary was set as 2300 V.


### Data Protocol
Glufibrinopeptide was used to calibrate the instrument in the MS/MS mode. Peak lists were generated using PLGS 2.2 software and automatically combined into a single pkl file for every LC-MS/MS run. The MS/MS data were acquired and processed using MassLynx V4.1 software (Micromass, Milford, MA, USA). Then the data were submitted to search through the SWISS-PROT (version 2016_10; 552,884 sequences; 197,760,918 residues) and NCBInr database using a Mascot Daemon 2.4.1 server, and Mus musculus was selected as specific species. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with one missed cleavage site allowed. The mass accuracy for parent ions was set as ± 50 ppm, and ± 0.2 Da was used for the fragment ion mass tolerance. Chemical modifications such as protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation (M), and deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as fixed modifications, during database search. These modifications were chosen due to their frequent occurrence during sample preparation. Proteins were identified on the basis of three or more different peptides whose ions scores exceeded the threshold of P < 0.05, indicating identification at the 95% confidence level. For a protein to be confirmed, the assignment needed to be based on four or more consecutive y- or b-series ions. Protein scores are derived from ions scores as a non-probabilistic basis for ranking protein families. Ions score is −10log(P), where P is the probability that the observed match is a random event.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse liver lc–ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Medical Science
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Jiyan Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang jiyan
Institute of Basic Medical Science


