### Accession
PXD006881

### Title
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and adhesion

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a pathogenic micro-organism responsible for many hospital-acquired infections. It is able to adhere to solid surfaces and develop an immobilised community or so-called biofilm. Many studies have been focusing on the use of specific materials to prevent the formation of these biofilms, but the reactivity of the bacteria in contact to surfaces remains unknown. In order to evaluate the impact of different materials on the physiology of Pseudomonas aeruginosa during the first stage of biofilm formation, i.e. adhesion, we investigated the total proteome of cells adhering to three materials: stainless steel, glass and polystyrene. Using tandem mass spectrometry performed at the PAPPSO proteomic platform, 930 proteins were identified, 70 of which were differentially expressed between the materials. Dysregulated proteins belonged to 19 PseudoCAP (Pseudomonas Community Annotation Project) functional classes, with a particular abundance of proteins involved in small molecule transport and membrane proteins. Notably, ten porins or porin precursors were under-produced in bacteria adhering to stainless steel when compared to those adhering to polystyrene and glass. Although adhesion to solid surfaces is an extracellular phenomenon, it involves not only extracellular proteins but also intracellular reactions, as observed with the dysregulation of 11 proteins involved in various metabolisms and five in protein translation. Overall, this work showed that during bacterial adhesion, P. aeruginosa senses the materials concerned and is able to modulate its physiology accordingly.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extraction Bacterial pellets were lysed with 20 µL of 10% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS, Sigma-Aldrich, Lyon, France), sonicated three times for 5 min at 4°C and then centrifuged (10,000 g, 10 min, 4°C). Supernatants containing soluble proteins were recovered and mixed with an equivalent volume of Laemmli 2X running buffer (Biorad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France).  Protein digestion The proteins thus extracted were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich), and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark. The protein sample was mixed with SDS loading buffer (63 mM Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 10 mM DTT, 2% SDS, 0.02% bromophenol blue, 10% glycerol), then loaded onto a SDS-PAGE stacking gel (7%) and subjected to a short period of electrophoresis (10 mA, 50 V, 5 min). After migration, the gels were stained with Coomassie blue and de-stained with a solution containing 50% ethanol, 10% acetic acid and 40% deionised water. The protein band revealed was then excised, washed with water, and subjected to protein digestion with 300 ng trypsin (Promega France, Charbonnières, France) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer at 37°C. After overnight hydrolysis, tryptic peptides were recovered by extraction (Shevchenko et al., 2006), dried in under a speed vacuum and finally suspended in 25 µL nano-LC loading buffer (0.08% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile; Sigma-Aldrich). The peptides were then dried and stored at -20°C. Tandem mass spectrometry Peptide analyses were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nanosystem (Dionex, Voisins le Bretonneux, France) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, USA; PAPPSO proteomic platform, INRA, Jouy-en-Josas) with a nanoelectrospray interface. Briefly, 4 µL of tryptic digest were loaded onto a Pepmap100C18 pre-column (0.3 mm ID x 5 mm, 5 µm, Dionex) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 4 min. All peptides were separated onto a Pepmap100C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 500 mm, 2 µm, Dionex) with a gradient from 2% to 35% for 68 min at 300 nL/min and 40°C, for a total running time of 85 min which included the regeneration and equilibration steps of the column. Ionisation was performed in positive mode (1.4 kV ionisation potential) with a liquid junction and capillary probe (PicoTip Emiter, 10 μm ID; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Data were acquired using Xcalibur (v2.07, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a data-dependent method comprising two steps: first, a full scan MS in an Orbitrap analyser (from 300 to 1400 in profile mode with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400) and second, fragmentation and the detection of daughter ions in the linear trap (qz = 0.22, activation time 50 ms and collision energy fixed at 35%) in centroid mode. The dynamic exclusion time was set at 45 s. To enhance mass accuracy, the lock mass option was activated on dimethylcyclosiloxan (m/z 445.120029).

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification The raw files produced under Xcalibur were first converted to mzXML files with MSconvert (http://sashimi.sourceforge.net, version 3.0.3768) and in a second step, proteins were identified using X!tandem software (X!tandem Piledriver 2015.04.01.1; http://www.thegpm.org) against a Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 protein database (NCBInr, NC_002516.2; 5566 sequences) associated with a standard proteomic contaminant database. The X!Tandem search parameters were i) trypsin specificity with three missed cleavages and ii) variable oxidation states of methionine. Semi-tryptic peptide detection was included by activating the option in the data refine mode. The mass tolerance was fixed at 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The final search results were filtered using a multiple threshold filter applied at the protein level and consisting of a Log10 protein E-value lower than −2.6 identified with a minimum of two different peptide sequences, detected in at least one analysis as having a peptide E-value lower than 0.05. These criteria led to false discovery rates estimated using the decoy database of 0.07% and 0.10% for peptide and protein identification, respectively.  X!TandemPipeline 3.3.5 analysis (Langella et al., 2017) (http://pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/) was used to filter and group the peptide/protein identifications from MS/MS mass spectra.  Statistical analyses Physicochemical results (contact angles and roughness) were considered to be significantly variable using ANOVA when the p-value was <0.05. A spectral counting approach was used to identify proteins detected in statistically different quantities between the conditions. Data from the mass spectrometry protein quantification of five biological replicates were compared. First, all conditions were compared (70 proteins significantly different) and second, the conditions were compared between each other and the results were merged. Filtering and statistical analysis were performed using MassChroqR, an R package developed by PAPPSO (http://pappso.inra.fr/). A small difference in the number of spectra may be noise-induced, so proteins displaying a minor variation between the conditions (whose mean difference was less than three spectra) were discarded from the analysis. A generalized linear mixed model (GLM) with a Poisson distribution was applied. This model is appropriate in the case of a counting such as spectral counting. The significance of protein abundance changes was determined by analysis of variance ANOVA using a Chi-square test. A protein was considered to be significantly variable when the p-value was <0.01. The p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using Benjamini and Hochberg’s method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is a pathogenic micro-organism responsible for many hospital-acquired infections. It is able to adhere to solid surfaces and develop an immobilized community or so-called biofilm. Many studies have been focusing on the use of specific materials to prevent the formation of these biofilms, but the reactivity of the bacteria in contact to surfaces remains unknown. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of the abiotic surface on the physiology of adherent bacteria. Three different materials, stainless steel (SS), glass (G), and polystyrene (PS) that were relevant to industrial or medical environments were characterized at the physicochemical level in terms of their hydrophobicity and roughness. We showed that SS was moderately hydrophilic and rough, potentially containing crevices, G was hydrophilic and smooth while PS was hydrophobic and smooth. We further showed that <i>P. aeruginosa</i> cells were more likely able to adhere to SS and G rather than PS surfaces under our experimental conditions. The physiological response of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> when adhering to each of these materials was then evaluated by global proteomic analysis. The abundance of 70 proteins was shown to differ between the materials suggesting that their abundance was modified as a function of the material to which bacteria adhered. Our data lead to enabling the identification of abundance patterns that appeared to be specific to a given surface. Taken together, our data showed that <i>P. aeruginosa</i> is capable of sensing and responding to a surface probably <i>via</i> specific programmes to adapt its physiological response accordingly.

### Keywords
Abiotic material, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Adhesion, Porins, Proteome modification

### Affiliations
Micalis Institute AgroParisTech INRA  78350 Jouy-en-Josas
AgroParisTech

### Submitter
Morgan Guilbaud

### Lab Head
Dr Marie-Noëlle BELLON-FONTAINE
Micalis Institute AgroParisTech INRA  78350 Jouy-en-Josas


