### Accession
PXD018715

### Title
Identification of the SS18-SSX interacting proteins

### Description
Using affinity purification determine changes in SS18 BAF complex upon fusion to SSX1. Using soluble nuclear fraction (nuclear extract NE) and nuclease digested chromatin fraction (CHR) we performed affinity capture of proteins bound to wild type SS18 and synovial sarcoma SS18-SSX1 fusion from NE and CHR of 293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
Complex purification  Stable HEK293T cell lines expressing by lentiviral infection HA-SS18 WT or HA-SS18-SSX1 were grown in 150mm dishes. Confluent plates were scraped to remove cells and cells were washed with PBS. Cell suspension was spun down by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C and pellets were resuspended in hypotonic buffer (10mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 10mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCL2, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF) and incubated on ice for 5 minutes. Following incubation, cell suspension was spun down by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C, and pellets were resuspended in 5X volume of fresh hypotonic buffer (with protease inhibitor cocktail) and then cells were homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer (glass). Cell suspension was layered onto hypotonic buffer sucrose cushion made with 30% sucrose w/v, spun down by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 1 hour at 4°C followed by removal of the cytosol-containing layer. The nuclei containing pellets were resuspended in high salt buffer (50mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 300mM KCl, 1mM MgCL2, 1mM EDTA, 1mM, 1% NP40, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail) and then the homogenate rotated for 1 hour at 4°C. Homogenates were then spun down by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 1 hour at 4°C in a SW32Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter). The soluble proteins, consisting of the nuclear extract (NE) fraction, was separated from the insoluble chromatin pellet, consisting of the chromatin (CHR) fraction. The chromatin pellet was further solubilized by treatment with Benzonase (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 minutes and subsequently additional KCl was added to final concentration of 700 mM (50mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 700mM KCl, 1mM MgCL2, 1mM EDTA, 1mM, 1% NP40, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail), and sonicated 3 times for 30 seconds with 5 minute intervals. The solubilized chromatin fraction was then spun down by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 1 hour at 4°C in a SW32Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) and supernatant collected. The collected nuclear extract and chromatin fractions were filtered with a 0.45um filter and rotated overnight at 4°C with HA magnetic resin. HA beads were washed in high salt buffer and eluted with 1 mg/mL of HA peptide for 4 times at durations of 1.5 hour each.     Mass-spectrometric sample preparation and experiments  Sample preparation. Equal amounts of selected fractions from glycerol gradient-separated complexes were concentrated using StrataClean beads and loaded onto SDS-PAGE gels. Samples were migrated 2cm into the gel, stained with colloidal blue stain and excised for MS analysis. All subsequent gradient MS steps were performed at the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility directed by Dr. Steven Gygi (Harvard Medical School).  Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.  On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads (Accucore, ThermoFisher) into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip .  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).   As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Elite ion-trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences, and the data were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate based on linear discriminant analysis (Huttlin et al., 2010).

### Publication Abstract
Interactions between chromatin-associated proteins and the histone landscape play major roles in dictating genome topology and gene expression. Cancer-specific fusion oncoproteins, which display unique chromatin localization patterns, often lack classical DNA-binding domains, presenting challenges in identifying mechanisms governing their site-specific chromatin targeting and function. Here we identify a minimal region of the human SS18-SSX fusion oncoprotein (the hallmark driver of synovial sarcoma) that mediates a direct interaction between the mSWI/SNF complex and the nucleosome acidic patch. This binding results in altered mSWI/SNF composition and nucleosome engagement, driving cancer-specific mSWI/SNF complex targeting and gene expression. Furthermore, the C-terminal region of SSX confers preferential affinity to repressed, H2AK119Ub-marked nucleosomes, underlying the selective targeting to polycomb-marked genomic regions and synovial sarcoma-specific dependency on PRC1 function. Together, our results describe a functional interplay between a key nucleosome binding hub and a histone modification that underlies the disease-specific recruitment of a major chromatin remodeling complex.

### Keywords
Nuclear extract, Chromatin, Synovial sarcoma, Histones, 293t cells, Baf complex

### Affiliations
Dana Farber Cancer Institute
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

### Submitter
Andrew D'Avino

### Lab Head
Dr Cigall Kadoch
Dana Farber Cancer Institute


