### Accession
PXD029165

### Title
Urinary proteins in dogs suffering leishmaniasis

### Description
This study is aimed at the description of the urinary proteome of dogs with of glomerulonephritis secondary to leishmaniasis, compare it with human proteome and identify possible new biomarkers for glomerular disease in leishmaniasis

### Sample Protocol
Urine samples were collected from 20 dogs, 5 from healthy dogs and 15 from stages Leishvet III and IV. Urine samples were analyzed by UHPLC-MS / MS

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification and peptide and protein identification of the results obtained by MS were processed using Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench software (Rev B.04.01, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). ed. Think something similar in scope to the Data Analysis section of your manuscript

### Publication Abstract
Canine leishmaniosis is frequently associated with the development of renal disease. Its pathogenesis is complex and not fully understood. For this reason, this study aimed to describe the urinary proteome, and identify possible new biomarkers in dogs with kidney disease secondary to leishmaniosis. Urine samples were collected from 20 dogs, 5 from healthy dogs, and 15 from stages Leishvet III and IV. Urine samples were analyzed by UHPLC-MS/MS. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD029165. A total of 951 proteins were obtained. After bioinformatic analysis, 93 urinary proteins were altered in the study group. Enrichment analysis performed on these proteins showed an overrepresentation of the complement activation pathway, among others. Finally, 12 discriminant variables were found in dogs with renal disease secondary to leishmaniosis, highlighting C4a anaphylatoxin, apolipoprotein A-I, haptoglobin, leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 1, and beta-2-microglobulin. This study is the first to describe the urinary proteomics of dogs with renal disease caused by leishmaniosis, and it provides new possible biomarkers for the diagnosis and monitoring of this disease.

### Keywords
Urine, Leishmania infantum, Dogs, Renal disease

### Affiliations
UNIVERSIDAD DE EXTREMADURA
INVESTIGADOR PRINCIPAL

### Submitter
FERNANDO JUAN  PEÑA VEGA 

### Lab Head
Dr LABORATORIO DE PATOLOGÍA CLÍNICA UNIVERSIDAD DE EXTREMADURA
INVESTIGADOR PRINCIPAL


