### Accession
PXD038060

### Title
Yeast Elongator Complex Elp1-6

### Description
Elongator complex Elp1-6 purified from Saccharomyces cerevisiae was analysed by crosslinking mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
To crosslink the Elp1-6 complex at a concentration of 2.22 µM, 85 µg of the complex was mixed with sulfo-SDA in molar ratios of 1:500 and 1:1000 (protein:crosslinker). The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 60 minutes, irradiated with UV light for 10 seconds, and quenched with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The crosslinked complex was then separated from single subunits on a Novex Bis-Tris 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel. Gel pieces containing the crosslinked complex were cut out and washed alternately six times with 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM ABC at 37 °C for 5 minutes each time. The sample was reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37 °C and washed with 50% acetonitrile. Free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes at room temperature and the gel pieces were again washed with 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM ABC at 37 °C for 5 minutes each time. The proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using 1 µg trypsin per 20 µg of protein sample. The digested peptides were recovered and desalted using C18 StageTips. The eluates of the StageTips were pooled and fractionated by size exclusion chromatography using a mobile phase consisting of 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoric acid at a flow rate of 10 µl/minute. The first six fractions containing peptides were collected and the solvent was removed using a vacuum concentrator. For the LC-MS/MS analysis, an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was used. Each SEC fraction was resuspended in 1.6% ACN and 0.1% formic acid before injection onto a 50-centimetre EASY-Spray C18 LC column. The mobile phase consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). A gradient of from 2% to 55% B was applied over the course of 90-100 minutes with a final increase to 95% B within 2.5 minutes. An EASY-Spray source ionised the eluting peptides before introducing them to the mass spectrometer. For each SEC fraction, two acquisitions were carried out. Data-dependent MS data were acquired in cycles of 2.5 seconds using the top-speed setting and the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. Ions with a charge state from 3+ to 7+ were selected for fragmentation by stepped higher-energy collisional dissociation using a decision tree. Spectra of fragments were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. Peaks were excluded after a single repeat for the duration of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
xiSEARCH & xiFDR is used to analyze the data and identified the peptides and proteins. Results are exported to mzidentml.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Elongator

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, TU Berlin

### Submitter
Alexander Rau 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Institute of Biotechnology, TU Berlin


