### Accession
PXD010631

### Title
Partial covariance two-dimensional mass spectrometry for bio-molecular primary structure

### Description
A new kind of two-dimensional mass spectrometry is described and applied to peptides, proteins and oligonucleotides. Partial covariance two-dimensional mass spectrometry (pC-2DMS) detects intrinsic statistical correlations between bio-molecular fragments originating from the same or consecutive decomposition events. This enables the identification of pairs of ions sharing a common origin across the entire fragment mass spectrum. The fragment-fragment correlations revealed by pC-2DMS are much more specific to the bio-molecular primary structure and its modifications than the individual fragment mass-to-charge ratios on which standard one-dimensional mass spectrometry (MS) is based. We illustrate the analytical power of pC-2DMS by demonstrating the identification of mixtures of combinatorial post-translational modification patterns inaccessible to standard MS.

### Sample Protocol
Water, acetonitrile and formic acid used for the MS analysis were of Optima LC-MS grade and were purchased from Fisher Scientific Ltd. For the solid phase synthesis of all peptides we employed the Fmoc (9-fluorenyl-methyloxycarbonyl) methodology (41) in a fully automated multiple synthesizer (Syro II from Multi Syntech Germany).The peptide synthesis was carried out on preloaded Wang resins. Peptide chain assembly was performed by in situ activation of amino acid building blocks by 2-(1H-benzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate (HBTU). The used amino acids Fmoc-Thr(PO(OBzl)OH)-OH and Fmoc-Tyr(PO(OBzl)OH)-OH were purchased from Merck Millipore GmbH. Fmoc-Tyr(Nitro)-OH, Fmoc-Arg-(Me)-OH, Fmoc-Arg(sMe2)-OH and Fmoc-Lys(Ac)-OH were purchased from Bachem AG. The synthesized peptides were purified by preparative HPLC on a Kromasil (AkzoNobel/Sweden) 100–10C 10 µm 120Å reverse phase column (30 × 250 mm) using an eluent of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water (A) and 80% acetonitrile in water (B). The peptides were eluted with a successive linear gradient of 25% B to 80% B in 30 min at a flow rate of 23 ml/min and lyophilized. The purified peptides were characterized with analytical HPLC and MS (Thermo Finnigan, LCQ).  The synthetic peptides were dissolved in 50% acetonitrile/2% formic acid in water to produce concentrations of ~1 μM to ~10 μM for 1D CID and 100 fM to ~1 µM for pC-2DMS measurements, respectively. All experiments were performed on an LTQ XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) linear ion trap mass spectrometer. The samples were infused into the mass spectrometer via a Harvard Apparatus 11 Plus Single Syringe Pump coupled to a Nanospray II Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 3 – 5 µl/min and spray voltage of 1.8 – 2.2 kV in positive ion mode, using no auxiliary desolvation gas. The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was held constant at 200°C.

### Data Protocol
The pC-2DMS data analysis was carried out by computer code written by us in Python using numerical routines from the NumPy (http://www.numpy.org/) and SciPy (http://www.scipy.org/) libraries. The software read in the raw data in text file format and calculated the TIC partial covariance (pCov) between each pair of m/z channels in the tandem mass spectra using Eq. (2). The autocorrelation signals, which trivially correlate each spectral signal to itself along the line x = y, were removed from the maps. Another Python code was written for processing the pC-2DMS maps in order to produce the scored lists of fragment ion correlations. This code first determined the features of a pC-2DMS map potentially corresponding to true correlation peaks, according to the height of their apices, followed by the calculation of the pC-2DMS correlation score using Eq. (S6).  The database searches were performed with parent ion tolerance of 5 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da, no enzyme specificity and using the ESI-trap instrument for the 1D Mascot search. Searches were performed over the UniProt/SwissProt protein database. All modifications were specified as variable modifications. Prototypical pC-2DMS search engine result files have filename extension 'restd' (results two-dimensional), prototypical pC-2DMS mgf-equivalent peak files have filename extension 'peakstd' (peaks two-dimensional).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Combinatorial modifications, Two-dimensional

### Affiliations
Imperial College London, UK
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Taran Driver

### Lab Head
Dr Marina Edelson-Averbukh
Imperial College London, UK


