### Accession
PXD014319

### Title
A binding site hotspot map of the FKBP12–rapamycin–FRB ternary complex by photo-affinity labeling and mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
Structural characterization of small molecule binding site hotspots within the global proteome is uniquely enabled by photo-affinity labeling (PAL) coupled with chemical enrichment and unbiased analysis by mass spectrometry (MS). MS-based binding site hotspot maps provide structural resolution of interaction sites in conjunction with identification of target proteins. However, binding site hotspot mapping has been confined to relatively simple small molecules to date; extension to more complex compounds would enable the structural definition of new binding modes in the proteome. Here, we extend PAL and MS methods to derive a binding site hotspot map for the immunosuppressant rapamycin, a complex macrocyclic natural product that forms a ternary complex with the proteins FKBP12 and FRB. Photo-rapamycin was developed as a diazirine-based PAL probe for rapamycin, and the FKBP12–photo-rapamycin–FRB ternary complex formed readily in vitro. Photo-irradiation, digestion, and MS analysis of the ternary complex revealed a McLafferty rearrangement product of photo-rapamycin conjugated to specific surfaces on FKBP12 and FRB. Molecular modeling of the ternary complex based on the binding site map revealed a 5.0 Å minimum distance constraint between the conjugated residues and the diazirine carbon. Molecular dynamics further predicted a 9.0 Å labeling radius for the diazirine upon photo-activation that may be useful in the interpretation of binding site measurements from PAL more broadly. Thus, in characterizing the ternary complex of photo-rapamycin by MS, we applied binding site hotspot mapping to a macrocyclic natural product and extracted a precise structural measurement for interpretation of PAL products that may enable the discovery of new ligand space in the “undruggable” proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The sample (~1 μg per injection) was loaded onto a C18 trap column (C18 Dr. Maisch, 3 µm particle size, 30 mm length, 150 µm internal diameter) and then separated on an analytical column (C18 Dr. Maisch, 1.8 µm particle size, 300 mm length, 75 µm internal diameter) at 150 nL/min with a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system connected in line to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid. The column temperature was maintained at 60 ˚C. Peptides were eluted with a water/acetonitrile gradient (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid/water, buffer B = 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile; flow rate 0.150 µL/min; gradient: hold at 2% B for 3 min, increase to 50% B over 60 min, increase to 98% B over 10 min, hold at 98% B for 15 min). Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 60K FWHM resolution over a m/z range of 400-2000. Tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 at a resolving power setting of 30K and fragmentation energy of 35%. An isolation window of 3 m/z used to ensure capture of isotopically coded species. With a mass tolerance of 10 ppm, precursors were excluded from further fragmentation after 3 occurrences within 30 s for 60 s. Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.3. Spectra were filtered to HCD spectra with signal-to-noise > 1.5. Spectra were searched against a database containing FKBP12 (Sequence S1D), FRB (Sequence S2E), and common contaminant proteins using Sequest HT with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, with semi-specific digestion, 2 missed cleavages, and variable oxidation on methionine residues. Assignments were validated with the Target Decoy PSM Validator. Spectra without high-confidence assignments in this initial search were then searched again against a database containing only FKBP12 and FRB (Sequences S1D and S2E) using Sequest HT with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, allowing for semi-specific digestion, 4 missed cleavages, variable oxidation on methionine residues, and RP modifications on any residue. Separate searches were performed for each possible RP modification mass (as listed in Figure S7). The results of these searches were combined and validated using the Target Decoy PSM Validator. The precursors of spectra with high confidence assignments to photo-rapamycin-modified species (Hope-295) or minimalist tag modified species (Hope-415,420) were manually examined for isotopic coding.

### Data Protocol
Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.3. Spectra were filtered to HCD spectra with signal-to-noise > 1.5. Spectra were searched against a database containing FKBP12 (Sequence S1D), FRB (Sequence S2E), and common contaminant proteins using Sequest HT with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, with semi-specific digestion, 2 missed cleavages, and variable oxidation on methionine residues. Assignments were validated with the Target Decoy PSM Validator. Spectra without high-confidence assignments in this initial search were then searched again against a database containing only FKBP12 and FRB (Sequences S1D and S2E) using Sequest HT with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, allowing for semi-specific digestion, 4 missed cleavages, variable oxidation on methionine residues, and RP modifications on any residue. Separate searches were performed for each possible RP modification mass (Hope-295, as listed in Figure S9) or the minimalist tag modification mass (Hope-415, 420, 256.1446 Da). The results of these searches were combined and validated using the Target Decoy PSM Validator. The precursors of spectra with high confidence assignments to photo-rapamycin or minnimalist-tag modified species were manually examined for isotopic coding.

### Publication Abstract
Structural characterization of small molecule binding site hotspots within the global proteome is uniquely enabled by photoaffinity labeling (PAL) coupled with chemical enrichment and unbiased analysis by mass spectrometry (MS). MS-based binding site maps provide structural resolution of interaction sites in conjunction with identification of target proteins. However, binding site hotspot mapping has been confined to relatively simple small molecules to date; extension to more complex compounds would enable the structural definition of new binding modes in the proteome. Here, we extend PAL and MS methods to derive a binding site hotspot map for the immunosuppressant rapamycin, a complex macrocyclic natural product that forms a ternary complex with the proteins FKBP12 and FRB. Photo-rapamycin was developed as a diazirine-based PAL probe for rapamycin, and the FKBP12-photo-rapamycin-FRB ternary complex formed readily in vitro. Photoirradiation, digestion, and MS analysis of the ternary complex revealed a McLafferty rearrangement product of photo-rapamycin conjugated to specific surfaces on FKBP12 and FRB. Molecular modeling based on the binding site map revealed two distinct conformations of complex-bound photo-rapamycin, providing a 5.0 &#xc5; distance constraint between the conjugated residues and the diazirine carbon and a 9.0 &#xc5; labeling radius for the diazirine upon photoactivation. These measurements may be broadly useful in the interpretation of binding site measurements from PAL. Thus, in characterizing the ternary complex of photo-rapamycin by MS, we applied binding site hotspot mapping to a macrocyclic natural product and extracted precise structural measurements for interpretation of PAL products that may enable the discovery of new binding sites in the "undruggable" proteome.

### Keywords
Photo-affinity labeling, Structural protemics

### Affiliations
Harvard University
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University


