### Accession
PXD012478

### Title
Targets of anti-trophoblast antibodies

### Description
Background: Our former study demonstrated that anti-trophoblast antibodies (ATAB) are more prevalent in the sera of patients with unexplained recurrent miscarriages (uRM), and the detection of ATAB is restricted to binding to JEG-3 cells and the quantification by flow cytometry. We further proved that the ATAB-positive sera decrease the production of β-hCG and progesterone in the same cell model. The specific antigenic epitopes of ATAB are still unclear, therefore our aim was to identify one specific target of ATAB in uRM patients.  Methods: The possible targets of ATAB were identified by western blots and mass spectrometry, and α-Enolase (ENO1) was further confirmed by a competition assay. The level of anti-ENO1 antibodies in the sera and the production of β-hCG and progesterone were evaluated with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Additionally, the expression of ENO1 in the first trimester placenta was analyzed with immunohistochemistry and triple fluorescence staining in uRM patients and healthy controls. Findings: ENO1 was identified to be a prominent target of ATAB and anti-ENO1 antibodies can decrease the secretion of β-hCG and progesterone. The titer of anti-ENO1 antibodies was increased in the sera of ATAB-positive patients compared to ATAB-negative patients. Overexpression of ENO1 and co-expression of ENO1 and β-arrestin was found in the extra villous trophoblasts of uRM patients in the first trimester placenta.  Interpretation: Anti-ENO1 antibody in the sera may be a novel autoimmune biomarker of uRM. Decreasing anti-ENO1 antibodies or inhibiting ENO1 expression might be a potential therapeutic treatment for uRM patients.

### Sample Protocol
JEG-3 cells were lysed with radioimmunoprecipatation assay buffer (RIPA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) and mixed with 4x sample buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerin, 2% SDS, 1% β-mercaptoethanol). 20 µg of JEG-3 celllysates were separated in 10% SDS-PAGE. The area between 35 and 40 kDa (corresponding to the Western blot signal given by ATAB)was excised and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. The gel slice was incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3. For reduction and alkylation, the gel slice was first incubated in 45 mM dithiothreitol / 50 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min, 55 °C), followed by an incubation in 100 mM iodoacetamide / 50 mM NH4HCO3 (15 min, RT). In-gel digestion was done with 70 ng porcine trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) overnight at 37 °C. The supernatant was recovered and peptides were further extracted from the gel pieces with 80 % acetonitrile. The identification of the proteins was performed on an Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex, Concord, Canada). Peptide samples were diluted in 10 µl 0.1 % formic acid (FA), transferred to a trap cartridge (PepMap100 C18, 75 µm×2 cm, 3 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) and separated at a flow rate of 200 nL min-1 (column: PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm×50 cm, 2 µm particles; Thermo Scientific). A 120 min long gradient from 2% to 25% followed by a 10 min long gradient from 25% to 50% of solvent B was applied. For MS acquisition, a data-dependent CID method was used.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed with MASCOT version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) using the human subset of the UniProt database. The MASCOT results were filtered for identifications with a probability > 95% using Scaffold V4.1 (Proteome Software Inc, Portland, OR, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Unexplained recurrent miscarriages / anti-trophoblast antibodies / jeg-3 cells / anti-α-enolase antibodies

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA  Gene Center Ludwig-Maximilians-University  81377 Munich Germany
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis LAFUGA  Gene Center Ludwig-Maximilians-University  81377 Munich Germany


