### Accession
PXD038038

### Title
Revealing Corynebacterium glutamicum proteoforms through top-down proteomics

### Description
Corynebacterium glutamicum is a bacterium widely employed in the industrial production of amino acids as well as a broad range of other biotechnological products. The present study describes the characterization of C. glutamicum proteoforms, and their post-translational modifications (PTMs) employing top-down proteomics. Despite previous evidence of PTMs having roles in the regulation of C. glutamicum metabolism, this is the first top-down proteome analysis of this organism. We identified 1125 proteoforms from 273 proteins, with 60 % of proteins presenting at least one mass shift, suggesting the presence of PTMs, including several acetylated, oxidized and formylated proteoforms. Furthermore, proteins relevant to amino acid production, protein secretion, and oxidative stress were identified with mass shifts suggesting the presence of uncharacterized PTMs and proteoforms that may affect biotechnologically relevant processes in this industrial workhorse. For instance, the membrane proteins mepB and SecG were identified as a cleaved and a formylated proteoform, respectively. While in the central metabolism, OdhI was identified as two proteoforms with potential biological relevance: a cleaved proteoform and a proteoform with PTMs corresponding to a 70 Da mass shift.

### Sample Protocol
Intracellular proteins were acquired after physical disruption of cells through maceration in liquid nitrogen and submitted to GELFrEE fractionation. Fractions with proteins smaller than 50 kDa were analyzed by three technical relicates using top-down analyses on a nano-UHPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled to Orbitrap Elite™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) (LC-MS/MS). Analytical (30 cm, 75 µM I.D.) and trap (4 cm, 100 µM I.D.) columns packed with PLRPS 1000 A, 5 µM (Agilent, California, U.S.A.).

### Data Protocol
First, Thermo raw files were converted to MzML format using the MSConvert tool. Then, identification and characterization of proteoforms were done using the TopPic suite software tool, version 1.4. Briefly, spectra were deconvoluted using TopFD with default parameters followed by identifications against a C. glutamicum ATCC 13032 reference proteome (11-2020), obtained from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/). Two mass shifts between -500 Da and 500 Da were allowed in the identification and the N-terminal forms were set as “NONE”, “NME”, “NME-ACETYLATION”, and “M-ACETYLATION”. A false discovery rate strategy was adopted with a decoy database, resulting in the identification of only proteoforms with FDR below 1% at the proteoform spectrum matches (PrSMs) level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Corynebacterium glutamicum, Top-down proteomics, Proteoforms

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, Brazil.
University of Brasilia

### Submitter
Reynaldo Magalhaes Melo

### Lab Head
Dr Marcelo Valle de Sousa
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, Brazil.


