### Accession
PXD041898

### Title
XCP1 cleaves Pathogenesis-related protein 1 into CAPE9 for systemic immunity in Arabidopsis

### Description
This repository is related to the work” XCP1 cleaves Pathogenesis-related protein 1 into CAPE9 for systemic immunity in Arabidopsis”. In this study, we found that the C-terminal proteolytic processing of a caspase-like substrate motif “CNYD” within Pathogenesis-related protein 1 (PR1) generates an immunomodulatory cytokine (CAPE9) in Arabidopsis. Salicylic acid enhances CNYD-targeted protease activity and the proteolytic release of CAPE9 from PR1 in Arabidopsis. This process involves a protease exhibiting caspase-like enzyme activity, identified as Xylem cysteine peptidase 1 (XCP1). XCP1 exhibits a calcium-modulated pH-activity profile and a comparable activity to human caspases. XCP1 is required to induce systemic immunity triggered by pathogen-associated molecular patterns. This work reveals XCP1 as a key protease for plant immunity, which produces the cytokine CAPE9 from the canonical salicylic acid signaling marker PR1 to activate systemic immunity. The following files are stored here: one MS datasets (include .raw, preprocessed .mgf, and Mascot MS/MS ion search result .dat file) generated in this work, including: “Total identified endogenous peptides observed in SA-treated Arabidopsis leaves on Q Exactive HF (named as supplementaldata2)”

### Sample Protocol
Plants were collected and ground into powder under liquid nitrogen. Frozen leaf powder was dissolved in 1% TFA. The filtrated leaf juice was then centrifuged and the supernatant was adjusted to pH 4.5 and further centrifuged. Then the supernatant was re-adjusted to pH 2.5. The tryptic β-casein peptides were added as internal control. To purify the supernatant, the C18 cartridge was used. The eluted solution was vacuum-evaporated and were further injected into a Superdex Peptide column for collecting the peptide fractions. The collected fractions were desalted by C18 ZipTip before LC-MS/MS analysis. To identify endogenous AtCAPE9, the LC-MS/MS operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used. To identify global peptide in SA-treated WT samples, a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF) coupled online with a nanoUHPLC system was used. The DDA acquisition parameters were set to one full MS scan (m/z 350 to 1650) with 60,000 resolution and were switched to 20 product ion scans with 30,000 resolution, 28% normalized collision energy (NCE) and isolation width 1.2 Th when a precursor ion charge was 2+ to 5+ and an intensity greater than 130,000 was detected.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra generated from Q Exactive HF were subjected to peak picking by msConvert version 3.0.18353 included in ProteoWizard Toolkit and were output into Mascot generic format (mgf) file. The mgf file obtained was searched against a database combining the target and decoy hypothetical peptide database based on the Arabidopsis TAIR11 protein database plus bovine β-casein protein sequence without specifying enzyme cleavage rules using Mascot MS/MS ion search (Matrix Science, server version 2.3). The approach to generate the target and decoy hypothetical peptide database has been reported in our previous work. The mass tolerance in Mascot search for peptide precursors and fragments was set at 5 ppm and ± 0.05 Da, respectively. All of the MS/MS spectra identified by Mascot were subsequently rescored by calculating the delta score (DS). The peptide hits produced from shuffled sequences were used to evaluate the cutoff of DS for limiting the false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% in the untargeted peptide identification result.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Systemic acquired resistance, Salicylic acid, Protease, Plant immunity, Peptide cytokine

### Affiliations
Acdemia Sinica
Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan

### Submitter
Shengchi Hung

### Lab Head
Dr Yet Ran Chen
Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan


