### Accession
PXD040413

### Title
Lysine acetolome of breast cancer-derived small extracellular vesicles reveals specific acetylation pattern for metabolic enzymes

### Description
Cancer-derived small extracellular vesicles have been proposed as promising potential biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer (BC). We performed a proteomic study of lysine acetylation of breast cancer-derived small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) to understand the potential role of the aberrant acetylated proteins in the metastasis and progression of BC. Three cell lines were used as models for this study: MCF10A (non-metastatic), MCF7 (estrogen and progesterone receptor positive, metastatic) and MDA-MB-231 (triple-negative, highly metastatic). For a com-prehensive protein acetylation analysis of the sEVs derived from each cell line, acetylated peptides were enriched using the anti-acetyl-lysine antibody, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. In total, 118 lysine acetylated peptides of which 22, 58 and 82 have been identified in MCF10A, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, respectively. These acetylated peptides were mapped to 60 distinct pro-teins and mainly identified proteins involved in metabolic pathways. Among those identified acetylated proteins presented in cancer-derived sEVs (MCF7, MDA-MB-231) are proteins associ-ated with glycolysis pathway, annexins and histones. Five enzymes from the glycolytic pathway, present only in sEVs isolated from cancer-derived sEVs cell lines, were validated. These include aldolase (ALDOA), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK 1), enolase (ENO) and pyruvate kinase M1/2 (PKM). For three of these enzymes, ALDOA, PGK 1 and ENO, the specific enzymatic activity was significantly higher in MDA-MB-231 when compared with MCF10A-derived sEVs. This study reveals that sEVs contain acetylated glycolytic metabolic enzymes that could be interesting potential candidates for early BC diagnostics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation for Acetylomics Isolated sEVs were added in lysis buffer with a volume ratio of 4:1 (fraction/buffer) consisting of a final concentration of 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 0.1 % NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 1.6 M urea, 1/1000 (v:v) protease inhibitor cocktail (Cat No. 78430), 3 µM Trichostatin A (TSA), 10 mM Nicotinamide (NAM), and gently vortexed for 2 min. The suspension was centrifuged for 3 min at 10,000 g and the supernatant was then collected. The protein concentration was determined using a Bradford protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat No. 23236).  Protein Reduction, Alkylation and Enzymatic Digestion Protein samples obtained from the isolated sEVs were reduced, alkylated, and di-gested using FASEB method as described previously [45]. Proteolytic digestion was performed by addition of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, #V5111), 1:300 enzyme to protein ratio, and incubated under shaking at 500 rpm at ambient temperature overnight. The digestion was stopped by addition of formic acid (1% final concentration) and centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 3 minutes. The supernatant containing about 100 µg of digested protein was desalted on disposable TopTip C-18 columns (Glygen, # TT2C18.96) and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Enrichment of Acetylated Peptides The peptides were dissolved in 100 µL of the imunnoprecipitation buffer solution containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40 and incu-bated with 30 µL pre-washed antibody beads (catalog no. PTM-104 for Kac, PTM Biolabs, Inc, Hangzhou) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The bound lysine acetylated pep-tides were then processed according to the protocol of PTM Biolabs. The eluted peptides were collected and vacuum-dried followed by resuspension in 20 µL of 0.1% FA and analysed by LC-MS/MS analysis.  Nano-LC-MS/MS Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON, Canada) equipped with an UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Missis-sauga, ON, Canada) was used for nLC-MS/MS analysis. Three microliters of enriched acetylated peptides were loaded onto the column for 65 min at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min and separated on an in-house packed column (Polymicro Technology), 15 cm × 70 μm ID, Luna C18(2), 3 μm, 100 Å (Phenomenex) employing a water/ACN/0.1% formic acid gradient.  The following steps were employed: 0-10 min, 2-2% ACN; 10-40 min, 2-38% ACN; 40-45 min, 38-98% ACN; 45-50 min, 98-98% ACN; 50-55 min, 98-2% ACN; 55-65 min, 2-2% ACN). Data-dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed following a full MS survey scan.  The Orbitrap parameters in ESI+ were set up as follows: ion spray voltage 2.1 kV, ion source temperature 250°C, top speed mode over the m/z range (m/z 350–2,000) at a resolution of 60,000. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+2 to +7), and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s. The au-tomatic gain control settings were 5x105 for full scan and 1x104 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors were isolated using a 2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
MS Spectra Processing Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for protein identifica-tion. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and 0.6 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search engine SEQUEST-HT implemented in Proteome Discoverer was applied for all MS raw files. Search parameters were set to allow for dynamic modifica-tion of methionine oxidation, lysine (K) acetylation, N-terminus acetylation, and static modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation. Peptides were searched against a human UniProt FASTA file containing 20,396 entries (21.04.2021) and a default contaminants database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both the protein and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer-derived small extracellular vesicles have been proposed as promising potential biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer (BC). We performed a proteomic study of lysine acetylation of breast cancer-derived small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) to understand the potential role of the aberrant acetylated proteins in the biology of invasive ductal carcinoma and triple-negative BC. Three cell lines were used as models for this study: MCF10A (non-metastatic), MCF7 (estrogen and progesterone receptor-positive, metastatic) and MDA-MB-231 (triple-negative, highly metastatic). For a comprehensive protein acetylation analysis of the sEVs derived from each cell line, acetylated peptides were enriched using the anti-acetyl-lysine antibody, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. In total, there were 118 lysine-acetylated peptides, of which 22, 58 and 82 have been identified in MCF10A, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines, respectively. These acetylated peptides were mapped to 60 distinct proteins and mainly identified proteins involved in metabolic pathways. Among the acetylated proteins identified in cancer-derived sEVs from MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell lines are proteins associated with the glycolysis pathway, annexins and histones. Five acetylated enzymes from the glycolytic pathway, present only in cancer-derived sEVs, were validated. These include aldolase (ALDOA), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK1), enolase (ENO) and pyruvate kinase M1/2 (PKM). For three of these enzymes (ALDOA, PGK1 and ENO) the specific enzymatic activity was significantly higher in MDA-MB-231 when compared with MCF10A-derived sEVs. This study reveals that sEVs contain acetylated glycolytic metabolic enzymes that could be interesting potential candidates for early BC diagnostics.

### Keywords
Protein acetylation, Small extracellular vesicles, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
John L. Holmes Mass Spectrometry Facility, Faculty of Science, University of Ottawa, Canada
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada

### Submitter
Nico Hüttmann

### Lab Head
Dr Maxim Valentinovich Berezovski
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada


