### Accession
PXD007665

### Title
GTSF-1 is required for the formation of an RNA-dependent RNA Polymerase complex in C. elegans

### Description
In every domain of life, Argonaute proteins and their associated small RNAs regulate gene expression. Despite great conservation of Argonaute proteins throughout evolution, there are not many other conserved proteins involved in small RNA pathways. Gametocyte-specific factor 1 (Gtsf1) proteins, characterized by two tandem CHHC zinc fingers and an unstructured, acidic C-terminal tail, represent one such conserved small RNA pathway component. In fly and mouse, they are required for fertility and have been shown to interact with Piwi clade Argonautes. We identified T06A10.3 as the Caenorhabditis elegans Gtsf1 homolog and named it gtsf-1. Given its conserved nature and roles in Piwi-mediated gene silencing, we sought out to characterize GTSF-1 in the context of the small RNA pathways of C. elegans. Like its homologs, GTSF-1 is required for normal fertility. Surprisingly, we report that GTSF-1 is not required for Piwi-mediated gene silencing. Instead, gtsf-1 mutants lack a class of endogenous small RNAs, known as 26G-RNAs, and fully phenocopy mutants lacking RRF-3, the RNA-dependent RNA Polymerase that synthesizes 26G-RNAs. We show, both in vivo and in vitro, that GTSF-1 specifically and robustly interacts with RRF-3 via its tandem CHHC zinc fingers. Furthermore, we demonstrate that GTSF-1 is required for the assembly of a larger RRF-3 and DCR-1-containing complex, also known as ERIC, thereby allowing for 26G-RNA generation. We propose that GTSF-1 homologs may similarly act to drive the assembly of larger complexes that subsequently act in small RNA production and/or in imposing small RNA-mediated silencing activities.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitates were resuspended in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer 4X (Life technologies #NP0007) and 0.1 M DTT and heated at 70oC for 10 minutes. The respective samples were separated on a 4%-12% gradient Bis-Tris gel (NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels, 1.0 mm, 10 well #NP0321; Life Technologies) in 1x MOPS (NuPAGE 20x MOPS SDS running buffer, #NP0001; Life Technologies) at 180 V for 10 min, afterwards separately processed by in-gel digest (Shevchenko et al., 2007) and desalted using a C18 StageTip (Rappsilber et al., 2007). The digested peptides were separated on a 25-cm reverse-phase capillary (75 µM inner diameter) packed with Reprosil C18 material (Dr. Maisch). Elution of the peptides was done along a 2h gradient from 2%-40% Buffer B (see Stage tip purification) with the EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Measurement was done on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with a Top10 data-dependent MS/MS acquisition method per full scan (Bluhm et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
The measurements were processed with the Max Quant software, version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) against the Uniprot database (using 25,489 entries for C. elegans) for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ip

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


