### Accession
PXD018701

### Title
Moyamoya disease factor RNF213 is a giant E3 ligase with a dynein-like core and a distinct ubiquitin-transfer mechanism

### Description
RNF213 is the major susceptibility factor for Moyamoya disease, a progressive cerebrovascular disorder that often leads to brain stroke in adults and children. Characterization of disease-associated mutations has been complicated by the enormous size of RNF213. Here we present the cryo-EM structure of mouse RNF213. The structure reveals the intricate fold of the 584 kDa protein, comprising an N-terminal stalk, a dynein-like core with six ATPase units, and a multidomain E3 module. Collaboration with UbcH7, a cysteine-reactive E2, points to an unexplored ubiquitin-transfer mechanism that proceeds in a RING-independent manner. Moreover, we show that pathologic MMD mutations cluster in the composite E3 domain, likely interfering with substrate ubiquitination. In conclusion, the structure of RNF213 uncovers a distinct type of an E3 enzyme, highlighting the growing mechanistic diversity in ubiquitination cascades. Our results also provide the molecular framework for investigating the emerging role of RNF213 in lipid metabolism, hypoxia, and angiogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
For XL-MS experiments 0.7 mg/mL of purified RNF213 supplied in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5 was crosslinked with 0.35 mM DSS or DSG (both Creative Molecule) for 40 min at 25°C. The reaction was quenched with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) for 10 min at 37°C. Samples were dried at 45°C (Concentrator, Eppendorf), resuspended in 8 M Urea (VWR) and reduced with 2.5 mM TCEP (VWR). Subsequently, samples were alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Urea was then diluted to 1 M by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were digested with trypsin (Promega), using 2 μg of protease per 100 μg protein. After 20 hours at 37°C, trypsin was inactivated by adding 0.4% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher). Samples were loaded on Sep-Pak cartridges (50 mg, Waters) equilibrated with 5% (v/v) acetonitrile (VWR), 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (Fisher Chemicals) and subsequently eluted with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. To enrich for crosslinked peptides, the samples were separated by SEC. For this purpose, peptides were resuspended in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and applied to a Superdex 30 Increase 3.2/300 column (GE Healthcare). Fractions containing crosslinked peptides were evaporated to dryness.  For MS-analysis samples were resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, No. 160454) at a flow rate of 25 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, No. 164739). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl/min, and a binary 3 h gradient. The gradient starts with 98% mobile phase A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2% mobile phase B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v), increases to 35% mobile phase B over 180 min, followed by a 5 min-gradient to 90% mobile phase B. Acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode with a 3 s cycle time. The full scan spectrum was recorded at a resolution of 60 000 in the range of 350-1500 m/z. Precursors with a charge state of +3 to +7 were fragmented. HCD-collision energy was set to 29%. The resolution of MS2-scans recorded in the Orbitrap was 45 000 with a precursor isolation width of 1.0 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 30 s exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
Fragment spectra peak lists were generated from the raw MS-data using the software MSConvert (v 3.0.9974) selecting the peak picking filter. Crosslink search was performed using the XiSearch (v 1.6.742) applying the following parameters: 6 ppm MS1-accuracy; 20 ppm MS2-accuracy; DSS-crosslinker with reaction specificity for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine, and protein N-termini with a penalty of 0.2 (scale 0-1) assigned for serine, threonine, and tyrosine; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine as variable modification; tryptic digest with up to 4 missed cleavages; and all other variables at default settings. Identified crosslinks were filtered to 5% FDR on link level with the software XiFDR (v 1.1.27). For analysis of the crosslinked data, the in-house software CrossLinkingVisualizer has been used.

### Publication Abstract
RNF213 is the major susceptibility factor for Moyamoya disease, a progressive cerebrovascular disorder that often leads to brain stroke in adults and children. Characterization of disease-associated mutations has been complicated by the enormous size of RNF213. Here, we present the cryo-EM structure of mouse RNF213. The structure reveals the intricate fold of the 584 kDa protein, comprising an N-terminal stalk, a dynein-like core with six ATPase units, and a multidomain E3 module. Collaboration with UbcH7, a cysteine-reactive E2, points to an unexplored ubiquitin-transfer mechanism that proceeds in a RING-independent manner. Moreover, we show that pathologic MMD mutations cluster in the composite E3 domain, likely interfering with substrate ubiquitination. In conclusion, the structure of RNF213 uncovers a distinct type of an E3 enzyme, highlighting the growing mechanistic diversity in ubiquitination cascades. Our results also provide the molecular framework for investigating the emerging role of RNF213 in lipid metabolism, hypoxia, and angiogenesis.

### Keywords
Rnf213, E3-ligase, Mouse

### Affiliations
IMP-Research Institute of Molecular Pathology
IMP-Research Institute of Molecular Pathology Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Antonia Vogel

### Lab Head
Dr Tim Clausen
IMP-Research Institute of Molecular Pathology Campus-Vienna-Biocenter 1 1030 Vienna


