### Accession
PXD007753

### Title
Trapping carbon dioxide on Arabidopsis proteome

### Description
Carbon dioxide is vital to the chemistry of life processes including including metabolism, cellular homeostasis, and pathogenesis. CO2 forms carbamates on the neutral N-terminal a-amino- and lysine e-amino-groups that regulate the activities of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase and haemoglobin, however, very few protein other carbamates are known. Tools for the systematic identification of protein carbamylation sites have not been developed owing to the reversibility of carbamate formation, and in consequence carbamylation is typically overlooked. Here we demonstrate methods to identify protein carbamates using triethyloxonium ions to covalently trap CO2 on proteins for proteomic analysis. Our method delivers evidence to support the hypothesis that carbamylation is widespread in biology, and understanding its role should significantly advance our understanding of cellular CO2 interactions.

### Sample Protocol
sample incubated at room temperature in the dark for 15 min. Proteins were digested using the filter aided sample preparation method (FASP) as described without modifications. The resulting peptide solution was desalted with home packed C18 stage tips (Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2:1896-1906). The resulting peptide mixture was dried down and redissolved in 15 μl 4% acetonitrile (MeCN), 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 20% of this was analysed by LCMSMS. Peptides were concentrated on a Pepmap C18 trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm) and separated on a Pepmap C18 reversed phase analytical column (Dionex, UK) (3 μm particles, 75 μm ID × 250 mm). Separations were carried out at 300 nl/min on a linear gradient from 96% A (0.05% formic acid), 4% B (0.05% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) to 35% B over 70 min followed by a second linear gradient from 35% B to 65% B over 7 min. and a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluted from the LC gradient were injected online to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a spray voltage of 1.6 kV and the temperature of the heated capillary set to 275 °C. Survey scans were acquired with enabled lock-mass (415.120023) from 400–1800 Da at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 after accumulation of 5 × 105 ions 36. The 10 most intense ions of the survey scan were sequenced concurrently to full scan acquisition in the Orbitrap by collision-induced dissociation (CID, normalized collision energy 35%) in the LTQ. Maximum filling times were 50 ms for the full scans and 100 ms for the MSMS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and unassigned charge states and singly charged ions were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 180 s with a maximum dynamic exclusion list of 50 entries and a relative mass window from -0.5Da to +1Da.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to .mgf peaklists using MSconvert. Peaklists were then searched using X!Tandem against a concatenated database consisting of the A. thaliana proteome (Uniprot, entry version 139 updated 07/07/2017) and the reversed FASTA file. Spliceosome, 12: 1231-1245 ) and the reversed fasta files for both31. The following search parameters were used: Parent mass error, 20 ppm. Fragment mass error 30 ppm. Missed cleavage sites allowed: 1. Fixed modification of +57.0215@C. Oxidation of methionine was allowed for as a variable modification. Three rounds of refinement were carried out to detect further modified peptides permitting additional variable modifications in round 1(0.98401@N, 79.9663@S, 79.9663@T, 79.9663@Y, 15.999@M, 15.999@W, 0.98401@Q, 14.016@C, 14.016@D, 14.016@E, 14.016@H, 28.0313@K, 28.0313@E, 28.0313@D), in round 2 (14.016@N, 31.9898@M, 31.9898@W, -18.011@S, -18.011@T, -57.021@C, 14.016@Q, 57.021@H, 57.021@D, 57.021@E, 72.0211@K) and in round 3 (56.0626@K).

### Publication Abstract
Carbon dioxide is vital to the chemistry of life processes including metabolism, cellular homoeostasis, and pathogenesis. CO<sub>2</sub> is generally unreactive but can combine with neutral amines to form carbamates on proteins under physiological conditions. The most widely known examples of this are CO<sub>2</sub> regulation of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase and haemoglobin. However, the systematic identification of CO<sub>2</sub>-binding sites on proteins formed through carbamylation has not been possible due to the ready reversibility of carbamate formation. Here we demonstrate a methodology to identify protein carbamates using triethyloxonium tetrafluoroborate to covalently trap CO<sub>2</sub>, allowing for downstream proteomic analysis. This report describes the systematic identification of carbamates in a physiologically relevant environment. We demonstrate the identification of carbamylated proteins and the general principle that CO<sub>2</sub> can impact protein biochemistry through carbamate formation. The ability to identify protein carbamates will significantly advance our understanding of cellular CO<sub>2</sub> interactions.

### Keywords
Trapping, Arabidopsis, Carbon dioxide, Carbamate

### Affiliations
Associate Professor in the Department of Biosciences Durham University UK
Durham University

### Submitter
Victoria Linthwaite

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cann
Associate Professor in the Department of Biosciences Durham University UK


