### Accession
PXD012704

### Title
Alginate encapsulation of differentiating hiPSCs

### Description
Here we characterize the impact of cell confinement on the pancreatic islet signature during the guided differentiation of alginate encapsulated human induced pluripotent stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared by in-solution digestion, TMT 11-plex labeling, off-line basic pH reversed phase fractionation and LC-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline, and spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human Uniprot database (March 11, 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. The search space for each reporter ion was limited to a range of 0.003 m/z to prevent overlap between the isobaric reporter ions. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs using in-house software, as described previously. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio that is less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms3

### Affiliations
Universitetet i Bergen
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Heidrun Vethe

### Lab Head
Dr Simona Chera
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Norway


