### Accession
PXD042490

### Title
TMT 6-plex proteome analyisis of USP8-depleted cells

### Description
The analysis to investigate the change in proteome of USP8-depleted cells

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were prepared and digested using the EasyPep Mini MS Sample Prep Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 25 µg of peptides from each sample were labeled with 0.2 mg of Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After TMT labeling, the sample channels were combined in an equal ratio, dried with a speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Samples were fractionated into eight fractions using a High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
1 µg of peptides from each fraction were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on EASY-nLC 1200-connected Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with FAIMS-Pro ion mobility interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an analytical column (C18, 1.7 µm particle size x 75 µm diameter x 250 mm, IonOpticks) heated at 55°C through a column oven (Sonation) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 225 min gradient (3.2% to 25.6% acetonitrile over 225 min). Peptides ionization was performed using the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). FAIMS-Pro was set to three phases (-40, -60, and -80 CV) with a sec interval, and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using a full scan (m/z range of 375-1500, nominal resolution of 120,000, target value of 4x105 ions) followed by MS/MS scans of the most intense ions in each sec of each CV phase. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a fixed collision energy of 38%, an isolation width of 0.7 m/z, a resolution of 50,000, and a target value of 1x105 ions. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (charge state 2-7) were placed on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 s. MS raw files were analyzed using a Sequest HT search program in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt reviewed human reference proteome (UniProt). TMT-based protein quantification was performed using a Reporter Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
K63-linked ubiquitin chains attached to plasma membrane proteins serve as tags for endocytosis and endosome-to-lysosome sorting. USP8 is an essential deubiquitinase for the maintenance of endosomal functions. Prolonged depletion of USP8 leads to cell death, but the major effects on cellular signaling pathways are poorly understood. Here, we show that USP8 depletion causes aberrant accumulation of K63-linked ubiquitin chains on endosomes and induces immune and stress responses. Upon USP8 depletion, two different decoders for K63-linked ubiquitin chains, TAB2/3 and p62, were recruited to endosomes and activated the TAK1-NF-&#x3ba;B and Keap1-Nrf2 pathways, respectively. Oxidative stress, an environmental stimulus that potentially suppresses USP8 activity, induced accumulation of K63-linked ubiquitin chains on endosomes, recruitment of TAB2, and expression of the inflammatory cytokine. The results demonstrate that USP8 is a gatekeeper of misdirected ubiquitin signals and inhibits immune and stress response pathways by removing K63-linked ubiquitin chains from endosomes.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Endosome, Usp8

### Affiliations
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science
Protein Metabolism Laboratory, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Japan

### Submitter
Akinori Endo

### Lab Head
Dr Yukiko Yoshida
Protein Metabolism Laboratory, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Japan


