### Accession
PXD014022

### Title
The Response of A549 Cells to Aspergillus fumigatus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa: A Proteomic perspective

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are the most prevalent fungal and bacterial pathogens, associated with cystic fibrosis-related infections, respectively. Although it is well established that P. aeruginosa eventually predominates as the primary pathogen, it is unknown why this is the case. Label-free quantitative proteomics was employed here to compare the cellular response to A. fumigatus, P. aeruginosa and sequential exposure to both pathogens in the type II alveolar epithelial cell line, A549, a model of the alveolar surface. In total, 2264 proteins were identified and the analysis of statistically significant (p<0.05; ±1.5 fold change), differentially abundant  (SSDA) proteins, revealed an increase in the relative abundance of proteins associated with biological processes common to all pathogen-exposed groups. These included mitochondrial stress, energy metabolism and protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum. Conversely, clear differences were observed between the cellular response to A. fumigatus or P. aeruginosa and following sequential exposure to both pathogens. The relative abundance of proteins associated with ribosomal activity appeared comparable between sequentially exposed cells and unexposed cells, but were substantially decreased in fungal- and bacterial-exposed cells. Furthermore, compared to unexposed cells, the relative abundance of proteins associated with the actin cytoskeleton, endocytosis, phagosome and lysosome were increased in A. fumigatus and P. aeruginosa-exposed cells, but appeared unchanged or decreased in sequentially exposed cells.  This research provides novel insights into the whole cell proteomic response to A. fumigatus and P. aeruginosa, and highlights distinct differences following sequential exposure to both pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
A549 cells (ATCC CCL 185, derived from a human lung carcinoma) were cultured in a 25 cm2 tissue culture flask (Sarstedt) containing Dulbecco’s Medium Essential Medium (DMEM) (95% v/v) (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 5% (v/v) foetal calf serum (GIBCO) and 2% L-glutamine (GIBCO), and incubated at 37°C and  5% CO2 in a humidified atmosphere. Cells were subcultured by trypsinization every 3-4 days. 100µl of the conidial suspension (1 x 106 conidia/ml) was added to each of three sub-confluent flasks of A549 cells to give a final concentration of 1 x 105 conidia ml. The flasks were incubated as described previously for 12 hours. 1ml of P. aeruginosa suspension (5 x 106 CFU/ml) was added to each of three sub-confluent flasks of A549 cells to give a final concentration of 1 x 106 CFU/ml. The flasks were incubated as described previously for 12 hours.  A549 cells were harvested by trypsinization using 1ml trypsin buffer (trypsin (0.25%, w/v)-EDTA (0.022%, w/v) in PBS) for 5 minutes, or until the cells had detached. An equal volume of trypsin neutralisation medium (DMEM 95 %, v/v) FCS (5 %, v/v)) was added to inhibit the action of trypsin, followed by centrifugation of the cell suspension at 200 g for 5 minutes. The cell pellet was resuspended in 3ml PBS, and the centrifugation step was repeated. Ex situ cell lysis was performed by re-suspending the cell pellet in 500µl cell lysis buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, and 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O), supplemented with protease inhibitors (aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin A, and TLCK (10 μg/ml)), and phosphatase inhibitors (phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2). Cell lysates were kept at room temperature on a rotary wheel (Stuart Rotator SB2, Bibby Scientific Limited, Staffordshire, UK) for 2 hours. The cell lysate was subjected to centrifugation (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5418) for 5 minutes at 14500 g to pellet cellular debris. The supernatant was removed and quantified using the Bradford method. 100 µg of each sample was subjected to overnight acetone precipitation. The protein was pelleted by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,500 g. The acetone was removed and the protein pellet was re-suspended in 25µl sample resuspension buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O). 2 µl was removed from each sample and quantified using the QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions. 125µl ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) was added to the remaining 20 µl of each sample. The protein sample was reduced by adding 1 μl 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) (prepared 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55M iodoacetamide at room temperature, in the dark for 15 minutes. 1 µl of a 1% w/v solution of Protease Max Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 0.5 µg/µl of Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (20μg dissolved in 40µl trypsin resuspension buffer). The protein/trypsin mixture was incubated at 37°C for 18 hours, after which digestion was terminated by adding 1 µl 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to each tryptic digest sample and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13000 rpm and a volume equivalent to 30 µg of pre-digested protein was removed and purified for mass spectrometry using C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v TFA to give a final peptide concentration of 1 µg/µl. The samples were sonicated for five minutes to aid peptide resuspension, followed by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 14,500 g. The supernatant was removed and used for mass spectrometry. 1µg of each digested sample was loaded onto a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a BioBasic™ C18 Picofrit™ column (100 mm length, 75 mm inner diameter), using a 120 minutes reverse phase gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 140,000 resolution and a range of 300 – 1700 m/z, was followed by an MS/MS scan at 17,500 resolution, with a range of 200-2000 m/z to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.  Protein quantification and LFQ normalization of the MS/MS data was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.3 (http://www.maxquant.org) following the general procedures and settings outlined in Hubner et al., 2010. The Andromeda search algorithm incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data against the Uniprot-SWISS-PROT database for Homo sapiens, A. fumigatus Af293 and P. aeruginosa PAO1 (downloaded 16/09/2016). The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptides and proteins, and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when observed in three replicates of one sample group.  Perseus v.1.5.5.3 (www.maxquant.org/) was used for data analysis, processing and visualisation. Normalised LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measurement of protein abundance for subsequent analysis. The data matrix was first filtered for the removal of contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group, i.e. A. fumigatus-exposed A549 cells versus the control (unexposed cells),  P. aeruginosa-exposed A549 cells versus the control, and sequential infection versus the control. Proteins not found in three out of three replicates in at least one group were omitted from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> are the most prevalent fungal and bacterial pathogens associated with cystic-fibrosis-related infections, respectively. <i>P. aeruginosa</i> eventually predominates as the primary pathogen, though it is unknown why this is the case. Label-free quantitative proteomics was employed to investigate the cellular response of the alveolar epithelial cell line, A549, to coexposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> and <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. These studies revealed a significant increase in the rate of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> proliferation where <i>A. fumigatus</i> was present. Shotgun proteomics performed on A549 cells exposed to either <i>A. fumigatus</i> or <i>P. aeruginosa</i> or to <i>A. fumigatus</i> and <i>P. aeruginosa</i> sequentially revealed distinct changes to the host cell proteome in response to either or both pathogens. While key signatures of infection were retained among all pathogen-exposed groups, including changes in mitochondrial activity and energy output, the relative abundance of proteins associated with endocytosis, phagosomes, and lysosomes was decreased in sequentially exposed cells compared to cells exposed to either pathogen. Our findings indicate that <i>A. fumigatus</i> renders A549 cells unable to internalize bacteria, thus providing an environment in which <i>P. aeruginosa</i> can proliferate. This research provides novel insights into the whole-cell proteomic response of A549 cells to <i>A. fumigatus</i> and <i>P. aeruginosa</i> and highlights distinct differences in the proteome following sequential exposure to both pathogens, which may explain why <i>P. aeruginosa</i> can predominate.

### Keywords
A549 cell line, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Cystic fibrosis, Aspergillus fumigatus, Lfq ms

### Affiliations
Biology
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland.

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland.


