### Accession
PXD014062

### Title
LC-MSMS of primary HGSC class I immunopeptidom

### Description
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), the principal cause of death from gynecological malignancies in the world, has not significantly benefited from recent progress in cancer immunotherapy. While HGSC infiltration by lymphocytes correlates with superior survival, the nature of antigens that can elicit anti-HGSC immune responses is unknown. The goal of this study was to establish the global landscape of HGSC tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) using a mass spectrometry pipeline that interrogates all reading frames of all genomic regions. In 23 HGSC tumors, we identified 113 TSAs. Classic TSA discovery approaches focusing only on mutated exonic sequences would have uncovered only seven of these TSAs. Other mutated TSAs resulted from out-of-frame exonic translation or from non-exonic sequences. The most interesting group of TSAs (n = 94) derived from aberrantly expressed unmutated genomic sequences which are not expressed in normal tissues. These aberrantly expressed TSAs (aeTSAs) derived primarily from non-exonic sequences, in particular intronic (31%) and intergenic (22%). Their expression was regulated at the transcriptional level by variations in gene copy number and DNA methylation. While mutated TSAs were unique to individual tumors, aeTSAs were shared by a large proportion of HGSCs. We conclude that, in view of their number and the fact that they are shared by many tumors, aeTSAs may be the most attractive targets for HGSC immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
HGSC tumor biopsies were cut in small pieces (cubes, ~3 mm in size) and 5 ml of ice-cold PBS containing protein inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, cat#P8340-5ml) was added to each tissue sample. Tissues were first homogenized twice for 20 seconds using an Ultra Turrax T25 homogenizer (IKA-Labortechnik) set at speed 20000 rpm and then 20 seconds using an Ultra Turrax T8 homogenizer (IKA-Labortechnik) set at speed 25000 rpm. Then, 550 μl of ice-cold 10X lysis buffer (5% w/v CHAPS) was added to each sample. After 60-minute incubation with tumbling at 4°C, samples were spun at 10000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred into new tubes containing 1 mg of W6/32 antibody covalently-cross-linked protein A magnetic beads and MAPs were immunoprecipitated as previously described (Lanoix et al., 2018). MAP extracts were then all dried using a Speed-Vac and kept frozen before MS analyses. Dried peptide extracts were re-suspended in 0.2 % formic acid. Peptide extracts were loaded on a home-made C18 analytical column (15 cm x 150 μm i.d. packed with C18 Jupiter Phenomenex) with a 56-min gradient from 0–30 % acetonitrile (0.2 % formic acid) and a 600 nl.min-1 flow rate on a nEasy-LC II system. Samples were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each full MS spectrum, acquired with a 60,000 resolution, was followed by 20 MS/MS spectra, where the most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 30,000, an  automatic gain control target of 5e4 and an injection time of 100 ms (HGSC1~3, OV606~642) or an automatic gain control target of 2e4 and an injection time of 800 ms (HGSC 4~6), and collision energy of 25 %.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PEAKS 8.5 or Peaks X (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.), and peptide sequences were searched against the matched global cancer database that was built using RNA-sequencing data of each HGSC sample. For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively.  Occurrence of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were considered as post-translational modifications.

### Publication Abstract
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC), the principal cause of death from gynecologic malignancies in the world, has not significantly benefited from advances in cancer immunotherapy. Although HGSC infiltration by lymphocytes correlates with superior survival, the nature of antigens that can elicit anti-HGSC immune responses is unknown. The goal of this study was to establish the global landscape of HGSC tumor-specific antigens (TSA) using a mass spectrometry pipeline that interrogated all reading frames of all genomic regions. In 23 HGSC tumors, we identified 103 TSAs. Classic TSA discovery approaches focusing only on mutated exonic sequences would have uncovered only three of these TSAs. Other mutated TSAs resulted from out-of-frame exonic translation (<i>n</i> = 2) or from noncoding sequences (<i>n</i> = 7). One group of TSAs (<i>n</i> = 91) derived from aberrantly expressed unmutated genomic sequences, which were not expressed in normal tissues. These aberrantly expressed TSAs (aeTSA) originated primarily from nonexonic sequences, in particular intronic (29%) and intergenic (22%) sequences. Their expression was regulated at the transcriptional level by variations in gene copy number and DNA methylation. Although mutated TSAs were unique to individual tumors, aeTSAs were shared by a large proportion of HGSCs. Taking into account the frequency of aeTSA expression and HLA allele frequencies, we calculated that, in Caucasians, the median number of aeTSAs per tumor would be five. We conclude that, in view of their number and the fact that they are shared by many tumors, aeTSAs may be the most attractive targets for HGSC immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome, Hgsc

### Affiliations
IRIC
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


