### Accession
PXD012879

### Title
MSCs OA SILAC Mass spectrometry imaging

### Description
In osteoarthritis (OA), impairment of cartilage regeneration can be related to a defective chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). Therefore, understanding the proteomic- and metabolomic-associated molecular events during the chondrogenesis of MSCs could provide alternative targets for therapeutic intervention. Here, a SILAC-based proteomic analysis identified 43 proteins related with metabolic pathways whose abundance was significantly altered during the chondrogenesis of OA human bone marrow MSCs (hBMSCs). Then, the level and distribution of metabolites was analyzed in these cells and healthy controls by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI), leading to the recognition of characteristic metabolomic profiles at the early stages of differentiation. Finally, integrative pathway analysis showed that UDP-glucuronic acid synthesis and amino sugar metabolism were downregulated in OA hBMSCs during chondrogenesis compared to healthy cells. Alterations in these metabolic pathways may disturb the production of hyaluronic acid (HA) and other relevant cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) components. This work provides a novel integrative insight into the molecular alterations of osteoarthritic MSCs and potential therapeutic targets for OA drug development through the enhancement of chondrogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow samples were obtained as trabecular bone biopsy specimens from femoral heads of OA patients (n=13) undergoing total hip replacement surgery, and donors with no history of joint disease (control, n=11). All tissue samples were provided by the Tissue Bank and the Autopsy Service at Hospital Universitario de A Coruña. hBMSCs were isolated and labeled as previously described (22). hBMSCs were firstly characterized based on their negativity for CD34 and CD45 and their positivity for CD73, CD90, CD105 and CD166 by flow cytometry and their differentiation potential towards cartilage, bone and adipose tissue (23, 24). Briefly, 5 × 104 cells were seeded in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM) 4.5 g/L glucose deﬁcient in arginine and lysine, supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, 2mM Lglutamine, and antibiotics, containing also 28 mg/L L-arginine-HCl−13C615N4 (Arg10) and 146 mg/L L-lysine-HCl−13C6 (Lys6) or the standard forms L-arginine HCl−12C614N4 and L-lysine-HCl−12C6 (Lys0) (all from Silantes, Munich, Germany). Cells were subcultured every week until achieving 100% labeling.SILAC-labeled cells populations were then cultured in 3D high-density pellet mass cultures or micromasses with chondrogenic differentiation medium containing 10 ng/ml TGF-β3 for 14 days (23). Micromasses were collected after 2 days and 14 days in culture, and stored at -80 °C until further analysis. hBMSCs employed in the proteomic analysis were obtained from femoral heads of three OA patients. For MALDI-imaging experiments, micromasses were embedded in 10% gelatin at 37 °C and immediately frozen at -80 °C. For these imaging experiments, samples from five additional OA patients and three individuals with no history of joint disease were included. Additionally, gene expression assays were carried out using OA and control hBMSCs from independent experiments, five and eight, respectively.Micromass sections (10µm) were obtained using a cryostat, mounted onto indium tin oxide (ITO), high conductivity slides (Delta Technologies, Stillwater, MN, USA) and stored at -80 °C until further analysis. Prior to matrix application, slides were placed in a vacuum dessicator at room temperature and defrosted for 20 min. A matrix solution of 10 mg/ml of 9-aminoacridine (9-AA) (Sigma-Aldrich, Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands) dissolved in 70% ethanol was prepared. The matrix was then deposited onto the tissue section surface using a HTX TM-Sprayer (HTX Technologies, LLC, North Carolina, USA). The complete loop of the sprayer (5 ml) was first flushed with the matrix solution and then applied to the sample surface. The matrix flow rate of the pump was 120 µl/min, the air pressure was set to 10 psi and a block temperature of 85 °C was chosen. The stage of the spraying device was moved at a speed of 1200 mm/min and the distance between the spray nozzle to the glass slide was set to 40 mm. Four layers of matrix were applied with 30 seconds of drying time between each pass in order to achieve homogeneous matrix coverage. In addition, the spray pattern was changed by an angle of 90° and adjusted with a line spacing of 3 mm.

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired using 4000 Series Explorer v.3.7. Protein identification and quantification were carried out using ProteinPilot™ software v.4.0 (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA). Each MS/MS spectrum was searched in the Uniprot/Swissprot database (UniProt 2015_05 release version containing 547,599 sequences and 195,014,757 residues, with taxonomy restriction_Homo sapiens) using the Paragon Algorithm. The following ProteinPilot search parameters were used: sample type set  as SILAC (Lys +6, Arg+10), oxidation of methionine residue as variable modification, iodoacetamide alkylation of cysteine residue as a fixed modification and a maximum of one missed cleavage allowed for trypsin. The ProteinPilot software also calculated a conﬁdence percentage, the Unused score, which reﬂects the probability of a hit being a false positive. Data were also normalized for loading error by bias correction. Searches against a concatenated database containing both forward and reversed sequences allowed the false discovery rate to be kept at 1%. Common contaminants such as trypsin autolysis peaks and matrix ion signals were excluded from the analysis. The theoretical ions and the peaks were matched using the same tolerance used by the Paragon Algorithm search. The tolerance used for matching is based on information about the mass accuracy of the instrument chosen in the Paragon Method dialog box. We considered statistically significant only those changes with a p value <0.05 and ±20% change in expression from day 2 to day 14. GO enrichment analysis on the set of modulated proteins was performed using Uniprot database.Principal component analysis (PCA) and discriminant analysis (DA) were employed to look for spectral similarities and differences between the samples collected at day 2 and 14, using an in-house built ChemoneTricks toolbox for MATLAB version 2014A (The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). The MS raw data were first converted to the MATLAB format. Then, all the spectra generated in the MSI experiments from the two time points all OA and control donors were combined and peak-picked prior to PCA. Peak picking was performed with the in-house-built PEAPI software to reduce the data set to a size that enables the computational methods needed. The number of principal components used as input for DA was limited to one quarter of the total number spectra to prevent overfitting of the DA model. After data analysis, m/z values were selected for further identification. Metabolites with DF1 score loadings >±5 according to PCA-DA analysis, and a p value <0.05 by the Mann-Whitney test were considered significantly altered.

### Publication Abstract
In osteoarthritis (OA), impairment of cartilage regeneration can be related to a defective chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). Therefore, understanding the proteomic- and metabolomic-associated molecular events during the chondrogenesis of MSCs could provide alternative targets for therapeutic intervention. Here, a SILAC-based proteomic analysis identified 43 proteins related with metabolic pathways whose abundance was significantly altered during the chondrogenesis of OA human bone marrow MSCs (hBMSCs). Then, the level and distribution of metabolites was analyzed in these cells and healthy controls by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI), leading to the recognition of characteristic metabolomic profiles at the early stages of differentiation. Finally, integrative pathway analysis showed that UDP-glucuronic acid synthesis and amino sugar metabolism were downregulated in OA hBMSCs during chondrogenesis compared with healthy cells. Alterations in these metabolic pathways may disturb the production of hyaluronic acid (HA) and other relevant cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM) components. This work provides a novel integrative insight into the molecular alterations of osteoarthritic MSCs and potential therapeutic targets for OA drug development through the enhancement of chondrogenesis.

### Keywords
Proteins, Ostearthritis, Metabolites, Imaging, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group-ProteoRed/ISCIII, Grupo de Investigación de Reumatología (GIR), INIBIC – Hospital Universitario de A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain
Grupo de Investigación de Reumatología, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña, SERGAS, Departamento de Medicina Universidad de A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain

### Submitter
Beatriz Rocha

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Blanco García
Grupo de Investigación de Reumatología, INIBIC-Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña, SERGAS, Departamento de Medicina Universidad de A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain


