### Accession
PXD000888

### Title
Anoxia in Ralstonia eutropha H16

### Description
Ralstonia eutropha H16 is a denitrifying microorganism able to use nitrate and nitrite as terminal electron acceptors under oxygen deprivation. To identify proteins showing an altered expression pattern in response to oxygen supply, R. eutropha cells grown aerobically and anaerobically were compared in a comprehensive proteome and transcriptome approach. Nearly 700 proteins involved in several processes including respiration, cell appendages formation, DNA and cofactor biosynthesis were found to be differentially expressed. A combination of 1D-gel-LC and conventional 2D-gel analysis of six consecutive sample points covering the entire denitrification sequence revealed a detailed view on the abundance pattern of the key proteins of denitrification. Denitrification- or anaerobiosis-induced alterations of the respiratory chain included a distinct expression pattern for multiple terminal oxidases. Alterations of the central metabolism were restricted to a few key functions including the isoenzymes for aconitase and isocitrate dehydrogenase, respectively. Although R. eutropha is a strictly respiratory bacterium, the abundance of certain fermentation enzymes was increased. This work represents a comprehensive survey of denitrification on proteomic and transcriptomic level and provides unique insight into how R. eutropha adapts its metabolism to low oxygen conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains and growth conditions Wild type R. eutropha H16 (DSM428, ATCC 17699) and the nrdDG mutant HF413 were used in this study. For proteome analysis R. eutropha was heterotrophically grown at 30°C and 180 rpm in a 10 L bioreactor filled with minimal medium. 0.4 % (w/v) Fructose served as sole energy and carbon source. For anaerobic growth under denitrifying conditions mineral medium was supplemented with 0.1 % (w/v) potassium nitrate and headspace was filled with helium with a minimal overpressure of 50 mbar. In general, minimal medium was inoculated to initial OD436 of 0.05. Aerobically growing cells in the exponential growth phase (OD436 around two) served as starting culture. Aerobically grown cells were harvested at OD436 of 1.0. Throughout anaerobic growth six different stages of denitrification served as sample points (SPs) referred to as SP-A to SP-F. For the duration of sampling, pressure within the fermentor was kept constant by adding helium. Additional investigations concerning the viability of the strains H16 and HF413 were accomplished on agar plates (1.5 % Bacto™-Agar) and in glass flasks based on the culture settings described above. Hydroxyurea (HU) and coenzyme B12 were added in final concentrations of 5 mM and 200 nM, respectively. In a preliminary experiment, two aerobic cultures were grown in the presence of light and heavy nitrogen (14N/15N), respectively, to allow peptide quantification by an inverse metabolic labelling strategy. This strategy was not pursued further, however, the cell material obtained with these two cultures was used as the aerobic reference in the present investigation. The biological variation of cultures grown in the presence of light or heavy nitrogen is negligible. Protein sample preparation, 2D-gel- and 1D-gel-LC-based analysis Samples dedicated to proteome analysis were harvested directly on ice, centrifuged for 20 min at 6,000 x g and 4°C, washed with H16P buffer (25 mM Na2HPO4/ 11 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.0, 0.3 mg/mL phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and stored at -80°C. Soluble and membrane fraction were prepared. Briefly, cells were disrupted by French press. Three time centrifugation at 6,000 x g and one time centrifugation of the appropriate supernatant at 88,000 x g yielded the soluble fraction. Pellets were washed with H16P buffer and sodium carbonate solution (0.1 M Na2CO3, pH 11). Membrane proteins became solubilised by incubating with lithium dodecyl sulfate. Protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) with bovine serum albumin as standard. Proteins were analysed by both 2D-SDS-PAGE combined with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) equal as well as 1D gel-LCMS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The software Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded specific database search engine thresholds. Identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.10 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.8 for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Ralstonia eutropha H16 is a denitrifying microorganism able to use nitrate and nitrite as terminal electron acceptors under oxygen deprivation. To identify proteins showing an altered expression pattern in response to oxygen supply, R. eutropha cells grown aerobically and anaerobically were compared in a comprehensive proteome and transcriptome approach. Nearly 700 proteins involved in several processes including respiration, formation of cell appendages, and DNA and cofactor biosynthesis were found to be differentially expressed. A combination of 1D gel-LC and conventional 2D gel analysis of six consecutive sample points covering the entire denitrification sequence revealed a detailed view on the shifting abundance of the key proteins of denitrification. Denitrification- or anaerobiosis-induced alterations of the respiratory chain included a distinct expression pattern for multiple terminal oxidases. Alterations in the central carbon metabolism were restricted to a few key functions including the isoenzymes for aconitase and isocitrate dehydrogenase. Although R. eutropha is a strictly respiratory bacterium, the abundance of certain fermentation enzymes was increased. This work represents a comprehensive survey of denitrification on the proteomic and transcriptomic levels and provides unique insight into how R. eutropha adapts its metabolism to low oxygen conditions.

### Keywords
Anaerobiosis, Spectral counting, Denitrification, Ralstonia eutropha h16, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Institut fuer Mikrobiologie EMAU Greifswald
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Institut fuer Mikrobiologie EMAU Greifswald


