### Accession
PXD035708

### Title
Loss of centrosomal gene ALMS1 alters lipid metabolism and the regulation of processes linked to the extracellular matrix.

### Description
In this project we evaluated the proteomic profiling with TGF-β stimuli at 24h in a CRISPR-Cas9 model for ALMS1 gene in hTERT-BJ-5ta cells. Proteomic results showed a majority inhibition of downstream regulated pathways by the TGF-β, associating the protein coding genes (PCG) with processes like TGF- β matrix regulation, epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), PI3K/AKT or P53. In conclusion, seems that the depletion of ALMS1 could be inhibiting the signals transduction through the TGF -β and the routes regulated downstream.

### Sample Protocol
Initially hTERT-BJ-5ta cells were lysed in RIPA buffer. After, 20µg of each sample was concentrated and staining with Coomassie in a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Then bands were cut and faded. Band distinction and alkylation was performed. After distinction, samples were digested. 100µL ammonium bicarbonate 25mM-50% acetonitrile (ACN) were added to each sample and they were incubated 30 min. The supernatant was removed and 100 µL of ACN 100% were added and were incubated for 10 min. The supernatant was removed again and 15 µL of Trypsin in ammonium bicarbonate 25mM were added to each sample. Samples were maintained at 4 ºC for 30 min. Finally, trypsin was removed, 5µL of ammonium bicarbonate 25mM were added and samples were incubated overnight. For peptide extraction, 40 µL of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.5% were added on each sample and they were incubated for 30min at room temperature. Then we added 20µL of ACN 100% in each 1.5mL tube and incubated the samples for 15 min at 37ºC. Finally, the samples were dried in a speed-vac at 45º for 1 hour and stored at -20 ºC until the analysis. Samples were resuspended in 24 µL of formic acid 0.1%. Then 10µL were injected into the HPLC. The analysis strategy was an LC-ESI-MS/MS workflow using a C18 precolumn. Samples were analyzed in a mass spectrophotometry Orbitrap ELITE (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, EE. UU) in long chromatography mode (4 hours).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in the database UniProtKB/TrEMBL for humans, using Proteome Discoverer software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ciliopathy, Primary cilia, Alms1, Alström syndrome, Tgf-β, Akt, Lc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Vigo

### Submitter
Brais Bea Mascato

### Lab Head
Dr Brais Bea-Mascato
University of Vigo


