### Accession
PXD031027

### Title
rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) infected rabbit liver proteome

### Description
Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) belongs to the family Caliciviridae, genus Lagovirus and is used in Australia as a biocontrol tool to keep the population of european rabbits low. This virus has a positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome that encodes structural (capsid) and non-structural proteins. Due to the lack of an established cell culture system for this virus, some of the non-structural proteins are yet awaiting characterisation and their function is unknown. This work attempted to characterise the process of RHDV infection and identify pathways that alterate in RHDV-infected rabbit liver at the proteome level. Young rabbits were infected with RHDV2 (genotype GI.1bP-GI.2) and humanely killed 24 hours post-infection. 25% liver homogenates were prepared in RNAlater buffer and stored at -20C. Uninfected rabbit liver samples served as a control. Samples from three RHDV2-infected animals (K375, K376, K378) and three uninfected animals (K3, K14, K12) were used in this study.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples were clarified at 0.2 g for 5 min at 4°C and 100 mg of solid precipitate was collected into tubes with glass beads. Liver homogenates were lysed by resuspending in 300 µl of PBS pH 7.5 with 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% Igepal CA-630 with protease inhibitors (Roche), 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 µl/ml benzonase nuclease (5 KU; Sigma-Aldrich). The suspension was homogenized using a Precellys homogenizer (Bertin Technologies) and incubated on ice for 30 min with gentle rocking to allow for full lysis. Finally, the lysates were cleared by centrifugation and supernatants were used for MS sample preparation: Liver lysates were subject to BCA assay (Abcam) to normalize the protein concentrations between samples. A total of 100 µg of protein from each sample was loaded onto s-trap micro columns (Protifi) as described above. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight with 1.5 µl of trypsin (Promega) per sample. Eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedVac and fractionated with the High pH Reversed-phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Pierce-Thermo Scientific) as recommended by the manufacturer. Briefly, the peptides were dissolved in 300 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto conditioned C18 columns (provided with the fractionation kit). After washing, the peptides were sequentially eluted with 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, and 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% triethylamine. All fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to MS processing. the digested protein samples were analyzed using data-dependent MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion ETD mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography (LC) system via a Nanospray Flex nano-ESI ion source (positive mode ESI with 2.3 kV static spray voltage) (Thermo Scientific).  Following injection by the autosampler, peptides were initially trapped onto a C18 PepMap100 µ-Precolumn (5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific; Part No. 160454) with a 5 µl/min flow of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile in water coming from the loading pump of the LC, for 10 minutes, at which point a valve was switched to place the trap between the nano pump and the nano LC column to begin chromatographic separation. The peptides were separated on a C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm particle size; Dr Maisch GmbH; Part No. r119.aq.0001) packed in house at Joint Mass Spectrometry Facility (JMSF), ANU (Richards et al., 2015).  The nano LC mobile phase gradient was as follows: flow rate of 350 nL/min; solvent A = MilliQ Ultra-Pure Water + 2% LC/MS-grade acetonitrile + 0.1% (v/v) Optima LC/MS-grade formic acid; solvent B = MilliQ Ultra-Pure Water + 80% Optima LC/MS-grade acetonitrile + 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid; 5% from 0 to 15 min B; 12.5% B at 20 min; 40% B at 95 min; 80% B at 97 min, hold at 80% B until 109 min; 5% B at 110 min; hold at 5% B until 120 min. IonTrap detector was used and the scan range 375-1500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) was used for peptide identification and protein quantification (Cox and Mann, 2008). The Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used to search against the rabbit UniProt FASTA database and a custom library of RHDV2 FASTA protein sequences based on the BlMt-1 GI.1bP-GI.2 virus (GenBank accession KT280060.1). Default search parameters were used, including up to two ‘missed trypsin cleavage sites’, ‘oxidation of methionine’ and ‘N-terminal acetylation’ as variable modifications, and ‘carbamidomethylation of cysteine’ as a fixed modification. The data were searched against a reverse database and peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. Label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014) was used for whole proteome analysis. The ‘match between runs’ option was not applied.

### Publication Abstract
The exact function(s) of the lagovirus non-structural protein p23 is unknown as robust cell culture systems for the <i>Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus</i> (RHDV) and other lagoviruses have not been established. Instead, a range of <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in silico</i> models have been used to study p23, revealing that p23 oligomerizes, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and possesses a conserved C-terminal region with two amphipathic helices. Furthermore, the positional homologs of p23 in other caliciviruses have been shown to possess viroporin activity. Here, we report on the mechanistic details of p23 oligomerization. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed the importance of an N-terminal cysteine for dimerization. Furthermore, we identified cellular interactors of p23 using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based proteomics; heat shock proteins Hsp70 and 110 interact with p23 in transfected cells, suggesting that they 'chaperone' p23 proteins before their integration into cellular membranes. We investigated changes to the global transcriptome and proteome that occurred in infected rabbit liver tissue and observed changes to the misfolded protein response, calcium signaling, and the regulation of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) network. Finally, flow cytometry studies indicate slightly elevated calcium concentrations in the cytoplasm of p23-transfected cells. Taken together, accumulating evidence suggests that p23 is a viroporin that might form calcium-conducting channels in the ER membranes.

### Keywords
Liver, Rabbit, Proteome, Rhdv

### Affiliations
CSIRO Black Mountain, Australia
University of Canberra/CSIRO

### Submitter
Elena Smertina

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja Strive
CSIRO Black Mountain, Australia


