### Accession
PXD039412

### Title
OmpR Arg-GlcNAcylation within Salmonella

### Description
Analysis of OmpR Arg-GlcNAcylation using bottom up proteomic analysis

### Sample Protocol
Digest of gel-separated proteins - Affinity-purified proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, fixed and then visualized with Coomassie staining. Bands of interest were excised and Coomassie staining removed by destaining with 50 mM NH4HCO3, 50 % ethanol for 20 minutes at room temperature with shaking at 750 rpm. Destained samples then dehydrated with 100 % ethanol, before being reduced by being rehydrated with 10mM DT in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were reduction for 1 h at 56 °C with shaking and then washed twice in 100 % ethanol for 10 minutes to remove DTT. Reduced dehydrated gel bands were then rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and allowed to alkylate in the dark for 45 minutes at room temperature. Alkylation buffer was removed and the gel samples washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3, followed by two rounds of 100 % ethanol before being vacuum dried. Alkylated samples were then rehydrated with either 20 ng/µl of trypsin (Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3 at 4 °C for 1 h. Excess protease was removed, gel pieces were covered in 40 mM NH4HCO3 and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were collected, desalted using homemade R3/C18 stage tips as previously described (PMID: 17703201) before analysis by LC-MS.   Reverse phase LC-MS/MS - Peptide samples were resuspended in Buffer A* (2 % MeCN, 0.1 % TFA) and separated using a two-column chromatography set on a a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were first concentrated on a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap at 5 μl/min for 5 minutes with Buffer A (0.1 % formic acid, 2 % DMSO) and then separated on a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separated peptide were infused into a Orbitrap Eclipse Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nl/minute for 65-minutes by altering the buffer composition from 2 % Buffer B (0.1 % formic acid, 77.9 % acetonitrile, 2 % DMSO) to 28 % B over 35 minutes, then from 28 % B to 4 % B over 10 minutes, then from 40 % B to 80 % B over 5 minutes. The composition was held at 100 % B for 5 min, and then dropped to 2 % B over 1 min before being held at 2 % B for another 9 min. The Eclipse Mass Spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, acquiring one full precursor scan (resolution 120,000; 375-2000 m/z, AGC target of 1×106) followed by upto 3 seconds of data-dependent HCD MS-MS events (using three collision energies of 25, 30, and 35; resolution 15k AGC target of 250% with a maximum injection time of 22 ms).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis - Identification of Arg-glycosylation events was accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0) (PMID: 19029910). The predicted amino acid sequences for GlmR and NagC were combined into a database with the Escherichia coli K12 proteome (Uniprot accession: UP000000625) the Salmonella Typhimurium SL1344 OmpR-his sequence and searched, allowing carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification and the variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and Arg-GlcNAcylation (H13C8NO5; 203.0793 Da to Arginine). Searches were performed with Trypsin cleavage specificity, allowing 2 miscleavage events with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0 % set for protein and peptide identifications. The resulting modified peptide output was processed within the Perseus (v1.4.0.6) (PMID: 27809316) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptm, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne 3000, Australia


