### Accession
PXD001969

### Title
Mps1 Phosphorylation of  the Molecular Chaperone Hsp90  Regulates Mitotic Checkpoint

### Description
SUMMARY  Mps1 protein kinase is required for accurate chromosome segregation during the mitotic checkpoint. The molecular chaperone Heat Shock Protein 90 (Hsp90) has been linked to Mps1 activity, however the molecular mechanismsunderlying this regulatory process remain elusive. We report that Mps1 directly phosphorylates a conserved threonine residue (T101 in yeast Hsp90 and T115 in human Hsp90) in the N domain of Hsp90. This phosphorylation regulates chaperone function by reducingHsp90 ATPase activity andfosteringits association with kinase client proteins including Mps1. Phosphorylation of T101is also essential for the mitotic checkpoint because it confers Mps1 stability and activity.Additionally,Mps1 phosphorylation of Hsp90 sensitizes cells to Hsp90 inhibitors and elevated Mps1 levels confer tumor selectivity on Hsp90 drugs.Finally,we identified Cdc14 as the phosphatasethat dephosphorylatesT101 and disruptsthe Mps1-Hsp90 interaction. This leads to degradation of Mps1,thusproviding a mechanism for its inactivation and mitotic exit.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin Digests of yHsp90 Complexes From SDS-PAGE Gels Purified yHsp90-T101A-His6 or yHsp90-T101E-His6complexes were loaded onto a 12% MOPS buffered SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) and run for 10min at 200v resulting in a ~2cm “gel plug”.  The gel was stained with 25mL Imperial Stain (Pierce) at room temperature, and destained overnight in dH2O at 4C.The gel plugs for each sample to be analyzed were excised by sterile razor blade, divided into 2 sections ~1cm each, and chopped into ~ 1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine HCl at 37°C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20°C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and vacuum dried.  Isotopic labeling of trypsin-digested yHsp90 complexes Peptide digests were reconstituted with 70 μl of Tris–HCl Buffer Solution (10 mM of Tris–HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM CaCl2, pH7.6), vortexed for at least 20 min to reconstitute the peptide mixture, then split into two vials of 30 μl each (16O vial and 18O vial), and 10ul was retained unlabeled and stored in -80˚C. In a separate vial Mag-Trypsin beads (Clontech) were prepared as follows.  30ul mag-trypsin beads per rxn (16O or 18O) were pooled and washed 3 times with 800 μl of Tris–HCl Buffer Solution, then brought back up in 30µl/sample of Tris-HCL buffer, and aliquoted to a new 1.5ml vial in the quantity of 30µl, vortexing lightly after each aliquot to keep the mag-trypsin beads in suspension.  Using a magnetic rack, the Tris-HCL buffer was removed from the beads, and the 30µl of sample digest from above was added to the beads and vacuum dried.  30μl of either 16O H2O or 97% 18O H2O (Cambridge Isotopes Laboratories) was added to the respective 16O or 18O prepared Mag-Trypsin bead vial and vortexed for 20 min to reconstitute the peptide mixture, and allowed to exchange overnight at 37°C. After 18O exchange, the solution was transferred to a new vial and any free trypsin in solution was inactivated with 1 mM PMSF for 30 min at 4°C. For each sample section, the AHA-1 (E/F) digests were combined 1:1 as follows: Forward (FWD) Sample Set: (F)-16O:(E)-18O and Reversed (REV) Sample Set: (E)-16O:(F)-18O, dried and stored at − 80°C until analysis. Three biological replicate experiments were performed.  HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC–MS/MS analysis The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 10 MSMS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60s.

### Data Protocol
LC–MS/MS data analysis, statistical analysis  Interactomes of yHsp90-T101A-His6 and yHsp90-T101E-His6were analyzed as described previously (Truman et al., 2012). All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.2.2, searching against the SPROT Human database using the following criteria:  18O heavy label was selected for quantitation with a min of 1 high confidence peptide to assign quantitation H/L ratio.  Trypsin was selected as the protease with max miss cleavage set to 2. Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Oxidization (M), Formylation (n-term), and Phosphorylation (STY). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da.  1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the MS level light and heavy peak areas determined by MaxQuant and reported in the proteinGroups.txt file as heavy/light or (T101E/T101A mutant).  Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Complete three biological replicates were performed, with each biological replicate split into two technical replicates (18O forward (FWD) labeling, and 18O reverse (REV) labeling). The abundance data from each biological replicate were normalized to the ratio of the bait protein in that run (e.g. normalized to the yHsp90-His6ratio).  Light and Heavy peak intensities were analyzed in each run to determine protein hits that fell into the category of either yHsp90-T101E-only hits or yHsp90-T101A-only hits and retained if they confirmed to this state across all 6 runs.  In the case of yHsp90-T101E-only or yHsp90-T101E-only protein hits, spectra counts can be used as a proxy for abundance as these would not of been assigned a quantitation ratio. This produced a list of hAha1 interactors and their respective quantitated changes between yHsp90-T101EandyHsp90-T101A. Further statistical analysis was performed using the R statistical package (http://www.r-project.org/). Proteins with three out of the six observations were retained. Missing values were imputed using row mean imputation. An ANOVA test was then performed to identify proteins that indicate significant variability (P-value < 0.05) between biological replicates within each group. These were removed from consideration. A list of proteins identified and corresponding ratios can be found in Table S1.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular chaperone Hsp90 protects deregulated signaling proteins that are vital for tumor growth and survival. Tumors generally display sensitivity and selectivity toward Hsp90 inhibitors; however, the molecular mechanism underlying this phenotype remains undefined. We report that the mitotic checkpoint kinase Mps1 phosphorylates a conserved threonine residue in the amino-domain of Hsp90. This, in turn, regulates chaperone function by reducing Hsp90 ATPase activity while fostering Hsp90 association with kinase clients, including Mps1. Phosphorylation of Hsp90 is also essential for the mitotic checkpoint because it confers Mps1 stability and activity. We identified Cdc14 as the phosphatase that dephosphorylates Hsp90 and disrupts its interaction with Mps1. This causes Mps1 degradation, thus providing a mechanism for its inactivation. Finally, Hsp90 phosphorylation sensitizes cells to its inhibitors, and elevated Mps1 levels confer renal cell carcinoma selectivity to Hsp90 drugs. Mps1 expression level can potentially serve as a predictive indicator of tumor response to Hsp90 inhibitors.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Molecular chaperones, Mps1, Kinase, Mitotic checkpoint, Cdc14, Phosphatase, Heat shock protein 90

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Urology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute,  SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 E. Adams St.,  Syracuse, NY 13210, USA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Mehdi Mollapour PhD
Department of Urology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute,  SUNY Upstate Medical University, 750 E. Adams St.,  Syracuse, NY 13210, USA


