### Accession
PXD007785

### Title
Genetic aberrations in MAP kinase pathway play an important role in erlotinib resistance in head and neck cancer

### Description
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor tyrosine kinase  is overexpressed in 90% of Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients. Clinical trials with EGFR-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as erlotinib have shown a modest activity in HNSCC alternate mechanisms of resistance are acquired. To investigate these acquired mechanisms of resistance and identify novel therapeutic targets we employed whole exome sequencing of an isogenic pair of erlotinib sensitive (SCC-S) and resistant (SCC-R) HNSCC cell line. We observed single nucleotide variations and copy number alterations in genes related to RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway. To assess the effects of these variations on cellular kinome and we employed SILAC-based phosphoproteomic analysis of SCC-S and SCC-R cell lines. Quantitative phosphoprotein profiling led to identification of 5558 unique phosphopeptides and 5025 unique phosphosites corresponding to 2344 proteins. We observed, 903 phosphopeptides belonging to 579 proteins and 518 phosphopeptides belonging to 368 proteins to be hyper and hypophosphorylated (≥2 fold) in SCC-R cells, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially phosphorylated proteins showed enrichment of proteins involved in MAPK pathway downstream of EGFR. We identified and validated activation of proteins related to MAPK pathway and its downstream targets in SCC-R cells. We further demonstrated that MAP2K1 inhibitor can be used as an alternative to erlotinib in HNSCC.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling: Isogenic human oral cancer cell line SCC-R (resistant to erlotinib) and SCC-S (sensitive to erlotinib) derived from UMSCC1 were used for the study. For SILAC-based proteomics experiments SCC-S cells were adapted to DMEM-SILAC media supplemented with L‐lysine‐2HCL (13C6, 15N2, 98% isotopic purity) and L –arginine‐HCL (13C6, 98% isotopic purity). SCC-R cells were maintained in regular media. Sample processing: For quantitative tyrosine phosphoproteomics experiment both SCC-S and SCC-R cells we grown to a confluency of 70% and were maintained in serum free media for 12 hours prior to harvesting in urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM phosphoglycerophosphate). Protein concentration was determined using BCA assays and normalized using SDS-PAGE gel and 10mg equivalent of lysate from each of the conditions were mixed. The mixture was reduced with 45mM dithiothreitol at 60oC for 30 mins and alkylated using 100mM iodoacetamide for 10 mins at room temperature. Concentration of urea was brought to 2M using HEPES buffer and digested overnight at 37oC using modified trypsin (Promega).  Basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) The labelled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation. Briefly, 1ml of bRPLC solvent A (10 mM TEABC pH 8.4, Sigma Aldrich) was used to re-suspend lyophilized peptides mixture. This mixture was fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) on an Agilent 1100 LC system with a flow rate of 1 mL/min by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (10mM TEABC in 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.4)for a total run-time of 60 mins. A total of 96 fractions were initially collected. The fractions were then concatenated to 12 fractions and were dried using speed vac. These vaccum dried samples were then enriched for phosphopeptides using TiO2 enrichment.   TiO2 based enrichment of phosphopeptides TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment of the 12 fractions was carried out. Briefly, TiO2 beads were incubated with DHB solution (80% ACN, 1% TFA, 3% 2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB)) for 2-4 hours at room temperature. Each fraction was resuspended in DHB and incubated with pre-treated TiO2 beads (1 mg). Phosphopeptide-bound TiO2 beads were washed three times with DHB solution and twice with 40% ACN. Peptides were eluted three times with 40 μl of 2% ammonia into 10 μl of 20% TFA. The peptides were lyophilized prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis  LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bermen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Precursor MS scan (m/z 350–1800) and MS/MS (m/z 350–1400) was acquired with a mass resolution of 120K and 30K at 200 m/z in the orbitrap mass analyzer. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 500K for MS and 50K for MS/MS and maximum ion injection time was set to 60ms for MS and 200ms for MS/MS scan events. In each duty cycle 10 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) mode at 32% normalized collision energy and isolation width was set to 2.0 m/z. Singly charged and unassigned charge precursor were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was set for 45 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window. The lock mass option was enabled using polysiloxane ion (m/z= 445.12002) from ambient air for internal calibration. The data was acquired in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analysis was searched against Human RefSeq database (Version 65 and known contaminants) using SequestHT and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y), and SILAC labels 13C6, 15C2-Lysine (K8); 13C6-Arginine (R6) were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as static modification. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and MS/MS identifications of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis. Precursor ion quantifier node with a mass precision of 3ppm was used for peptide and protein quantification. PhosphoRS node (version 3.1) was used for calculation of phosphosite probabilities. Further phosphopeptides with phosphosite probabilities ≥75% were used for identification of protein phosphorylation  sites.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) targeted therapies have shown limited efficacy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients despite its overexpression. Identifying molecular mechanisms associated with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs such as erlotinib remains an unmet need and a therapeutic challenge. In this study, we employed an integrated multi-omics approach to delineate mechanisms associated with acquired resistance to erlotinib by carrying out whole exome sequencing, quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling. We observed amplification of several genes including AXL kinase and transcription factor YAP1 resulting in protein overexpression. We also observed expression of constitutively active mutant MAP2K1 (p.K57E) in erlotinib resistant SCC-R cells. An integrated analysis of genomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic data revealed alterations in MAPK pathway and its downstream targets in SCC-R cells. We demonstrate that erlotinib-resistant cells are sensitive to MAPK pathway inhibition. This study revealed multiple genetic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic alterations associated with erlotinib resistant SCC-R cells. Our data indicates that therapeutic targeting of MAPK pathway is an effective strategy for treating erlotinib-resistant HNSCC tumors.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Head and neck cancer, Quantitative phosphoproteomics, Mass spectrometry, Egfr-tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India


