### Accession
PXD042510

### Title
Ergolide Mediates Anti-Cancer Effects on Metastatic Uveal Extra Cellular Vesicles: Melanoma Cells and Modulates  their Cell Lysate and Extracellular Vesicle proteomes.

### Description
Uveal melanoma is a poor prognosis cancer with an imperative need for new treatment options. Ergolide, a sesquiterpene lactone isolated from the flowers of Inula species (a medicinal herb), exerts anti-cancer properties. The objective of this study was to 1) evaluate whether ergolide reduced metastatic uveal melanoma (MUM) cell survival/viability in vitro and in vivo; and 2) to understand the molecular mechanism of ergolide action. Ergolide treatment resulted in significant dose-dependent reduction (48.5 to 99.9%; p &lt; 0.0001) in OMM2.5 cell survival in vitro and of normalized primary zebrafish xenograft fluorescence (56%; p&lt; 0.0001) in vivo, compared to vehicle controls. Proteome profiling of ergolide treated OMM2.5 cells, identified 5023 proteins in total with 52 and 55 proteins significantly altered at 4 hours and 24 hours, respectively (p value &lt;0.05; fold-change &gt;1.2). Immunoblot analysis of heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1), growth/differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) corroborated the proteomics data. MIF was distinctly downregulated following ergolide treatment. Proteomics of EVs isolated from OMM2.5 cells treated with ergolide detected 2931 total proteins, 2679 of which are recognized as EV proteins based on the Vesiclepedia compendium. 252 additional putative novel EV proteins were also identified. Within the differentially expressed proteins, the proteasomal pathway was primarily altered. Interestingly, BRCA2 and CDKN1A Interacting Protein (BCCIP) and Chitinase Domain Containing 1 (CHID1), were the only proteins significantly differentially expressed by ergolide in both the OMM2.5 cell and EV isolates and they displayed inverse differential expression in the cells versus the EVs. In the TCGA database, no significant correlations occurred between BCCIP and CHID1 transcript levels and overall survival or disease-free survival in UM patients. Ergolide is a novel candidate that shows promise as an anti-proliferative agent for UM/MUM cells. Proteomic profiling of OMM2.5 cell lysates and EVs identified candidate pathways elucidating the action of ergolide and putative biomarkers of UM, that require further examination.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles sample preparation OMM2.5 cells were cultured in complete media containing RPMI 1640 + 10% fetal bovine serum + 1X Antibiotic-Antimycotic + 4 mM L-Glutamine and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. OMM2.5 cells were seeded into 8 - 12 T175 flasks at a seeding density of 4 x 10 6 cells/flask in 25 ml of complete media per flask and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO 2 for ~24 h. The cells were washed with 1 X PBS and treated with  either 0.1% DMSO or 2.5 µM ergolide in 20 ml serum-free media/flask. Conditioned media was collected after 24 h into 50 mL conical tubes by pooling media from two flasks. Medium was centrifuged at 300 g, 4°C for 10 min with swinging bucket rotor (Hettich, #1494). Supernatant was transferred to new tube and re-centrifuged for 5 min at 2500 g, 4°C, then at 13,500 g, 4°C for 40 min. Finally, supernatant was ultracentrifuged for 3 h at 174,900 g, 4°C. Supernatant was discarded, and EV pellets were resuspended in 120-145 μl of 0.2 μm filtered PBS. Isolated EV samples were stored at -80°C after measurement of protein concentration (Nanodrop) and particle size distribution by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). In parallel, drug treated cells were trypsinized, cell counting was performed. Cell pellet was resuspended in RIPA buffer and stored at - 20°C. Extracellular vesicles mass spectrometry and data analysis Following trypsin digestion, the samples were cleaned using C18 HyperSep SpinTips (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was analysed in duplicate on a Bruker timsTof Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen) connected to a Bruker nanoElute nano-lc chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics) . Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic and injected onto a pepmap100 C18 5 μm trap column (0.3mm x 5mm) (Thermo Scientific) prior to separation with an increasing acetonitrile gradient using an Aurora UHPLC column (25 cm × 75 μm ID, C18, 1.6 μm, (Ionopticks) (35). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, with a capillary voltage of 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180°C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 5 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.03 seconds (31) .

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer raw data was searched against the Homo Sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) using the search engine Maxquant (release 2.0.2.0). In brief, specific parameters were used (Type: TIMS DDA, Fixed mods; Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable mods; Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term). Each peptide used for protein identification met specific Maxquant parameters, i.e., only peptide scores that corresponded to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 were accepted from the Maxquant database search. Two-tailed, equal distribution Student’s T test was employed to test for statistical difference with values of ∗p &lt; 0.05 (32) . Heatmaps where generated with Cluster 3.0 using Pearson correlation uncentered, with average linkage (33) and visualized with Java TreeView software (34) .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor, Chitinase domain containing 1, Metastatic uveal melanoma, Brca2 and cdkn1a interacting protein, Extracellular vesicles, Ergolide

### Affiliations
University College Dublin
University College Dublin, School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Breandán Kennedy
University College Dublin, School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4


