### Accession
PXD014545

### Title
mTMT: An alternative, non-isobaric, tandem mass tag allowing for precursor-based quantification

### Description
Stable isotope labeling of peptides is the basis for numerous mass spectrometry-based quantification strategies. Isobaric tagging and metabolic labeling, namely TMT and SILAC, are among the most widely used techniques for relative protein quantification. Here we report an alternative, precursor-based quantification method using non-isobaric TMT variants: TMT0 (TMTzero) and shTMT (super-heavy TMT). We term this strategy mTMT (mass difference tandem mass tagging), as these TMT variants differ by 11 mass units; yet, peptides labeled with these reagents co-elute, analogous to SILAC-labeled sample analysis. As proof-of-concept, we profiled the proteomes of two cell lines that are frequently used in neuroscience studies, SH-SY5Y and SVGp12, using mTMT and standard SILAC-labeling approaches. We show similar numbers of quantified proteins and peptides using each method with highly correlated fold changes between workflows. We conclude that mTMT is a suitable alternative for precursor-based protein quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Cell growth and harvesting. Methods of cell growth and propagation followed techniques like those utilized previously. In brief, cells were propagated in lysine and arginine-deficient DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and either labeled or unlabeled lysine and arginine. For SILAC-labeled samples, cells were propagated in media containing Lys6 and Arg10 for ten passages. Label incorporation was checked to be >98%. In parallel, cells were propagated in light media (supplemented with native lysine and arginine) with identical number of passages as the SILAC “heavy” samples. These “light” cells were also used for mTMT-based quantification analysis. Biological replicates were prepared by reciprocal labeling for both the SILAC and mTMT workflows.  For harvesting, cells were washed thrice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Cells were dislodged with a non-enzymatic reagent, harvested by trituration following the addition of 10 mL PBS, pelleted by centrifugation at 3,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and the cells frozen on dry ice.  Cell lysis and protein digestion. One milliliter of 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5, 8M urea supplemented with 1X Roche Complete protease inhibitors was added per each 15 cm cell culture dish. Cells were homogenized by 10 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (room temperature, 30 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiotreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion (150 µg). In brief, 4 parts of neat methanol were added to each sample and vortexed, 1-part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and 3 parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 RPM for 2 min at room temperature, both layers surrounding the protein disk were aspirated, and the disk was washed with 1 mL of 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 13 h with Lys-C protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37°C. Tandem mass tag labeling. For mTMT processed samples, the SL-TMT protocol was followed with some modifications. TMT0 and shTMT reagents were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile to a final concentration of 20 μg/μL. Fifteen microliters of TMT reagent, and an additional 45 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile was added to 150 µg of peptides which were in 150 µL of 200mM EPPS pH8.5. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v).  We performed reciprocal labeling for both SILAC and mTMT workflows. Specifically, SILAC-heavy SVGp12 cells were mixed with SILAC-light SH-SY5Y cells and SILAC-heavy SH-SY5Y cells were mixed with SILAC-light SVGp12 cells at a 1:1 protein ratio. Likewise, shTMT (heavy)-labeled SVGp12 cells were mixed with TMT0 (light)-labeled SH-SY5Y cells, while shTMT (heavy)-labeled SH-SY5Y cells were mixed with TMT0 (light)-labeled cells SVGp12 also at a 1:1 protein ratio. The pooled samples were vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters).

### Data Protocol
aw MS data files were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.2.10) with the integrated search engine Andromeda using default settings for SILAC-based quantification. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human proteome sequence database (UP000006640_9606.fasta). For mTMT experiments, the labels were set as follows: shTMT (235.17674 Th) on K and N termini were “heavy” labels, while TMT0 (224.15248 Th) on K and N termini were “light” labels. For SILAC experiments, heavy labeled samples contained Lys6 (+8.01420 Th) and Arg10 (+10.00827 Th), while “light” samples were unmodified. For protein-level comparisons, peptides were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR), and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%, which resulted in a final peptide level FDR of <0.1%.

### Publication Abstract
Stable isotope labeling of peptides is the basis for numerous mass-spectrometry-based quantification strategies. Isobaric tagging and metabolic labeling, namely, tandem mass tagging (TMT) and SILAC, are among the most widely used techniques for relative protein quantification. Here we report an alternative, precursor-based quantification method using nonisobaric TMT variants: TMTzero (TMT0) and superheavy TMT (shTMT). We term this strategy mass difference tandem mass tagging (mTMT).&#xa0;These TMT variants differ by 11 mass units; however, peptides labeled with these reagents coelute, analogous to SILAC-labeled peptide pairs. As a proof-of-concept, we profiled the proteomes of two cell lines that are frequently used in neuroscience studies, SH-SY5Y and SVGp12, using mTMT and standard SILAC-labeling approaches. We show similar quantified proteins and peptides for each method, with highly correlated fold-changes between workflows. We conclude that mTMT is a suitable alternative for precursor-based protein quantification.

### Keywords
Isobaric, Silac, Tmt, Metabolic, Svgp12, Sh-sy5y

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Joao Paulo Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Joao Paulo Cell Biology Harvard Medical School USA


