### Accession
PXD015874

### Title
SBDS-dependent ribosome destabilization maintains pluripotency via regulation of translation

### Description
Unique traits of pluripotent stem cells are not fully known. Using thermal proteome profiling, we identified reduced stability of ribosomes in induced pluripotent cells (iPSCs) compared to that in somatic cells. Also, iPSCs exhibited lower protein synthesis rate and lower expression of a ribosome maturation factor, the Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond Syndrome protein (SBDS). Differentiation of iPSCs led to upregulation of SBDS and knock-down of SBDS slowed the differentiation while increasing expression of master pluripotency markers NANOG and OCT4. Mutations in the SBDS gene have been shown to impair ribosome assembly and to inhibit differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells causing the Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Physiological SBDS-dependent destabilization of ribosomes appears to be a tool for translational control providing robustness to the state of pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
Human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) H9 were cultured cultured at 37◦C and 5% CO2 in a humidified Forma Steri-cycle i160 CO2 incubator (Thermo Fischer Scientific) on LN-521-coated dishes in NutriStem medium (Biological Industries). HFF (ATCC® CRL-2429™, male) were grown in IMDM medium (Biowest) supplemented with 10% Gibco™ Fetal Bovine Serum, Qualified, US Origin, Standard (Sterile-Filtered) (Gibco). Pluripotent cells were dissociated from dishes using treatment with TrypLE Express, pelleted by centrifugation, resuspended in NutriStem with 10 µM of Y-27632 (a ROCK inhibitor) and cultured in suspension on low adhesion plates at 37◦C, 5% CO2 to form embryoid bodies (EBs). After 3 days, the EBs were plated in gelatin-coated tissue cell culture 6-well plates (Corning) in MEM medium (GIBCO Invitrogen) supplemented with 20% (vol/vol) fetal bovine serum (GIBCO Invitrogen), 2 mM l-glutamine and 1% (wt/vol) nonessential amino acids (GIBCO Invitrogen) and grown for 6 more days. Cells were rinsed two time with PBS and lysed in the plate with 1% SDS, 8M urea, 50 mM Tris buffer pH 8.5. The cells were then sonicated using Branson probe sonicator 45 s with 3 s pulse and 30 % amplitude and protein concentration was measured by BCA. 50 µg of proteins were used for proteomics samples preparation. Reduction was performed using 5 mM DTT at RT for 1h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA at RT in the dark for 1h. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT. Then methanol/chloroform precipitation was performed as followed: 3 sample volume of methanol were added, then 1 sample volume of chloroform and 3 volumes of water. Samples were vortexed between each step and then centrifugated at 20 000 x g for 10 min at 4 C. The aqueous layer was removed and the protein pellet was rinsed with one sample volume of methanol, vortexed and centrifuged using the same speed as in the previous step. Finally, all the liquid was removed and the protein pellet was air dried. Air-dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5. The samples were diluted once with by adding 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 (4M urea) and lysyl endopeptidase digestion was carried out at a 1 :100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. The following day, samples were diluted 4 times (1M urea) with 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5, then tryptic digestion was performed for 6h at RT using a 1 :100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w). After that, TMT10 labeling was performed during 2h at RT by adding 0.2 mg of reagent dissolved in dry ACN according to manufacturer’s instructions and a final ACN concentration of 20%. The reaction was then quenched by adding triethylamine to a final 0.5% concentration and incubated 15 min at RT. The samples were combined resulting in one pooled sample per replicate containing each temperature. After that, the samples were acidified to pH <3 using TFA, desalted using Sep Pack (Waters) and vacuum dried overnight using miVac DNA (Genevac).  TMT10 set name 126 127N 127C 128N 128C 129N 129C 130N 130C 131 H9 H9_1 H9_2 H9_3 Embryoid body_1 Embryoid body_2 Embryoid body_3 hFF_1 hFF_2 hFF_3 / H980 H980_1 H980_2 H980_3 Embryoid body_1 Embryoid body_2 Embryoid body_3 hFF_1 hFF_2 hFF_3 / The TMT10 labelling was performed as follow : 150 µg of proteins were resuspended into 20 mM NH4OH. Then, samples were off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionated using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min. This resulted in 96 fractions that were concatenated into 24 fractions and dried o/n using miVac DNA. Prior to Mass spectrometry analysis, all samples were resuspended into 2% ACN and 0.1% FA at a concentration of 0.2 µg/µl and 1 µg were injected into a UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The liquid chromatography gradient was of 120 minutes with a A phase consisting of 2% ACN and 0.1% FA and a B phase consisting of 98% ACN and 0.1% FA. Q-Exactive HF acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes using a top-20 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120 000 with a target value of 5.106 or maximum integration time of 100 ms. The m/z range was from 375 to 1500. Peptide fragmentation was performed using HCD, and the energy was set at 33%. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 45 000 with the target value of 2.105 ions and a maximum integration time of 93 ms. The isolation window and first fixed mass were set at 1.6 m/z units and m/z 100, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
TMT-10 labelling quantification Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3). MS2 was selected as the quantification mode with TMT10 as the modification. Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. The Andromeda search engine was using the UniProt human database 2019_05 excluding protein isoforms (73 910 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acid.  Default parameters were used for the instrument setting. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins. “Match between runs” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Ribosome, Thermal proteome profiling, Pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia.
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia.


