### Accession
PXD025351

### Title
(Phospho)Proteomic Characterization of Ptenm3m4 Cortex

### Description
PTEN has a strong Mendelian association with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), representing a special case in autism’s complex genetic architecture. Animal modeling for constitutional Pten mutation creates an opportunity to study how disruption of Pten affects neurobiology and glean potential insight into ASD pathogenesis. Subsequently, we comprehensively characterized the neural (phospho)proteome of Ptenm3m4/m3m4 mice, which exhibits cytoplasmic-predominant Pten expression, by applying mass spectrometry technology to their brains at two-weeks- (P14) and six-weeks-of-age (P40). The differentially expressed/phosphorylated proteins were subjected to gene enrichment, pathway, and network analyses to assess the affected biology. We identified numerous differentially expressed/phosphorylated proteins, finding greater dysregulation at P40 consistent with prior transcriptomic data. The affected pathways were largely related to PTEN function or neurological processes, while scant direct overlap was found across datasets. Network analysis pointed to ASD risk genes like Pten and Psd-95 as major regulatory hubs, suggesting they likely contribute to initiation or maintenance of cellular and perhaps organismal phenotypes related to ASD.

### Sample Protocol
Three wildtype and three homozygous mutant two-week-old mouse hemibrains and three wildtype and three homozygous mutant six-week-old cortices were submitted to the Lerner Research Institute (LRI) Proteomics Core. These samples were homogenized in urea lysis buffer (20mM HEPES, 9M urea, 1X HALT phosphatase inhibitor, pH 8.0) with lysis Matrix D beads using FastPrep-24 from MP Biomedical. An aliquot from each tissue lysate was taken out for in-solution tryptic digestion. These samples were solubilized in 50 μL of in-solution digestion buffer, 6M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and then diluted to give a final urea concentration of less than 1 M for digestion. All samples were digested in-solution by adding 0.5 μg trypsin and incubating overnight at room temperature. A second aliquot of trypsin was added and digestion was continued for an additional 6 hours. After digestion, the peptides were desalted and quantified using Thermo Scientific Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (Thermo Scientific #23275). A 100 μg peptide aliquot from each sample was dried down and reconstituted in 100 μL 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) for offline fractionation. Fractionation was performed by loading 90 μL onto an offline Hp-RP separation column (Waters, XBridge C18 3.5 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm, or Waters XBridge C18 3.5 μm, 2.1 x 150 mm) using an Agilent 1200 microflow pump. The samples were fractionated using a stepwise gradient at 250 μL/min for 40min. A fraction collector was used for collection with a rate of 1 minute per fraction through the rest of the gradient. One of every four collections were combined and a total of 10 fractions per sample was obtained. Each combined fraction was lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 30 μL 1% acetic acid for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS system was a Thermo LTQ-Obitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer system. The HPLC column was a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2μm, 100 Å reversed phase capillary chromatography column. Five μL volumes of the extract were injected and the peptides eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min were introduced into the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The microelectrospray ion source is operated at 2.5 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. The data was analyzed by using all CID spectra collected in the experiment to search the mouse UniProtKB databases with the search program Mascot and Sequest. These search results were then uploaded into the program Scaffold. The quantitation was performed by comparing the normalized spectral counts for these samples. For phospho-enriched samples, the raw data were analyzed using Seqeust, and the quantitation was performed by comparing the normalized peptide precursor intensities of these samples.

### Publication Abstract
PTEN has a strong Mendelian association with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), representing a special case in autism's complex genetic architecture. Animal modeling for constitutional Pten mutation creates an opportunity to study how disruption of Pten affects neurobiology and glean potential insight into ASD pathogenesis. Subsequently, we comprehensively characterized the neural (phospho)proteome of Pten<sup>m3m4/m3m4</sup> mice, which exhibits cytoplasmic-predominant Pten expression, by applying mass spectrometry technology to their brains at two-weeks- (P14) and six-weeks-of-age (P40). The differentially expressed/phosphorylated proteins were subjected to gene enrichment, pathway, and network analyses to assess the affected biology. We identified numerous differentially expressed/phosphorylated proteins, finding greater dysregulation at P40 consistent with prior transcriptomic data. The affected pathways were largely related to PTEN function or neurological processes, while scant direct overlap was found across datasets. Network analysis pointed to ASD risk genes like Pten and Psd-95 as major regulatory hubs, suggesting they likely contribute to initiation or maintenance of cellular and perhaps organismal phenotypes related to ASD.

### Keywords
Autism, Lc-msms, Mouse, Pten

### Affiliations
Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Charis Eng
Genomic Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic


