### Accession
PXD035545

### Title
the analysis of sus scrofa serum LC-MS/MS after african swine fever virus infection

### Description
African swine fever (ASF) is the most dangerous disease of pigs and causes enormous economic losses in the global pig industry. However, the mechanism of ASF virus (ASFV) infection is unclear. Hence, we wanted to understand the host response mechanism upon ASFV infection. We analyzed the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between ASFV-infected and un-infected serum samples using quantitative proteomics. Setting the p-value < 0.05 and |log2 (fold change)| > 1.5, we identified 173 DEPs, including 57 upregulated and 116 downregulated proteins, which belonged to various biological processes and pathways according to the Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analyses. The enriched pathways include the immune system, metabolism, and inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The cellular debris and impurities of 100 μL serum sample were removed by centrifugation at 12000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 mL centrifuge tube and the protein concentration was determined with the PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was deoxidized with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Then, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide, leading to the final concentration of urea of not more than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 mass ratio overnight for the first digestion, followed by secondary digestion at 1:100 mass ratio for 4 h. TMT labeling The peptides of different groups after trypsin digestion were labeled using the TMT kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), according to the manufacture’s protocol. In brief, the TMT reagent was thawed and dissolved in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. LC-MS/MS analysis The labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography using the Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The gradient comprised of an increasing percentage of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) from 6% to 23% over 26 min, 23% to 35% in the next 12 min, 35% to 80% in the next 3 min, and then kept at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo, USA). The resulting peptides were subjected to a nano-spray-ionization source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled online to the UPLC system. The electrospray voltage was set as 2.0 kV. The MS was set as 350 – 1800 m/z for the full scan range, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Further, peptides were selected for MS/MS using 28% normalized collision energy, and the fragments were detected at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4 for MS/MS, and the fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. A data-dependent procedure alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a dynamic exclusion time of 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Database search The MS/MS data were analyzed using the Maxquant software version 1.5.2.8. The tandem mass spectra were searched against the Sus scrofa (pig) UniProt database concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. For the initial research, the mass tolerance was set as 20 ppm for precursor ions and 5 ppm in mass search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Oxidation of Met was specified as a variable modification and the modification of Cys with carbamidomethyl was specified as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Functional analysis of the differentially expressed proteins To further explore the internal relationships between the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), an enrichment analysis was performed. The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was analyzed from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) with respect to three categories —biological process, molecular function, and cellular component. The Clusters of Orthologous Groups of protein/Eukaryotic Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG/KOG) analysis were analyzed using an online database (http:ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/pub/COG/KOG/kyva). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to confirm the enrichment of the DEPs, and the whole quantified protein annotations were used as the background data set.

### Publication Abstract
African swine fever (ASF) is the most dangerous pig disease, and causes enormous economic losses in the global pig industry. However, the mechanisms of ASF virus (ASFV) infection remains largely unclear. Hence, this study investigated the host response mechanisms to ASFV infection. We analyzed the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between serum samples from ASFV-infected and uninfected pigs using quantitative proteomics. Setting the <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05 and |log<sub>2</sub> (fold change)| &gt; 1.5, we identified 173 DEPs, comprising 57 upregulated and 116 downregulated proteins, which belonged to various biological processes and pathways based on the Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analyses. The enriched pathways include immune responses, metabolism, and inflammation signaling pathways. Western blot analysis validated the DEPs identified using quantitative proteomics. Furthermore, our proteomics data showed that C1QTNF3 regulated the inflammatory signaling pathway. C1QTNF3 knockdown led to the upregulation of pro-inflammatory factors IL-1&#x3b2;, IL-8, and IL-6, thus inhibiting ASFV replication. These results indicated that C1QTNF3 was critical for ASFV infection. In conclusion, this study revealed the molecular mechanisms underlying the host-ASFV interaction, which may contribute to the development of novel antiviral strategies against ASFV infection in the future.

### Keywords
Sus scrofa serum lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
huazhong agriculture university
College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Changjie Lv

### Lab Head
Dr Changjie Lv
College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University


