### Accession
PXD021416

### Title
Skeletonema marinoi LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
Rising atmospheric CO2 concentrations are leading to ocean acidification, altering the inorganic carbon buffer system with consequences for marine organisms. Here we applied RNA-seq and iTRAQ quantification to investigate the potential impacts of ocean acidification on the temperate coastal marine diatom Skeletonema marinoi.

### Sample Protocol
Skeletonema marinoi samples were collected by centrifugation at 5000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C for protein extraction. The samples were immediately frozen in liquid N2 and then stored at -80 ℃ until subsequent extraction. After Protein digestion, iTRAQ labeling, and peptide fractionation, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to the Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode by nano-electrospray ionization.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the raw MS/MS data were submitted to a Mascot (v 2.3.02) search against the aforementioned transcriptome database of S. marinoi. The final selected protein must contain at least one unique peptide. The IQuant software was used for protein quantification. IQuant settings were set according to the “Picked protein false discovery rate (FDR) strategy” with the FDR value of a peptide or protein ≤ 0.01. Protein with fold change ＞1.2 and p-value ＜ 0.05 was accepted as the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ocean acidfication, Skeletonema marinoi, Basic metabolic processes

### Affiliations
The ocean university of China
College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China

### Submitter
Zhang mei

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Zhen
College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China


