### Accession
PXD027670

### Title
Acetylation regulates the oligomerization state and activity of RNase J, the major ribonuclease of Helicobacter pylori

### Description
In Helicobacter pylori, the major actor in post-transcriptional regulation is an RNA degradosome assembly   composed of the essential ribonuclease RNase J and the DEAD-box RNA helicase RhpA. Here, we describe the oligomeric state and post-translational modifications of this protein complex. Our crystal structure of RNase J at 2.75 Å resolution reveals a homotetrameric quaternary state, and solution studies show that purified RNase J forms monomers and dimers, that RhpA is a monomer, and that the two proteins interact to form a stable complex with a 1:1 stoichiometry. Using mass spectrometry, we observed that RNase J is acetylated on multiple residues, one of which, K649, is important for RNase J oligomerization. Mutations targeting this residue and others affect the dimerization and in vitro activity of RNase J, suggesting that the dimer is the active form. In H. pylori, we observed that several of the identified acetylated residues impact on cell morphology, suggesting their importance for RNase J cellular function. Using H. pylori mutants, we found that several pathways contribute to RNase J acetylation. We propose acetylation as a regulatory level controlling RNase J properties and as a consequence the activity of the H. pylori RNA degradosome.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-downs were performed from H. pylori cultures strains expressing FLAG-tagged RNase J. Protein eluted in denaturing mode were put in a 1D gel for subsequent proteomic analysis, by in-gel digestion, of the corresponding band gel of RNase J.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 using the Andromeda search engine. Raw files and MaxQuant files (msms.txt) were processed in Skyline-daily 20.1.9.268 to generate XIC and perform peak integration for each K-acetylated peptide. Normalization across samples was performed by using the mean of the ratios from non-modified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
In the gastric pathogen Helicobacter pylori, post-transcriptional regulation relies strongly on the activity of the essential ribonuclease RNase J. Here, we elucidated the crystal and cryo-EM structures of RNase J and determined that it assembles into dimers and tetramers in vitro. We found that RNase J extracted from H. pylori is acetylated on multiple lysine residues. Alanine substitution of several of these residues impacts on H. pylori morphology, and thus on RNase J function in vivo. Mutations of Lysine 649 modulates RNase J oligomerization in vitro, which in turn influences ribonuclease activity in vitro. Our structural analyses of RNase J reveal loops that gate access to the active site and rationalizes how acetylation state of K649 can influence activity. We propose acetylation as a regulatory level controlling the activity of RNase J and its potential cooperation with other enzymes of RNA metabolism in H. pylori.

### Keywords
K-acetylation, Helicobacter pylori, Proteomics, Q exactive plus

### Affiliations
Unité de Pathogenèse de Helicobacter, CNRS UMR 2001, Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Hilde De Reuse
Unité de Pathogenèse de Helicobacter, CNRS UMR 2001, Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France


