### Accession
PXD028294

### Title
Human milk dynamics: Inter-individual variation in peptidome

### Description
The aim of this study was to map inter-individual variation in the human milk peptidome and to investigate relationships between these data and possible explanations for observed variation.

### Sample Protocol
Human milk samples were thawed at 4°C and skimmed milk was obtained after centrifugation at 1500g for 10 minutes at 10°C. Proteins were precipitated by addition of an equal volume of 200 g/L trichloroacetic acid in milli-Q water and subsequent centrifugation at 3000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. From the resulting supernatant, 50 µL was cleaned by solid phase extraction (SPE) on C18+ Stage tip columns (prepared in-house). After clean-up and elution, the resulting peptides were analysed using a nanoLC-MS/MS mass spectrometry system with an LTQ-Orbitrap XL for both MS and MSMS measurements.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Human milk is a dynamic biofluid, and its detailed composition receives increasing attention. While most studies focus on changes over time or differences between maternal characteristics, interindividual variation receives little attention. Nevertheless, a comprehensive insight into this can help interpret human milk studies and help human milk banks provide targeted milk for recipients. This study aimed to map interindividual variation in the human milk proteome, peptidome, and metabolome and to investigate possible explanations for this variation. A set of 286 milk samples was collected from 29 mothers in the third month postpartum. Samples were pooled per mother, and proteins, peptides, and metabolites were analyzed. A substantial coefficient of variation (&gt;100%) was observed for 4.6% and 36.2% of the proteins and peptides, respectively. In addition, using weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA), 5 protein and 11 peptide clusters were obtained, showing distinct characteristics. With this, several associations were found between the different data sets and with specific sample characteristics. This study provides insight into the dynamics of human milk protein, peptide, and metabolite composition. In addition, it will support future studies that evaluate the effect size of a parameter of interest by enabling a comparison with natural variability.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens; breast milk; peptidomics; peptides; variability

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


