### Accession
PXD021473

### Title
Activity-Dependent Mitochondrial Plasticity and Mitoproteome are Dysregulated in Fragile X Syndrome

### Description
We measure changes in the proteome after 48 hours of activity deprivation with tetrodotoxin (TTX) and the NMDA receptor antagonist (2R)-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid (APV). We used wild type and FMRP mutant primary cortical neurons treated with vehicle or treated with TTX-APV.

### Sample Protocol
Postnatal 1 cortical cultures were lysed with a 8M Urea (pH 8.5). The urea lysis buffer included an EDTA free HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Samples were trypsin digested and labeled with TMT reagent for quantitative mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Data were processed through the MaxQuant software v1.6.2.3, which served for recalibration of MS data, filtering of database search results at the 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR), calculation of reporter ion intensities (TMT), isotopic correction of reporter ion intensities (TMT). Data were searched using Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
Homeostatic plasticity is necessary for the construction and maintenance of functional neuronal networks, but principal molecular mechanisms required for or modified by homeostatic plasticity are not well understood. We recently reported that homeostatic plasticity induced by activity deprivation is dysregulated in cortical neurons from Fragile X Mental Retardation protein (FMRP) knockout mice (Bulow et al. in Cell Rep 26: 1378-1388 e1373, 2019). These findings led us to hypothesize that identifying proteins sensitive to activity deprivation and/or FMRP expression could reveal pathways required for or modified by homeostatic plasticity. Here, we report an unbiased quantitative mass spectrometry used to quantify steady-state proteome changes following chronic activity deprivation in wild type and Fmr1<sup>-/y</sup> cortical neurons. Proteome hits responsive to both activity deprivation and the Fmr1<sup>-/y</sup> genotype were significantly annotated to mitochondria. We found an increased number of mitochondria annotated proteins whose expression was sensitive to activity deprivation in Fmr1<sup>-/y</sup> cortical neurons as compared to wild type neurons. These findings support a novel role of FMRP in attenuating mitochondrial proteome modifications induced by activity deprivation.

### Keywords
Autism, Mitochondria, Fmrp, Mitoproteome, Fmr1, Homeostatic plasticity, Fragile x syndrome

### Affiliations
Emory University
Professor, Dept. Cell Biology, Emory University

### Submitter
Victor Faundez

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Faundez
Professor, Dept. Cell Biology, Emory University


