### Accession
PXD038620

### Title
SUMO pulldown proteomics Namalwa 5-Aza-2' deoxycytidine treatment

### Description
Combination therapies targeting malignancies aim to increase treatment efficacy and reduce toxicity. Hypomethylating drug 5-Aza-2’-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-2’) enhances transcription of tumor suppressor genes and induces replication errors via entrapment of DNMT1. Post-translational modification by SUMO plays major roles in the DNA damage response and is required for degradation of entrapped DNMT1. Here, we combine SUMOylation inhibitor TAK981 and DNA-hypomethylating agent 5-Aza-2’ to improve treatment of MYC driven hematopoietic malignancies, since MYC overexpressing tumors are sensitive to SUMOylation inhibition. We studied the classical MYC driven malignancy Burkitt lymphoma, as well as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with and without MYC translocation. SUMO inhibition prolonged the entrapment of DNMT1 to DNA, resulting in DNA damage. An increase in DNA damage was observed in cells co-treated with TAK981 and 5-Aza-2’. Both drugs synergized to reduce cell proliferation in vitro in a B cell lymphoma cell panel, including Burkitt lymphoma and DLBCL. In vivo experiments combining TAK981 (25 mg/kg) and 5-Aza-2’ (2.5 mg/kg) showed a significant reduction in outgrowth of Burkitt lymphoma in an orthotopic xenograft model. In contrast, single dosing of TAK981 was ineffective and single dosing of 5-Aza-2’ only led to a modest outgrowth reduction.  TAK981 and 5-Aza-2’ synergize to reduce B cell Lymphoma outgrowth in vitro and in vivo.  SUMOylation is a key-player in the repair of DNA damage, hence upon TAK981 treatment the repair of DNA damage induced by 5-Aza-2’ treatment is impaired. Our results demonstrate the potential of tailored combination of drugs, based on insight in molecular mechanisms, to improve the efficacy of cancer therapies.  

### Sample Protocol
His10-SUMO2 purified samples were concentrated through 100kDa cutoff filters and supplemented with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Subsequently, samples were reduced with 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated using 5 mM chloroacetamide and reduced again with 6 mM DTT. Urea was diluted to 2M with 50mM ABC for trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA V5111) digestion in a ratio of 1:100 enzyme-to-protein overnight and light protected at room temperature. After digestion, peptides were acidified with 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then desalted and concentrated on triple-disc C18 reverse phase StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides were eluted with 33.3% acetonitrile (ACN), vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.1% folic acid.  Peptides were analyzed by nanoflow liquid C18 chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated within a 50 cm column with an inner diameter of 75 µM. The gradient was run from 2% to 40% of ACN in 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 200 nL/minute in 60 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was performed using MaxQuant Software version 2.0.1.0 matching the human proteome (uniprot-proteome_UP000005640.fasta 2022-01-07). Trypsin/P was used to perform database search, with four missed cleavages. Label-Free Quantification was enabled with default values. Carbamidomethylation of cystine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were considered variable modifications.  MaxQuant proteingroups.txt were further analyzed using Perseus Software version 1.6.15 (Tyanova et al., 2016). 4 and 20 hour 5-Aza-2’ treated samples were analyzed separately. Data sets were filtered for potential contaminants or only identified by site. LFQ intensities were Log2 transformed, right-sided Student’s t-test was (FDR 0.05 q-value) performed between His10-SUMO2 enriched samples and their parental control counterparts. All proteins not significantly enriched in at least 3 out of 4 replicates per sample type of His10-SUMO2 samples were removed. Next, two-sided Student’s t-tests (FDR 0.05 q-value) were performed between DMSO and 4 hour of 5-Aza-2’ treatment and between DMSO and 20 hours of 5-Aza-2’ treatment of the significantly enriched peptides in the SUMO expressing samples. Data for both groups were loaded into VulcanoSer (Goedhart & Luijsterburg, 2020) to generate volcano-plots. Hits were considered different when Log2 of LFQ intensities are higher than 1 and statistically significant P of -Log2 1.3.

### Publication Abstract
Combination therapies targeting malignancies aim to increase treatment efficacy and reduce toxicity. Hypomethylating drug 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-2') enhances transcription of tumor suppressor genes and induces replication errors via entrapment of DNMT1, yielding DNA-protein crosslinks. Post-translational modification by SUMO plays major roles in the DNA damage response and is required for degradation of entrapped DNMT1. Here, we combine SUMOylation inhibitor TAK981 and DNA-hypomethylating agent 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine to improve treatment of MYC driven hematopoietic malignancies, since MYC overexpressing tumors are sensitive to SUMOylation inhibition. We studied the classical MYC driven malignancy Burkitt lymphoma, as well as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with and without MYC translocation. SUMO inhibition prolonged the entrapment of DNMT1 to DNA, resulting in DNA damage. An increase in DNA damage was observed in cells co-treated with TAK981 and 5-Aza-2'. Both drugs synergized to reduce cell proliferation in vitro in a B cell lymphoma cell panel, including Burkitt lymphoma and DLBCL. In vivo experiments combining TAK981 (25&#x2009;mg/kg) and 5-Aza-2' (2.5&#x2009;mg/kg) showed a significant reduction in outgrowth of Burkitt lymphoma in an orthotopic xenograft model. Our results demonstrate the potential of tailored combination of drugs, based on insight in molecular mechanisms, to improve the efficacy of cancer therapies.

### Keywords
B cell lymphoma, Sumoylation, 5-aza-2' deoxycytidine

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Leiden University Medical Centre (LUMC)

### Submitter
Alfred Vertegaal

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Leiden University Medical Centre (LUMC)


