### Accession
PXD005850

### Title
Identification of NTAL protein interactors

### Description
The adaptor protein NTAL (non-T cell activation linker) is expresses in acute myeloid leukemia blasts, and its downregulation by alkylphospholipid treatment or protein expression knockdown reduces AKT activation. This new data elucidates new NTAL protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of proteins from cell lysates was carried out using specific NTAL antibory and itotype controls. Magnetic beads-antibodies were incubated for 1h with cell lysates, followed by washing with 25mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 0.5M NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20. Beads-Antibody-Interacting proteins were directly submitted to reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion (0.1ug). Peptides were dessalted in home-made C18 stage-tips and submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis in a Q-Exactive coupled to NanoEasy liquid chromatographic system.

### Data Protocol
Samples (NTAL x isotype control) were analyzed in triplica injections using data-dependent mode. MS-data was analyzed by MaxQuant and Perseus softwares.Interactions were identified by non-labeling quantitation using iBAQ approach.

### Publication Abstract
Non-T cell activation linker (NTAL) membrane protein depletion from lipid rafts by alkylphospholipids or downregulation by shRNA knockdown decreases cell viability through regulation of the Akt/PI3K pathway in mantle cell lymphoma and acute promyelocytic leukemia cells. Here, we confirmed that the knockdown of NTAL in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines was associated with decreased cell proliferation and survival. Similarly, a xenograft model using AML cells transduced with NTAL-shRNA and transplanted into immunodeficient mice led to a 1.8-fold decrease in tumor burden. Using immunoprecipitation, LC-MS/MS analysis, and label-free protein quantification, we identified interactors of NTAL in two AML cell lines. By evaluating the gene expression signatures of the NTAL protein interactors using the PREdiction of Clinical Outcomes from Genomic Profiles database, we found that 12 NTAL interactors could predict overall survival in AML, in at least two independent cohorts. In addition, patients with AML exhibiting a high expression of NTAL and its interactors were associated with a leukemic granulocyte-macrophage progenitor-like state. Taken together, our data provide evidence that NTAL and its protein interactors are relevant to AML cell proliferation and survival and represent potential therapeutic targets for granulocyte-macrophage progenitor-like leukemias.

### Keywords
Ntal, Leukemia, Interactors

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
University of São Paulo

### Submitter
Vitor Faca

### Lab Head
Dr Vitor Marcel Faça
University of São Paulo


