### Accession
PXD025185

### Title
Protease-sensitive regions in amyloid light chains: what a common pattern of fragmentation across organs suggests about aggregation

### Description
In this study we aimed to provide a detailed comparative description of the fragmentation sites of amyloid LCs in multiple organs of an individual patient.

### Sample Protocol
Amyloid fibrils were enriched from kidney and subcutaneous fat. After reduction of disulfide bonds and alkylation of cysteines, primary amines in the reconstituted samples were dimethylated using formaldehyde and NaBH3CN, while labeling of carboxyl groups was obtained by amidation with ethanolamin. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, all samples were digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using the Sequest HT-based search engine contained in the Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software, version 2.0. In a preliminary database search step, the MS/MS data were searched against the human proteome database (downloaded from UniProt in August 2019 and containing 74190 entries) additioned of the sequence of AL-55; full tryptic cleavage and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification were specified. The target database was used in the second step of spectra alignment, in which semi-tryptic cleavage and additional PTMs were indicated. Specifically, these modifications included: a) in samples labeled as described above: dimethylation of lysines and N-terminus (+28.031) and addition of EA on aspartate, glutamate and C-terminus ; b) in unlabeled samples: oxidation of methionines and triptophans , cyclization of N-terminal glutamines , deamidation of glutamines and asparagines.

### Publication Abstract
Light-chain (AL) amyloidosis is characterized by deposition of immunoglobulin light chains (LC) as fibrils in target organs. Alongside the full-length protein, abundant LC fragments are always present in AL deposits. Herein, by combining gel-based and mass spectrometry analyses, we identified and compared the fragmentation sites of amyloid LCs from multiple organs of an AL &#x3bb; amyloidosis patient (AL-55). The positions pinpointed here in kidney and subcutaneous fat, alongside those previously detected in heart of the same patient, were aligned and mapped on the LC's dimeric and fibrillar states. All tissues contain fragmented LCs along with the full-length protein; the fragment pattern is coincident across organs, although microheterogeneity exists. Multiple cleavage positions were detected; some are shared, whereas some are organ-specific, likely due to a complex of proteases. Cleavage sites are concentrated in 'proteolysis-prone' regions, common to all tissues. Several proteolytic sites are not accessible on native dimers, while they are compatible with fibrils. Overall, data suggest that the heterogeneous ensemble of LC fragments originates in tissues and is consistent with digestion of preformed fibrils, or with the hypothesis that initial proteolytic cleavage of the constant domain triggers the amyloidogenic potential of LCs, followed by subsequent proteolytic degradation. This work provides a unique set of molecular data on proteolysis from ex&#x2009;vivo amyloid, which allows discussing hypotheses on role and timing of proteolytic events occurring along amyloid formation and accumulation in AL patients.

### Keywords
Amyloidogenesis, Immunoglobulin light chains, Proteolysis, Proteomics, Amyloid fibrils

### Affiliations
Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo
Amyloidosis Treatment and Research Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo

### Submitter
Giulia Mazzini

### Lab Head
Dr Giovanni Palladini
Amyloidosis Treatment and Research Center, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo


