### Accession
PXD029623

### Title
Identification of global inhibitors of cellular glycosylation

### Description
Small molecule inhibitors of glycosylation enzymes can be valuable tools for dissecting glycan functions and present great potential as drug discovery candidates. Most screening campaigns for inhibitors of glycosyltransferases have been limited to in vitro enzyme assays using recombinant enzymes, which often have led to promising candidates that have been difficult to study further in cells and animals due to issues with permeability and toxicity. Here, we aimed to circumvent these issues by employing a cell-based screening assay using glycoengineered cells expressing tailored reporter glycoproteins, which allowed us to narrow in on specific steps in individual glycosylation pathways. We focused on GalNAc-type O-glycosylation, and initially selected the GalNAc-T11 isoenzyme that selectively initiates O-glycosylation of the endocytic low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR)-related proteins as target. In our screen with a limited small molecule compound library, we did not identify selective inhibitors of GalNAc-T11 or the family of GalNAc-T isoenzymes, however we identified two potent compounds that broadly inhibited glycosylation processes in a reversible manner. We demonstrate that these compounds inhibit all Golgi-localized glycosylation and suggest that this is mediated by reversible fragmentation of the Golgi system, presumably via interactions with HSP90. Finally, we demonstrate how these compounds can be used in cell model studies to dissect roles of different types of glycosylation by showing the importance of Tn-expression for binding of cancer-specific antibodies and by validating further the importance of cellular heparan sulfate in the binding and infection of SARS-CoV-2

### Sample Protocol
HEK293WT cells treated for 24 h with 10 µM NSC80997 or DMSO control were resuspended in 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corporation) and lysed by sonication. Lysates were heated for 10 min at 80°C, followed by reduction (5 mM DTT, 60°C, 30 min), alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, RT, 30 min), and digestion with trypsin (25 µg/sample) (Roche) at 37°C overnight. Cleared, acidified digests were loaded onto equilibrated SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) followed by washing with 0.1% TFA. Columns were washed further with 0.1% FA and peptides were eluted with 50% MeOH in 0.1% FA. Peptides were labelled using a TMTsixplex isobaric labelling kit (Thermo Fisher) and fractionated using a Pierce High pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacturer’s instructions prior to LC/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.4.2 (GraphPad Software). Two-tailed Student’s t-test was used to calculate significance between two groups, and ANOVA was used for analysis of multiple groups. Post-hoc comparisons of multiple groups were corrected for multiple comparisons by Bonferoni correction. P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Small molecule inhibitors of glycosylation enzymes are valuable tools for dissecting glycan functions and potential drug candidates. Screening for inhibitors of glycosyltransferases are mainly performed by in vitro enzyme assays with difficulties moving candidates to cells and animals. Here, we circumvent this by employing a cell-based screening assay using glycoengineered cells expressing tailored reporter glycoproteins. We focused on GalNAc-type O-glycosylation and selected the GalNAc-T11 isoenzyme that selectively glycosylates endocytic low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR)-related proteins as targets. Our screen of a limited small molecule compound library did not identify selective inhibitors of GalNAc-T11, however, we identify two compounds that broadly inhibited Golgi-localized glycosylation processes. These compounds mediate the reversible fragmentation of the Golgi system without affecting secretion. We demonstrate how these inhibitors can be used to manipulate glycosylation in cells to induce expression of truncated O-glycans and augment binding of cancer-specific Tn-glycoprotein antibodies and to inhibit expression of heparan sulfate and binding and infection of SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Compound library screen, Cell-based glycan array, 53 golgi fragmentation, Glycosyltransferases, O-glycosylation, Glycosylation inhibitor

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, GlycoMS group

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, GlycoMS group


