### Accession
PXD022397

### Title
TbSAP is a novel chromatin protein repressing metacyclic Variant Surface Glycoprotein expression sites in bloodstream form Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
The African trypanosome Trypanosoma brucei is a unicellular eukaryote, which relies on a protective Variant Surface Glycoprotein (VSG) coat for survival in the mammalian host.  A single trypanosome has >2000 VSG genes and pseudogenes of which only one is expressed from one of ~15 telomeric bloodstream form expression sites (BESs).  Infectious metacyclic trypanosomes present within the tsetse fly vector also express VSG from a separate set of telomeric metacyclic ESs (MESs).  All MESs are silenced in bloodstream form T. brucei.  As very little is known about how this is mediated, we performed a whole genome RNAi library screen to identify MES repressors.  This allowed us to identify a novel SAP domain containing DNA binding protein which we called TbSAP.  TbSAP is enriched at the nuclear periphery and binds both MESs and BESs.  Knockdown of TbSAP in bloodstream form trypanosomes did not result in cells becoming more ‘metacyclic’-like.  Instead, there was extensive global upregulation of transcripts including MES VSGs, VSGs within the silent VSG arrays as well as genes immediately downstream of BES promoters. TbSAP therefore appears to be a novel architectural chromatin protein playing an important role in silencing the extensive VSG repertoire of bloodstream form T. brucei.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 4 x 10e7 T. brucei cells per sample were washed twice at 4ºC in trypanosome dilution buffer (5 mM KCL, 80 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 20 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM NaH2PO4, 20 mM glucose pH 7.6) and resuspended in 45 μl cold 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0) with protease inhibitors.  Samples were then incubated for 5 minutes at 37ºC in order to activate endogenous GPI-specific phospholipase C (GPI-PLC) which cleaves GPI-anchored proteins on the cell surface.  Samples were then cooled on ice and the supernatant was harvested and diluted with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher) and dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 1 x sample buffer with 100 mM dithiothreitol.  Harvested proteins were denatured at 70ºC for 10 minutes and then frozen before processing for mass spectrometry using the protocol described in Leal et al., Nucleic Acids Res 2020.

### Data Protocol
Please see the material and methods section in Leal et al., Nucleic Acids Res 2020.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc/ms-ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


