### Accession
PXD013541

### Title
proteomics analysis of LN308 cell line under treatment with tunicamycin and thapsigargin

### Description
Accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum triggers the unfolded protein response (UPR), an adaptive signal transduction pathway aimed at reinstating cellular homeostasis, or, if that fails, at triggering of apoptosis. The UPR plays a key role in a variety of disorders (including diabetes, neurodegenerative disorders, and inflammatory processes) and has been implicated in cancer progression and resistance to chemotherapy. However, the mechanisms and pathways by which the UPR contributes to chemoresistance are only poorly understood. We have employed a multi-omics approach to monitor changes to gene expression after induction of the UPR with two different compounds, probing in parallel the transcriptome, the proteome, and changes to translation. Stringent filtering reveals the induction of 267 genes (the UPR regulon), many of which have not previously been implicated in stress response pathways. We experimentally demonstrate that UPR-mediated translational control via phosphorylation of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2a) and subsequent induction of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) causes an up-regulation of enzymes involved in a pathway that diverts intermediate metabolites from glycolysis to fuel mitochondrial one-carbon metabolism. This metabolic rewiring of the cells results in resistance to treatment with the widely-used folate anti-metabolites Methotrexate and Permetrexed.

### Sample Protocol
For the separation of peptides, an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC, Thermo Scientific) nanoLC system was used. 1µg of peptides was loaded for each measurement. The peptides were first pre-concentrated on a pre-column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 100µm 2cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) using 0.1% TFA at a flowrate of 20µl/min and then loaded on an analytical main-column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 75µm 50cm, Thermo Scientific). A linear gradient employing A: 0.1% formic acid (FA) and B: 84% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% FA running from 3-35% B in 180 min at a flowrate of 250nl/min was used. For the global proteomics analysis, the high resolution orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) was used in top 15 data dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM), AGC target: 1e6 and maximum injection time of 120ms. Data dependent MS/MS scans were acquired on the 15 most abundant ions using a normalized collision energy of 27%, at a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, AGC target: 5e4, isolation width: 1.6m/z, fixed first mass: 120m/z and dynamic exclusion of 20s. MS/MS scans were performed only for precursor ions with charge states between 2 and 4.

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis of mass spectrometry data, Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 3.0 NonLinear Dynamics) was used. X!Tandem (Craig and Beavis 2004) via SearchGUI interface version 2.5.0 (Vaudel et al. 2011) and Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) were used as search algorithm for the peptide identification. For the data base search, Uniprot human database (downloaded on 22nd of July 2015) was used with the following search parameters: fixed modification: carbamidomethylation at cysteine, variable modification: oxidation at methionine, Trypsin as protease (maximum 2 missed cleavages), 10ppm as MS1 tolerance and 0.02Da as MS2 tolerance. PeptideShaker version 1.4.0 (Vaudel et al. 2015) was used to combine the peptide identification from X!Tandem and Mascot. Only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides were used for further analysis. The statistical data analysis was performed using R version 3.3.1 (codename "Bug in Your Hair") using the t.test function (Student’s t-test, two-sided, true variance equality, confidence level at 0.95). The regulation cut-off was defined as median of the log2 fold-change ± twice the standard deviation of the log2 fold-change. The significant cut-off was defined as less than 0.05. The general calculation, data formatting and illustration of the data was performed using the R-packages reshape2, dplyr, ggplot2 and gridExtra.

### Publication Abstract
Stress response pathways are critical for cellular homeostasis, promoting survival through adaptive changes in gene expression and metabolism. They play key roles in numerous diseases and are implicated in cancer progression and chemoresistance. However, the underlying mechanisms are only poorly understood. We have employed a multi-omics approach to monitor changes to gene expression after induction of a stress response pathway, the unfolded protein response (UPR), probing in parallel the transcriptome, the proteome, and changes to translation. Stringent filtering reveals the induction of 267 genes, many of which have not previously been implicated in stress response pathways. We experimentally demonstrate that UPR-mediated translational control induces the expression of enzymes involved in a pathway that diverts intermediate metabolites from glycolysis to fuel mitochondrial one-carbon metabolism. Concomitantly, the cells become resistant to the folate-based antimetabolites Methotrexate and Pemetrexed, establishing a direct link between UPR-driven changes to gene expression and resistance to pharmacological treatment.

### Keywords
Dda, Shot-gun proteomics, Glioblastoma, Label-free

### Affiliations
Lipidomics Group Leibniz-Institute for analytical science – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Straße 11 | 44139 Dortmund, Germany 

### Submitter
Chi Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Ahrends
Lipidomics Group Leibniz-Institute for analytical science – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany


