### Accession
PXD014767

### Title
The mitochondrial and chloroplast proteome of Euglena gracilis

### Description
Euglena gracilis is regarded as a flexible and adaptable free-living protist of considerable biotechnological interest. We carried out proteomic analysis of the E. gracilis purified chloroplast and mitochondrion. These data provide a new level of insight into functions and unique characteristics of these organelles and reveals the manner, in which these differ from its counterparts in other organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected by centrifugation at 800 × g for 10 min and resuspended in SHE buffer (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.3) supplemented with 0.4% fatty acid-free bovine serum albumine. All the following steps were performed on ice. Euglena cells were disrupted by sonication at 80% power using a thick 19.5-mm probe (Ultrasonic homogenizer 3,000; Biologics, Inc.). Sonication was performed in six 10 s pulses cycles with 2-min breaks between them. The sonicate was centrifuged for 15 min at 800 × g and 4 °C and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged for 15 min at 8,500 × g at 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in 3 ml of STM buffer (250 mM sucrose, 20 mM Tris–HCl, 2 mM MgCl2, pH 8.0) with 40 U of DNase I (Thermo Scientific) and incubated on ice for 30–60 min. The DNase-treated lysate (5 ml) was loaded on top of a discontinuous sucrose density gradient. The gradient was prepared by layering decreasingly dense sucrose solutions upon one another from 2.0, 1.75, 1.5, 1.25, 1, to 0.5 M (5 ml each) and was centrifuged in the SW-28 rotor at 87,041 x g at 4 °C for 4.5 h (L8-M, Beckman). Mitochondrial and chloroplast fractions were recovered from the gradient and washed twice in SHE buffer. Samples were then sonicated in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Thermo Sci.) containing 2 mM dithiothreitol and separated on a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (Thermo) under reducing conditions. For generation of whole cell lysate samples (to use for enrichment analysis), cells were washed with PBS containing Roche complete protease inhibitors, extracted with standard NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (3X), sonicated and lysates containing 10exp7 cells were fractionated on a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-12% gradient polyacrylamide gel under reducing conditions. Sample lanes were divided into 8 slices that were excised from the Coomassie-stained gel, destained, and then subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation. The treated fractions were subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Sci.) performed by the Proteomic Facility at the University of Dundee. Sample layout: Mitochondrial fraction (replicate1, 8 fractions: mt1-mt8; replicate2, 8 fractions: mt9-mt16; replicate3, 8 fractions: mt17-mt24); Chloroplast fraction (replicate1, 8 fractions: cp1-cp8; replicate2, 8 fractions: cp9-cp16; replicate3, 8 fractions: cp17-cp24); whole cell lysate (replicate1, 8 fractions: L1-L8; replicate2, 8 fractions: L9-L16; replicate3, 8 fractions: L17-L24)

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0, Cox & Mann, 2008), using the predicted translated transcriptome (PMID: 30732613) as search database. Minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids, isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins, and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. If the identified peptide sequence set of one protein contained the peptide set of another protein, these two proteins were assigned to the same protein group. Ratios were calculated from label-free quantification intensities using only peptides that could be uniquely mapped to a given protein.P values were calculated applying t-test based statistics using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Euglena spp. are phototrophic flagellates with considerable ecological presence and impact. Euglena gracilis harbours secondary green plastids, but an incompletely characterised proteome precludes accurate understanding of both plastid function and evolutionary history. Using subcellular fractionation, an improved sequence database and MS we determined the composition, evolutionary relationships and hence predicted functions of the E.&#xa0;gracilis plastid proteome. We confidently identified 1345 distinct plastid protein groups and found that at least 100 proteins represent horizontal acquisitions from organisms other than green algae or prokaryotes. Metabolic reconstruction confirmed previously studied/predicted enzymes/pathways and provided evidence for multiple unusual features, including uncoupling of carotenoid and phytol metabolism, a limited role in amino acid metabolism, and dual sets of the SUF pathway for FeS cluster assembly, one of which was acquired by lateral gene transfer from Chlamydiae. Plastid paralogues of trafficking-associated proteins potentially mediating fusion of transport vesicles with the outermost plastid membrane were identified, together with derlin-related proteins, potential translocases across the middle membrane, and an extremely simplified TIC complex. The Euglena plastid, as the product of many genomes, combines novel and conserved features of metabolism and transport.

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Euglena gracilis, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Drug Discovery and Evaluation Unit, Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites, BIOCEV, Charles University in Prague
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Zoltner
Drug Discovery and Evaluation Unit, Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites, BIOCEV, Charles University in Prague


