### Accession
PXD018603

### Title
Targeting LSD1 rewires kinase networks and primes leukaemia cells for kinase inhibitor treatment

### Description
We show that intrinsic resistance to kinase inhibitors may be reversed by coercing kinase networks into acquiring topologies tolerant to drug sensitivity. Using acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) as a model, we found several antagonists of chromatin modifying enzymes that sensitised cancer cells to kinase inhibitor treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8 M urea buffer. This concentration was reduced to 2 M with 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0) and proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptide solutions were desalted using Oasis-HLB cartridges and phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2. For proteomics experiments, samples were lysed in hypotonic buffer.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Mascot. Label-free quantification was performed using Pescal, a in-house developed software that uses extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for all the peptides identified in at least one sample across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Most tumor types either fail to respond or become resistant to kinase inhibitors, often because of compensatory prosurvival pathways in the cancer cell's broader signaling circuitry. Here, we found that intrinsic resistance to kinase inhibitors in cultured primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells may be overcome by reshaping kinase networks into topologies that confer drug sensitivity. We identified several antagonists of chromatin-modifying enzymes that sensitized AML cell lines to kinase inhibitors. Of these, we confirmed that inhibitors of the lysine-specific demethylase (LSD1; also known as KDM1A) rewired kinase signaling in AML cells in a way that increased the activity of the kinase MEK and that broadly suppressed the activity of other kinases and feedback loops. As a result, AML cell lines and about half of primary human AML samples were primed for sensitivity to the MEK inhibitor trametinib. Primary human cells with <i>KRAS</i> mutations and those with high MEK pathway activity were the best responders to sequential treatment with LSD1 inhibitors then trametinib, whereas those with <i>NRAS</i> mutations and high mTOR activity were poor responders. Overall, our study reveals the MEK pathway as a mechanism of resistance to LSD1 inhibitors in AML and shows a way to modulate kinase network circuitry to potentially overcome therapeutic resistance to kinase inhibitors.

### Keywords
Lsd1, Phosphoproteomics, Acute myeloid leukaemia, Kinase signaling networks, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
University of Salamanca
Barts Cancer Institute. Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Maruan Hijazi

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Cutillas
Barts Cancer Institute. Queen Mary University of London


