### Accession
PXD036570

### Title
Stereoretentive Post-Translational Protein Editing

### Description
Chemical post-translational methods now allow convergent side-chain  editing of proteins as a form of direct chemical mutagenesis without needing to resort  to genetic intervention. Current approaches that allow the creation of constitutionally  native side-chains via C–C formation using off-protein carbon-centred C• radicals  added to unnatural amino acid radical acceptor SOMOphile ‘tags’ such as  dehydroalanine are benign and wide-ranging. However, they also typically create  epimeric mixtures of D-/L-residues. Here we describe a light-mediated desulfurative  method that, through the creation and reaction of stereoretained on-protein L-alanyl  Cβ• radicals, allows Cβ–Hγ, Cβ–Oγ, Cβ–Seγ, Cβ–Bγ and Cβ–Cγ bond formation to flexibly generate site-selectively edited proteins with full retention of native stereochemistry  under mild conditions from a natural amino acid. This methodology shows great  potential to explore protein side-chain diversity and construct useful bioconjugates.   This dataset contains LCMS data of tryptic digests of a PstS protein selectively modified by different radical acceptors (modification site D178). In total, 16 LCMS files are presented along with the results of the identification by MSFragger, corresponding to the variants of the PstS protein with different modifications.

### Sample Protocol
For in-solution proteolytic digestion, samples were dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 30 mM 2-chloroacetamide. Trypsin was added to each sample for an overnight incubation at 37C with 1:25 trypsin:protein ratio (w/w). The samples were desalted by Oasis HLB cartridges, dried, and reconstituted in water containing 5% formic acid, 5% DMSO right before the LC-MS analysis. For in-gel proteolytic digestion (PstS-Bal178 and PstS-TEMPO-A178), samples were resolved  via SDS-PAGE and stained with InstantBlue. After destaining in water, the corresponding bands were excised and cut into small cubes. The gels were extensively destained twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3/MeCN (1:1, v/v). After washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3, samples were reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 30 mM 2-chloroacetamide. The gels were washed twice with 50 mM NH4HCO3/MeCN (1:1, v/v). In turn, the gels were dehydrated with MeCN and dried under air before overnight trypsin digestion in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37C with 1:25 trypsin:protein ratio (w/w). Samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS using a UltiMate 3000 nanoUHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. The peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), then separated on an in-house  packed analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm in-house packed with ReproSil Gold 120 C18,  1.9 µm) with a gradient of 12% to 40% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 15 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-1400 m/z, resolution 60000, AGC target 1200000). The 20 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 30% of normalised collision energy and with a resolution 7500, AGC target 20000.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using FragPipe (v18.0) MSFragger 3.5 with standard ‘open’ search  settings against database (PDB ID 2abh with mutation D178A). Data was filtered using the  inbuilt tools within FragPipe to an FDR of below 1%. Modified peptides were discerned by  filtering the resulting dataset using the expected changes in mass caused by each modification.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical post-translational methods allow convergent side-chain editing of proteins without needing to resort to genetic intervention. Current approaches that allow the creation of constitutionally native side chains via C-C bond formation, using off-protein carbon-centered C&#xb7; radicals added to unnatural amino acid radical acceptor (SOMOphile, singly occupied molecular orbital (SOMO)) "tags" such as dehydroalanine, are benign and wide-ranging. However, they also typically create epimeric mixtures of d/l-residues. Here, we describe a light-mediated desulfurative method that, through the creation and reaction of stereoretained <i>on-protein</i>l-alanyl C<sub>&#x3b2;</sub>&#xb7; radicals, allows C<sub>&#x3b2;</sub>-H<sub>&#x3b3;</sub>, C<sub>&#x3b2;</sub>-O<sub>&#x3b3;</sub>, C<sub>&#x3b2;</sub>-Se<sub>&#x3b3;</sub>, C<sub>&#x3b2;</sub>-B<sub>&#x3b3;</sub>, and C<sub>&#x3b2;</sub>-C<sub>&#x3b3;</sub> bond formation to flexibly generate site-selectively edited proteins with full retention of native stereochemistry under mild conditions from a natural amino acid precursor. This methodology shows great potential to explore protein side-chain diversity and function and in the construction of useful bioconjugates.

### Keywords
Chemical modification, Psts, Stereoretentive, Protein editing, Lcms

### Affiliations
Rosalind Franklin Institute
Rosalind Franklin Institute, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Oxford OX11 0FA, UK Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TA, UK Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK

### Submitter
Nikita Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Guy Davis
Rosalind Franklin Institute, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Oxford OX11 0FA, UK Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TA, UK Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK


