### Accession
PXD017943

### Title
Phosphorylation ratio determination in fresh frozen and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue with targeted mass spectrometry

### Description
Formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues are routinely prepared and collected for diagnostics in pathology departments. Therefore, FFPE tissues are the most accessible research sources in pathology archives. In this study we investigated whether we can apply a targeted and quantitative parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method for FFPE tissue samples in a sensitive and reproducible way. Normal brain and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tissues were used to demonstrate the feasibility of our approach. Two analytical methods (or workflows) were used: PRM measurement of a tryptic digest without phosphopeptide enrichment (Direct-PRM) and after Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment (Fe-NTA-PRM). Applying these two methods, the phosphorylation ratio could be determined for selected four peptide pairs that originate from Neuroblast differentiation-associated protein (AHNAK S5448-p), Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II subunit delta (CAMK2D T337-p), Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B (EIF4B S93-p) and Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR S1166-p). In normal brain FFPE tissues, using the Fe-NTA-PRM method, we were able to quantify the targeted phosphorylated peptides with a high degree of reproducibility (CV = 14%). Our results indicate that formalin fixation does not impede relative quantification of a phosphosite and its phosphorylation ratio in FFPE tissues. The developed methods open ways to study archival FFPE tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS measurement FFPE tissue lysis Four slices of 8 µm of tissues were cut and placed in separate Eppendorf tubes. The tissue was washed twice with 1 ml xylene and subsequently the tissue was rehydrated by two washes of 1 ml of each 100%, 70% and 50% ethanol and water, consecutively. Four hundred µl of 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, Milford, MA) in 300 mM Tris-Base, pH 8.0 was added to each tissue pellet (~500 µg total protein) and disrupted by external sonification for 2 min at 70% amplitude at a maximum temperature of 25°C (Branson, Ultrasonic, Danbury, CT). Samples were then incubated for 90 min at 90°C. FF tissue lysis A range of 5 to 10 eight µm tissue slices (see Table S1) were cut and placed in separate Eppendorf tubes. We used five to ten slices because of difference in size of the tissue compared to the frozen tissues. Four hundred µl of 0.1% Rapigest (Waters, Milford, MA) was added to the tissue pellet (~500 µg total protein) and disrupted by external sonification for 2 min at 70% amplitude at a maximum temperature of 25°C (Branson, Ultrasonic, Danbury, CT) and incubated for 5 min at 99°C. In-solution digestion To the lysates of FF and FFPE tissue, after cooling down from the above mentioned 90 and 99°C, 20 µl of 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and incubated for 30 min at 60°C. Subsequently, 20 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. Afterwards 10 µg trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added and incubated overnight at 37°C. After this incubation 5 µl 50% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample and centrifuged at 20,000 g. The supernatant of the digested sample was dried using a vacuum centrifuge (Savant SC210A, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at -80 °C. Desalting of peptides and phosphopeptides with automation For the automated sample processing an AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent technologies, Santa Clara, CA) was used. For the phosphopeptide enrichment Fe-NTA cartridges were used. Manufacturer’s protocols were applied for all cartridges as described below36. Desalting of peptides Following the manufacturer’s peptide cleanup protocol (v2.0)36, the digested samples were desalted. C18 cartridges were primed with 100 µl 50% ACN /0.1% TFA and equilibrated with loading buffer (0.1% TFA / water). The dried digested tissue was re-suspended in 220 µl peptide mixture of Stable Isotope Labeled (SIL) peptides (see Table 1). Two hundred µl of the resuspended sample was loaded onto the C18 cartridge. The desalted peptides were eluted in 25 µl elution buffer 70% ACN/0.1% TFA after washing the cartridges with 100 µl loading buffer. Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment Using the phosphopeptide enrichment protocol (v2.0)36, the enrichment was achieved by using 5 µl Fe(III)-NTA cartridges on the AssayMAP Bravo platform. To the 25 µl desalted digested tissue sample, 95 µl 80% ACN/0.1% TFA was added. From this solution, 10 µl was kept to determine the peptide concentration using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Fe-NTA cartridges were primed with 100 µl 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and equilibrated with equilibration buffer (80% ACN/0.1% TFA). The desalted digest of tissue samples was loaded onto the cartridges. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 25 µl 1% ammonia after washing the cartridges with 100 µl of the equilibration buffer. The eluted phosphopeptides were dried directly using a vacuum centrifuge. Dried samples were dissolved in 25 µl 0.1% TFA/ 2% ACN and measured by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by nano-LC (Ultimate 3000RS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany). After preconcentration and washing the samples on a C18 trap column (5 mm × 300 μm internal diameter (ID), Thermo Fisher Scientific ), samples were loaded onto a C18 column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID × 250 mm, 2 μm particle and 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a linear 90 minutes gradient (4-38% ACN/H20; 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separation of the peptides was monitored by a UV detector (absorption at 214 nm). The nano-LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in the data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 375-1,500) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 after accumulation of an AGC target of 400,000. A top speed method with a maximum duty cycle of 3 seconds was used. In these 3 seconds the most intense peptide ions from the full scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by HCD (normalized collision energy 30%) and measured in the iontrap with a AGC target of 10,000. Maximum fill times were 50 ms for the full scans and 50 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and only charge states from 2-7 were selected for fragmentation. The dynamic exclusion was activated after the first time a precursor was selected for fragmentation and excluded for a period of 60 seconds using a relative mass window of 10 ppm. Lock mass correction was activated to improve mass accuracy of the survey scan.

### Publication Abstract
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are routinely prepared and collected for diagnostics in pathology departments. These are, therefore, the most accessible research sources in pathology archives. In this study we investigated whether we can apply a targeted and quantitative parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method for FFPE tissue samples in a sensitive and reproducible way. The feasibility of this technical approach was demonstrated for normal brain and glioblastoma multiforme tissues. Two methods were used: PRM measurement of a tryptic digest without phosphopeptide enrichment (Direct-PRM) and after Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment (Fe-NTA-PRM). With these two methods, the phosphorylation ratio could be determined for four selected peptide pairs that originate from neuroblast differentiation-associated protein (AHNAK S5448-p), calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II subunit delta (CAMK2D T337-p), eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4B (EIF4B S93-p), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR S1166-p). In normal brain FFPE tissues, the Fe-NTA-PRM method enabled the quantification of targeted phosphorylated peptides with high reproducibility (CV &lt; 14%). Our results indicate that formalin fixation does not impede relative quantification of a phospho-site and its phosphorylation ratio in FFPE tissues. The developed workflow combining these methods opens ways to study archival FFPE tissues for phosphorylation ratio determination in proteins.

### Keywords
Targeted mass spectrometry, Quantitative proteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Ffpe, Phosphorylation ratio, Prm, Clinical proteomics, Cancer proteomics

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam
Erasmus medical center 

### Submitter
Lona Zeneyedpour

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam


