### Accession
PXD001580

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Canola Inoculated with Bacteria under Salt Stress

### Description
In order to understand the salt response-mechanisms and ability of plant growth promoting bacteria to moderate harmful effect of salt, two Canola cultivars, salt-tolerant Hyola308, and salt-sensitive Sarigol, were treated with Inoculation with plant growth promoting bacteria, Pseudomonas fluorescens, and salt. For this quantitative proteomics technique was used.

### Sample Protocol
Two Canola cultivars, salt-tolerant Hyola308, and salt-sensitive Sarigol, were inoculated with Pseudomonas fluorescens in the hydroponic system. At 7 days after transplantation, plants were treated without or with 150 and 300 mM NaCl. Proteins were extracted from roots and leaf of the canola plant. For proteomics, protein samples were cleaned with chloroform/metahnol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and were then separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D x 120 mm; Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. The peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Bacteria, Canola, Salinity

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science

### Submitter
Farzad Banaei-Asl

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


