### Accession
PXD031280

### Title
Palmyrene Polychromy: Investigations of funerary portraits from Palmyra in the collections of the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek

### Description
Two samples from the Beauty of Palmyra (IN 2795 – Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, Copenhagen, Denmark) were collected from the surface coating, and partially the paint layer, in locations corresponding to paint residues from respectively the yellow paint (containing lead-based yellow pigment) and the red paint (containing haematite as pigment) of the headdress of the figure. The two samples were analysed using a palaeoproteomic protocol to investigate the use of a proteinaceous paint binder and/or the presence of other proteinaceous materials. The analysis led to the confident identification of collagen, probably indicating the use of animal glue as paint binder of the sample removed from red paint residues. Various animal keratins were also confidently identified in both samples. The presence of these proteins might be related to the manufacture of organic pigments, but also possibly to the use of a keratin-based glue as paint binder or surface coating, or even to the use of a paintbrush made with animal bristles.

### Sample Protocol
The original samples were divided into two aliquots. The first set was processed and analysed in 2016, the second set was processed in 2021. The same extraction protocol was used for both experiments, with differences only in the instrumental MS analyses. The samples, along with a protocol blank per experiment, were processed following the protocol described in Mackie et al. (2018). The samples were placed in separate Protein Lo-Bind tubes (Eppendorf, Germany). Protein residues were extracted over a 2-hour incubation at 80°C using 100 μL of an aqueous buffer containing: 2 M guanidinium chloride (GuHCl), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP), 20 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), and 100 mM trisaminomethane (Tris). The pH of the extraction solution was monitored to be around 8.0 throughout the protein extraction. The first protein digestion was performed in-solution with 0.2 μg rLysC (Promega, Sweden) for 2 hours at 37°C, under agitation. The solution was diluted to a final concentration of 0.6 M GuHCl using 25 mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile (ACN) in water. A second enzymatic digestion was performed overnight with 0.8 μg Trypsin (Promega, Sweden) under agitation at 37°C. The digestion was then quenched by acidifying the solution to pH 2 using 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The resulting peptides were collected on in-house made C18 extraction stage-tips. Stage-tips were stored at -18°C and the extracted peptides were eluted using ACN in water right before analysis: for the 2016 samples, 20 μL 40% ACN + 0.1% TFA and then 10 μL 60% ACN + 0.1% TFA (the two solutions were merged for each sample); for the 2021 samples, 30 μL 40% ACN + 0.1% formic acid. The volume of the solution was reduced to approximately 3 μL by placing the tubes in a vacuum centrifuge at 40°C. The peptides were then recovered with 5 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN and separated on a 15 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Denmark). The set of samples processed in 2016 was analysed on a QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific, Germany) with the following parameters. A 77 min gradient was used. Buffer A was milliQ water; buffer B was 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used increasing buffer B, going from 5% to 30% in 50 min, then to 45% in 10 min, finally to 80% in 2 min, and was held at 80% for 5 min before dropping back down to 5% in 5 min and holding for 5 min. Flow rate was set at 250 nL/min. An integrated column oven was used to maintain a column temperature of 40°C. A wash-blank, injecting 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN, was run in between samples to hinder cross-contamination. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent top 10 mode with spray voltage 2 kV, and S-lens RF level at 50. The heated capillary was kept at 275°C. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 over the m/z range 300-1750 with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. HCD-generated product ions were recorded with a maximum ion injection time set to 108 ms, a target value of 2e5 and resolution of 60,000. Normalised collision energy was set at 28% and the isolation window was 1.3 m/z, with dynamic exclusion set to 30 s. The second set of samples, processed in 2021, was analysed with similar parameters as the first set, but on a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The following parameters were changed with respect to the first experiment: MS range 350-1400 m/z, maximum injection time of 25 ms, MSMS isolation window 1.2 m/z, collision energy 30%, maximum ion injection time set to 118 ms, dynamic exclusion 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were identified with the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.1.0), matching them against four different databases of protein sequences. First, the spectra from all the raw files were matched against a reference database containing all the publicly available sequences of proteins contained in the most common proteinaceous artistic materials: animal glue, egg, and milk. The matches were against fully tryptic peptide sequences. Second, in order to investigate the presence of protein residues originating from other sources, the spectra were then matched against a larger database (SwissProt, from UniProt), containing all publicly available and manually reviewed protein sequences. The matches were against fully tryptic peptide sequences. Third, following the results obtained with the SwissProt database for the raw files acquired in 2021, the spectra from these analyses were matched against a database containing keratins and keratin-associated proteins from Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates). This search was matching the spectra against semi-tryptic peptide sequences, to account for the possible origin of the peptides from unspecific hydrolysis of the proteins. Fourth and finally, the spectra acquired in 2021 were matched against the publicly available proteome of Sus scrofa (pig). This search was matching the spectra against semi-tryptic peptide sequences. All other parameters were the same in all searches. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. The following variable modifications were considered: oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminus, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, conversion of N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, conversion of N-terminal glutamic to pyroglutamic acid, and hydroxyproline. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 7, with up to two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01, whereas the minimum score for unmodified and modified peptides was set to 40. Proteins were considered confidently identified if at least two unique non-overlapping peptides were observed, unless otherwise specified. Peptides were considered species-diagnostic when, after BLAST search against the entire nrNCBI protein database: (i) they were assigned to a single species, or (ii) they were a match with a limited number of species among which only one can be considered plausible, based on the nature of the samples and their geographic and historical origin. Contaminant proteins were assessed using the contamination.fasta provided by MaxQuant, containing common laboratory contaminants (http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start_downloads.htm), such as primate keratins (likely from the laboratory space or through human handling of the object and/or samples), excess trypsin, and Bovine Serum Albumin (a common laboratory reagent). Peptides assigned to recurrent contaminant proteins were filtered out and not considered further.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Binding media, Digital reconstructions, Hxrf, Sem-eds, Pigments, Lc-ms/ms, Palmyra, Funerary portraits, Ancient polychromy

### Affiliations
GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen
Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana

### Submitter
Fabiana Di Gianvincenzo

### Lab Head
Dr Luise Ørsted Brandt
GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen


