### Accession
PXD001997

### Title
Protein accumulation post-LASIK surgery in granular corneal dystrophy type II patients involves altered proteolytic processing of transforming growth factor beta-induced protein (TGFBIp)

### Description
his study present the protein profile of diseased cornea from granular corneal dystrophy patients developing protein accumulation after LASIK surgery. Extracted ion chromatography (XIC) label free quantification was perform using Mascot Distiller software. In addition, 2D-PAGE followed by western blot against the mutated protein TGFBIp that cause the protein accumulation in the cornea, was examined and compared to normal corneal tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation – GCDII patient and control tissues were lyophilized for 2 h using a speedvac concentrator and grinded into powder using liquid nitrogen. Approximately, 0.3mg of each tissue was subjected to 0.66 M CNBr in 70% trifluoroacetic acid at 23°C. The following day the tissues were lyophilized and re-suspended in 8 M Urea in 0.2 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min, and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. Samples were then diluted 5 times using 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, followed by overnight digestion with 1:50 w/w sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma) at 37°C. The samples were desalted using POROS 50 R2 RP column material (Applied Biosystems) packed in GELoader Tips (Eppendorf).  LC-MS/MS – LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) equipped with a NanoSpray III source (AB SCIEX) and operated under Analyst TF 1.6.0 control. The CNBr and trypsin cleaved samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, injected and trapped on a in-house packed trap column (2 cm x 100 μm I.D) using RP ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm i.d.) pulled and packed in-house with RP ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 20 min gradient from 5% to 35% phase B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile). The acquisition method used for the area based extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) quantification was set up as an information-dependent acquisition (IDA) experiment collecting up to 25 MS/MS spectra in each 1.6 sec cycle using an exclusion window of 6 sec. The GCDII patient and control samples were run in triplicates on the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data processing – For protein identification all raw MS files were processed using Mascot Distiller 2.5.1.0 (Matrix Science) and MGF files generated were search in the Swiss-Prot (v. 2015_03) Homo sapiens database using Mascot 2.5.0 (Matrix science, London, UK). CNBr+Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. To address endogenous P1 cleavage sites a second search was performed using semi-trypsin as specified enzyme. In both searches carbamidomethyl was entered as a fixed modification, whereas hydrozylation of proline, oxidation of methionine, and C-terminal conversion of methionine to homoserine and homoserine lactone by CNBr were used as variable modifications. All data were searched with a mass tolerance of the precursor and product ions of 10 ppm and 0.2 Da using ESI-QUAD-TOF as the instrument setting and all searches was adjusted to a 1% FDR at the peptide level.  For the area based XIC quantification Mascot Distiller was used and the mascot search was performed using the same settings as for protein identification above except that the default average [MD] quantitation protocol was selected using a 1% FDR threshold at the peptide level, number of peptides used for quantitation was 3, matched rho was 0.8, XIC threshold was 0.3 and isolated precursor threshold was set at 0.7. All data were imported and processed using MS Data Miner v. 1.3.0 [1]. All protein identifications based on at least one peptide with an ion score cut-off of 45 or minimum two peptides with an ion score cut-off of 30 was included for further data analysis. The spectrum of proteins solely identified based on one peptide was manually inspected and accepted upon 3 consecutive y- or b-ions assigned to the most intense peaks in the spectrum. To address endogenous P1 cleavage sites all TGFBIp peptide spectra with an ion score cut-off of minimum 45 within the semi-tryptic search was extracted and the distribution of P1 amino acid residues of the non-tryptic cleavage site was calculated and compared between control and patient groups. The area based XIC quantification was based on the average intensity of the 3 most abundant peptides per protein and displayed as a molar percentage by dividing the average intensity with the total intensity of the give MS analysis. Using Gene Ontology annotations all extracellular proteins were ranked according to their molar fraction of a sample and the average molar percentage across patient and control groups were compared.

### Publication Abstract
More than 60 mutations in transforming growth factor beta-induced protein (TGFBIp) have been reported in humans causing a variety of phenotypic protein aggregates in the cornea, commonly termed corneal dystrophies. One mutation, generating an arginine to histidine amino acid substitution at position 124 in mature TGFBIp leads to granular corneal dystrophy type 2 (GCD2). Homozygous GCD2 cases develop massive protein accumulation early in life whereas heterozygous GCD2 cases become affected much later and generally with a much less severe outcome. However, if heterozygous GCD2 patients undergo laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) surgery protein accumulation is accelerated and they develop massive protein accumulations a few years after surgery. Here, we present the protein profile of aggregate-containing corneal tissue from GCD2 patients with a history of LASIK surgery using LC-MS/MS. Label-free quantification of corneal extracellular matrix proteins showed accumulation of TGFBIp. This was supported by 2DE and immunoblotting against TGFBIp that revealed the accumulation of full-length TGFBIp. In addition, a high molecular weight TGFBIp complex was more apparent in GCD2 patients after LASIK surgery, which may be important for the disease progression. Lastly, 2DE also revealed differential processing between GCD2 patients with a history of LASIK surgery when compared to healthy individuals.

### Keywords
2d-page, Cornea, Granular corneal dystrophy, Xic quantification, Tripletof 5600+

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Ebbe Toftgaard Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Johannes Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


