### Accession
PXD009493

### Title
D2Ome - rate constant estimation from heavy water metabolic labeling and LC-MS

### Description
We developed a software for extraction of protein decay rate constants from heavy water labeling followed by LC-MS experiments. We illustrate the program on application to normal diet and western diet fed LDLR-/- mice. We demonstrate that proteins subunits of 40S ribosomal complex have reduced stability in western diet fet mice.

### Sample Protocol
Male LDLR-/- mice were labeled with heavy water. Liver samples were processed using LC-MS. Liver samples were collected at 6 time points of labeling. Data dependent acquisition was used to obtain mass spectral data.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzML file format using MSConvert. The mzML files were used in Mascot database search engine to identify peptides and proteins. False discovery rate was controled by using decoy sequence database.

### Publication Abstract
Metabolic labeling followed by LC-MS-based proteomics is a powerful tool to study proteome dynamics in high-throughput experiments both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro.</i> High mass resolution and accuracy allow differentiation in isotope profiles and the quantification of partially labeled peptide species. Metabolic labeling duration introduces a time domain in which the gradual incorporation of labeled isotopes is recorded. Different stable isotopes are used for labeling. Labeling with heavy water has advantages because it is cost-effective and easy to use. The protein degradation rate constant has been modeled using exponential decay models for the relative abundances of mass isotopomers. The recently developed closed-form equations were applied to study the analytic behavior of the heavy mass isotopomers in the time domain of metabolic labeling. The predictions from the closed-form equations are compared with the practices that have been used to extract degradation rate constants from the time-course profiles of heavy mass isotopomers. It is shown that all mass isotopomers, except for the monoisotope, require data transformations to obtain the exponential depletion, which serves as a basis for the rate constant model. Heavy mass isotopomers may be preferable choices for modeling high-mass peptides or peptides with a high number of labeling sites. The results are also applicable to stable isotope labeling with other atom-based labeling agents.

### Keywords
Heavy water labeling, Software, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
UTMB

### Submitter
Ahmad Borzoo

### Lab Head
Dr Rovshan G. Sadygov
UTMB


