### Accession
PXD001479

### Title
The gut microbiota affects the mucus barrier

### Description
Two C57BL/6 mice colonies maintained in two rooms in the same specific pathogen free (SPF) facility were found to have different gut microbiota and a mucus phenotype specific for each colony. The thickness and growth of the colon mucus was similar in the two colonies, but one colony had mucus not penetrable to bacteria or bacterial-sized beads, similar to what occurs in free-living wild mice. On the other hand, the other colony had an inner mucus layer that was penetrable to bacteria and beads. These different properties of the mucus in the two rooms were dependent on the microbiota, as the phenotypes were transmissible by transfer of ceacal microbiota to germ-free mice. Mice with an impenetrable mucus layer had increased amounts of Erysipelotrichi, while mice with a penetrable mucus layer had higher levels of Proteobacteria and TM7 bacteria in the distal colon mucus. Thus bacteria affect mucus barrier properties in ways that can have implications for health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Mucus samples removed after thickness measurements were solubilized in a guanidinium hydrochloride-based buffer, following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as described before [Rodriguez-Pineiro AM, Bergstrom JH, Ermund A, Gustafsson JK, Schutte A, Johansson ME, and Hansson GC (2013) Studies of mucus in mouse stomach, small intestine, and colon. II. Gastrointestinal mucus proteome reveals Muc2 and Muc5ac accompanied by a set of core proteins. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 305: G348-G356]. Proteins were during this procedure digested with 10 ng/μL porcine trypsin (Promega), and the resulting peptides were eluted and cleaned in StageTips. These samples were then analyzed by nano-reversed phase liquid chromatography (nRPLC) coupled to electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) in an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific), following the settings described in the article mentioned above.

### Data Protocol
Data from the MS/MS experiments were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.2.2.5. The databases used were the MaxQuant contaminant database, and the UniProt-SwissProt mouse database (version of March 2012, only reviewed sequences) completed with our public mucin database (http://www.medkem.gu.se/mucinbiology/databases/). For the searches, Met oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed. The main search error was limited to 6 ppm, with a false discovery rate threshold of 0.01. Protein amounts were relatively quantified (ppm) by their intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) in a total of 3 biological replicates per room and food studied.

### Publication Abstract
Two C57BL/6 mice colonies maintained in two rooms of the same specific pathogen-free (SPF) facility were found to have different gut microbiota and a mucus phenotype that was specific for each colony. The thickness and growth of the colon mucus were similar in the two colonies. However, one colony had mucus that was impenetrable to bacteria or beads the size of bacteria-which is comparable to what we observed in free-living wild mice-whereas the other colony had an inner mucus layer penetrable to bacteria and beads. The different properties of the mucus depended on the microbiota, as they were transmissible by transfer of caecal microbiota to germ-free mice. Mice with an impenetrable mucus layer had increased amounts of Erysipelotrichi, whereas mice with a penetrable mucus layer had higher levels of Proteobacteria and TM7 bacteria in the distal colon mucus. Thus, our study shows that bacteria and their community structure affect mucus barrier properties in ways that can have implications for health and disease. It also highlights that genetically identical animals housed in the same facility can have rather distinct microbiotas and barrier structures.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Mucus, Colon, Ileum

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology University of Gothenburg Sweden
Biomedicinska inst

### Submitter
Ana M. Rodriguez-Pineiro

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar C. Hansson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology University of Gothenburg Sweden


