### Accession
PXD044169

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of sponge whole-body movement

### Description
Sponges (Porifera) are early-branching Metazoa who do not possess muscles or neurons, however are able to undergo a whole-body movement that involves the closure of their canal system and collapse of an epithelial tent. In this study we profile proteomic responses of the freshwater sponge Spongilla lacustris during nitric oxide (NO) and agitation induced movements to elucidate the early evolution of coordination. Specifically, we measure condition-dependent changes in protein thermal stability and abundance using Thermal proteome profiling (TPP). These changes are the result of proteins undergoing stabilizing or destabilizing conformational changes broadly caused by e.g. the binding or dissociation of small molecules to the proteins, the formation or loss of protein-protein interactions or a change in post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
TPP for NOC-12/NO-donor and agitated sponges were done in slightly different ways:   NOC-12/NO-donor (45.5 uM) treatment   4 x 45 Spongilla lacustris gemmules were plated in 20 mL M-Medium (1 mM CaCl2 x 6 H2O, 0.5 mM MgSO4 x 7 H2O, 0.5 mM NaHCO3, 0.05 mM KCl, 0.25 mM Na2SiO3) (in 55 mm culture dishes) and kept at 18°C in the dark. Untreated sponges (2 replicates) were harvested and dissociated in 1.5 mL M-medium and 10 equal aliquots of 150 uL were distributed in PCR tubes. Two plates were treated with 1.5 mL M-medium containing 45.5 uM NOC-12. 5 min after treatment (movement validated via brightfield microscopy), sponges were harvested and distributed in PCR tubes similarly. Each aliquot was heated for three minutes to a different temperature (20.0-30.4-32.6-37.0-41.0-44.8-49.9-55.1-61.1-67.2°C). Lysis buffer (final concentration 0.8% NP-40 (Sigma, #276855), 1.5mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor (Roche), phosphatase inhibitor (Roche), 0.4 U/ml benzonase (Merck, #71206-3) was added and cells were incubated at 4°C for one hour. Protein aggregates were removed by centrifugation (0.45 um filter plate, Merck, #MSHVN4550). From the soluble fraction the protein concentration was determined (BCA assay) and for sample preparation 10 mg protein (based on two lowest temperatures) were taken further. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin/Lys-C with the SP3 protocol. Peptides were labeled with TMT10plex (Thermo, #90111). Pairs of two temperatures for control and treated samples were combined in one TMT experiment. Pooled samples were fractionated on a reversed phase C18 system running under high pH conditions, resulting in twelve fractions.   Agitation   TPP of agitated sponges was part of an extended TPP experiment including 8 different conditions, six of which are not discussed more specifically. In total, 16 x 30 Spongilla lacustris gemmules were plated in 20 mL filtered lake water (collection from Lake Constance, Germany) (in 55 mm culture dishes) and kept at 18°C in the dark. Movement was induced by agitation (5 min, 500 rpm) in two plated and confirmed via brightfield microscopy. Sponges were harvested and distributed in PCR tubes similarly. Each aliquot was heated for three minutes to a different temperature (30.4-32.6-37.0-41.0-44.8-49.4-49.9-50.5-52.6-57.0-61.1-64.9-69.5°C). Lysis buffer (final concentration 0.8% NP-40 (Sigma, #276855), 1.5mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor (Roche), phosphatase inhibitor (Roche), 0.4 U/ml benzonase (Merck, #71206-3)) was added and cells were incubated at 4°C for one hour. Protein aggregates were removed by centrifugation (0.45 um filter plate, Merck, #MSHVN4550). From the soluble fraction the protein concentration was determined (BCA assay) and for sample preparation 10 mg protein (based on two lowest temperatures) were taken further. Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin/Lys-C with the SP3 protocol. Peptides were labeled with TMT16plex (Thermo, A44522). Pairs of two temperatures for control and treated samples were combined in one TMT experiment. Pooled samples were fractionated on a reversed phase C18 system running under high pH conditions, resulting in twelve fractions.   LC-MS/MS measurements were conducted identical for both TPP experiments. Online fractionation was done an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5 mm, 300 mm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 A˚) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 mm x 50 cm C18, 3 mm, 100 A˚). Solvent A 99.9% LC-MS grade water (Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid, solvent B 99.9% acetonitrile (Thermo Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid. Flow rate loading 30ul/min, separation at 0.3ml/min. Pico-Tip Emitter 360 mm OD x 20 mm ID; 10 mm tip (New Objective). Gradient (120 min): 2% to 4% B in 4 min, from 4% to 8% in 2 min, 8% to 28% in 96 min, and from 28% to 40% in another 10 min. A column cleaning step using 80% B for 3 min was applied before the system was set again to its initial conditions (2% B) for re-equilibration for 10 minutes. MS equipment: Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Nanospray-Flex ion source. MS settings (Spray voltage: 2.3 kV, Capillary temperature: 275 ˚C, Full scan mass range 375-1200 m/z, MS1 Orbitrap resolution: 70000, MS1 Maximum IT: 10 ms, MS1 AGC target: 3e6, MS2 resolution: 35000, MS2 AGC target: 2e5, MS2 maximum IT: 120 ms, TopN: 10, MS2 isolation window: 0.7, MS2 fixed first mass: 100, MS2 nCE: 32, MS2 dynamic exclusion: 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed with IsobarQuant and peptide and protein identification was performed with the Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science) search engine. Data was searched against a custom Spongilla lacustris proteome (proteins with minimal length of 70 aa identified from transcriptome with TransDecoder (version 3.0.1)) including known contaminants and the reversed protein sequences. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex (NOC12 treatment)/TMT16plex (agitation) on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex/TMT16plex on peptide N-termini. The raw output files of IsobarQuant (protein.txt – files) were processed using the R programming language. Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. Moreover, only proteins which were identified in at least two mass spec runs in one of the lowest temperatures (23 °C or 30.4 °C for NOC12-treatment, 23 °C or 30.9 °C for agitation treatment) and identified in at least 2 mass spec runs (NOC12-treatment) or 5 mass spec runs (agitation; part of a larger experiment comparing 8 different treatments) over all temperatures were kept for the analysis. 6314 proteins passed the quality control filters in the NOC12-treatment experiment. 3363 proteins passed the quality control filters in the agitation experiment. Raw TMT reporter ion intensities (‘signal_sum’ columns) were first cleaned for batch effects using limma and further normalized using vsn (variance stabilization normalization). Different normalization coefficients were estimated for each temperature. Abundance and stability scores were calculated as indicated in Mateus, A., Hevler, J., Bobonis, J. et al. The functional proteome landscape of Escherichia coli. Nature 588, 473–478 (2020). A treatment / control ratio was calculated for each temperature and replicate separately. The abundance score was estimated by calculating an average ratio of the first two temperatures (23 °C and 30.4 °C (NOC-12) / 30.9 °C (agitation)) for each replicate. The remaining ratios were then divided by the respective abundance average and summed up to calculate the stability score. Abundance and stability score were transformed into a z-distribution using the ‘scale’ function of R. In order to estimate the significance, abundance and stability scores for each replicate have been tested for difference using limma. The number of identifications in the different temperatures for each replicate has been used as a weight. The t-values (output of limma) were analyzed with the ‘fdrtool’ function of the fdrtool package in order to extract p-values and false discovery rates (fdr - q-values). A protein was annotated as a hit with an absolute score above 3 and a fdr below 0.01 and as a candidate with an absolute score above 2 and a below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
A hallmark of animals is the coordination of whole-body movement. Neurons and muscles are central to this, yet coordinated movements also exist in sponges that lack these cell types. Sponges are sessile animals with a complex canal system for filter-feeding. They undergo whole-body movements resembling "contractions" that lead to canal closure and water expulsion. Here, we combine live 3D optical coherence microscopy, pharmacology, and functional proteomics to elucidate the sequence and detail of shape changes, the tissues and molecular physiology involved, and the control of these movements. Morphometric analysis and targeted perturbation suggest that the movement is driven by the relaxation of actomyosin stress fibers in epithelial canal cells, which leads to whole-body deflation via collapse of the incurrent and expansion of the excurrent canal system. Thermal proteome profiling and quantitative phosphoproteomics confirm the control of cellular relaxation by an Akt/NO/PKG/PKA pathway. Agitation-induced deflation leads to differential phosphorylation of proteins forming epithelial cell junctions, implying their mechanosensitive role. Unexpectedly, untargeted metabolomics detect a concomitant decrease in antioxidant molecules during deflation, reflecting an increase in reactive oxygen species. Together with the secretion of proteinases, cytokines, and granulin, this indicates an inflammation-like state of the deflating sponge reminiscent of vascular endothelial cells experiencing oscillatory shear stress. These results suggest the conservation of an ancient relaxant-inflammatory response of perturbed fluid-carrying systems in animals and offer a possible mechanism for whole-body coordination through diffusible paracrine signals and mechanotransduction.

### Keywords
Actomyosin, Tpp, Evolution, Spongilla

### Affiliations
EMBL
Developmental Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany  Proteomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Detlev Arendt
Developmental Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany  Proteomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany


