### Accession
PXD002105

### Title
California sea lion cerebrospinal fluid LC-MS/MS

### Description
We conducted a pilot label-free LC-MS/MS study to profile and compare the cerebral spinal fluid from California sea lions with domoic acid toxicosis and without domoic acid toxicosis. CSF samples from a 8 animals with DAT and 3 controls were run on a nano LC-MS/MS (Triple TOF) and searched against a mammalian database.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of frozen were thawed at 37 °C for 1 min, vortexed and 50 µL was transferred to a fresh vial. To this, five volumes of ice cold acetone was added and placed in -20 °C overnight. Next, the samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was removed, and rinsed with five volumes of ice cold acetone. This was repeated two more times. After the final removal of supernatant, the acetone was removed under vacuum and centrifugation for 30 s. At this point the samples were randomized to limit technical bias. To each pellet, 50 µL of a RapiGest (0.1% in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added and let sit overnight at 4 °C. Prior to digestion with trypsin, the solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Then the solutions were transferred to fresh vials, and trypsin (Gold; Promega) was added at 1:50 (trypsin:CSF protein), and final volumes were brought to 100 µL with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion occurred at 37 °C for 18 h. The digestion was halted with 900 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. These were desalted using solid phase extraction (60 mg/mL Strata-X 33u polymeric reversed phase, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA), by washed three times with 0.1% formic acid followed by 5 % acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid, then keeping the eluent from 1 mL of 60% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid. These samples were reduced to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge at low heat then stored at -20 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to peak lists in the mgf format using the using the AB Sciex MS Data Converter (v. 1.1 beta, July 2011). These data were searched using the Mascot algorithm (v. 2.4.1; Matrix Science) against a mammalian database. This database was created using the 2015_01 releases of the SwissProt, SwissProt varsplic and TrEMBL databases from UniProt. Within Mascot the mammalian taxon ID, 40674, was specified, as well as the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine), resulting in 1,319,830 sequences. The following search parameters were used: trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for two mis-cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed and deamidated (NQ) and oxidation (M) were variable modifications; 30 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance; instrument type was specified as ESI-QUAD-TOF; a decoy database was used within Mascot to provide local FDR. These database and precursor tolerances were confirmed as optimal since they provided the highest number of identified proteins and the lowest local FDR when compared to searches that did not use TrEMBL and/or used a species subset as was previously utilized by our lab. Briefly this species subset consisted of Ailuropoda melanoleuca (Giant Panda; 9646), Canis lupus familiaris (Dog; 9615), Homo sapiens (Human; 9606), Sus scrofa (Pig; 9823), Bos taurus (Bovine; 9913), Mus musculus (Mouse; 10090), and Zalophus californianus (California sea lion; 9704). Mascot results were confirmed using Scaffold (3.6.5), with a minimum protein confidence of 99 % confidence, two peptides, and 80% peptide confidence. Experiment wide grouping was used which resulted in 206 proteins identified at >0.1% FDR. The unweighted spectrum counts were exported from Scaffold for statistical analysis in R (v. 3.1.2).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic studies including marine mammals are rare, largely due to the lack of fully sequenced genomes. This has hampered the application of these techniques toward biomarker discovery efforts for monitoring of health and disease in these animals. We conducted a pilot label-free LC-MS/MS study to profile and compare the cerebrospinal fluid from California sea lions with domoic acid toxicosis (DAT) and without DAT. Across 11 samples, a total of 206 proteins were identified (FDR&lt;0.1) using a composite mammalian database. Several peptide identifications were validated using stable isotope labeled peptides. Comparison of spectral counts revealed seven proteins that were elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid from sea lions with DAT: complement C3, complement factor B, dickkopf-3, malate dehydrogenase 1, neuron cell adhesion molecule 1, gelsolin, and neuronal cell adhesion molecule. Immunoblot analysis found reelin to be depressed in the cerebrospinal fluid from California sea lions with DAT. Mice administered domoic acid also had lower hippocampal reelin protein levels suggesting that domoic acid depresses reelin similar to kainic acid. In summary, proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in marine mammals is a useful tool to characterize the underlying molecular pathology of neurodegenerative disease. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002105 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002105).

### Keywords
California sea lion, Cerebrospinal fluid, Domoic acid

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, and Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Michael G. Janech
Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, and Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA


