### Accession
PXD041184

### Title
Grafting systems for plant cadmium research: insights for basic plant physiology and applied mitigation

### Description
Cadmium (Cd) is a highly toxic and carcinogenic pollutant that poses a threat to human and animal health by affecting several major organ systems. Urbanization and human activities have led to significant increases in Cd concentration in the environment, including in agroecosystems. To protect against the harmful effects of Cd, efforts are being made to promote safe crop production and to clean up Cd-contaminated agricultural lands and water, reducing Cd exposure through the consumption of contaminated agricultural products. There is a need for management strategies that can improve plant Cd tolerance and reduce Cd accumulation in crop plant tissues, all of which involve understanding the impacts of Cd on plant physiology and metabolism. Grafting, a longstanding plant propagation technique, has been shown to be a useful approach for studying the effects of Cd on plants, including insights into the signaling between organs and organ-specific modulation of plant performance under this form of environmental stress. In this review, we aim to highlight the current state of knowledge on the use of grafting to gain insights into Cd-induced effects as well as its potential applicability in safe crop production and phytoremediation. In particular, we emphasize the utility of heterograft systems for assessment of Cd accumulation, biochemical and molecular responses, and tolerance in crop and other plant species under Cd exposure, as well as potential intergenerational effects. We outline our perspectives and future directions for research in this area and the potential practical applicability of plant grafting, with attention to the most obvious gaps in knowledge. We aim at inspiring researchers to explore the potential of grafting for modulating Cd tolerance and accumulation and for understanding the mechanisms of Cd-induced responses in plants for both agricultural safety and phytoremediation purposes. Finally, it is important to bear in mind that although we have address Cd in this review, the idea can be applied to the large majority of abiotic and biotic stressors.

### Sample Protocol
Grafts of Solanum lycopersicum cv. Calabash Rouge (CR) and Solanum lycopersicum cv. Pusa Ruby (PR) (which have been classified and further characterized as sensitive (S) and tolerant (T) to Cd, respectively (Marques et al. 2023)) were used in this study. Two graft combinations (S/S: sensitive scion grafted onto sensitive rootstock; S/T: sensitive scion grafted onto tolerant rootstock) were grown in a hydroponic system according to the growth conditions described in Marques et al. (2023), in either control (Cd-free) or Cd-containing (35 μM CdCl2) hydroponic solution. The use of 35 μM was based on the work of Piotto et al. (2018), which indicated this concentration as suitable for examining and screening tomato lines for tolerance/sensitivity to Cd toxicity after short-term exposure. Four biological replicates of fresh leaves were sampled from treatment and control groups 4 days after Cd treatment onset and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and subsequently stored at − 80 °C until further freeze-drying. The choice of Cd exposure for 4 days was based on the work of Borges et al. (2019), which performed the first quantitative proteomic analysis of the PR and CR genotypes. This period is sufficient for plants to recognize the stress, but short enough to avoid severe damage to the sensitive genotype (Marques et al. 2021). Protein extraction from the freeze-dried leaves, protein preparation, LC–MS/MS data acquisition, and data analysis were performed as described below. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al. 2019) partner repository with the dataset identifier XXX.  Protein extraction and fractionation Dried tomato leaves were grinded in a Retsch mill with Zirkonia beads for 5 min at 30 Hz. To the finely ground plant material 600-800 µL urea/DTT extraction buffer (8M urea/5mM DTT in 100mM Tris, pH 8.5/ protease inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (Sigma) (20 µL/mL)) was added, samples were mixed and incubated for 30 min at RT. After centrifugation for 10 min (10k x g) at RT the supernatant was removed and transferred to a fresh tube, this procedure was repeated up to 3 times, until no visible pellet was retained.  Protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660 nm protein assay. Samples were alkylated using chloroacetamide (CAA) (550 mM stock, 14 mM final concentration) for 30 min at RT in the dark, after which an aliquot corresponding to 50 µg total protein was subjected to in-solution digestion. In brief, samples were diluted with 50 µL 100mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1mM CaCl2, then 0.5 µg Lys-C (WAKO) was added. Samples were incubated for 4h at 37 °C with shaking, after which 300 µL 100mM Tris, pH 8.5 and 0.5 µg trypsin were added. Samples were incubated o/n at 37 °C with shaking. Samples were acidified with 4 µL 50% TFA and split up for single BoxCar samples and library samples: For the library samples 40 µL of each condition per replicate were mixed and submitted to SCX fractionation. To this end, StageTips were prepared using 6 layers of SPE disk (Empore Cation 2251 material) activated with acetonitrile and 1% TFA (100 µL each) and washed with buffer A (water, 0.2% TFA) (100 µL) by spinning 5 min (1.5k x g), samples were acidified to 1 % TFA, loaded by centrifugation (10 min, 800 x g) and washed with buffer A (5 min, 1.5k x g) (100 µL). Fractionation was carried out using an ammonium acetate gradient (20% ACN, 0.5 % FA) starting from 25 mM to 500 mM for 9 fractions and two final elution steps using 1% ammonium acetate, 80% ACN and finally 5% ammonium acetate, 80% ACN. All fractions were eluted by centrifugation (5 min, 500 x g) using 2 x 30 µL eluent. The fractions were dried and taken up in 10 µL A* buffer. Peptide concentration was determined by Nanodrop and samples were diluted to 0.2 µg/µL for measurement. For the BoxCar analysis, the remaining samples were desalted with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al. 2003). The eluted peptides were dried and then taken up in 10 µL A* buffer. Peptide concentration was determined by Nanodrop and samples were diluted to 0.2 µg/µL for measurement.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquisition Library samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors. BoxCar samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-independent manner using the MaxQuant.Live application (Wichmann et al. 2019). The acquisition was initiated using the “magic scan” protocol and consisted of one full MS scan with a a mass range of 300–1650 m/z at a resolution of 140,000 FWHM, a target value of 3×106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. This was followed by two BoxCar scans, each consisting of 10 boxes with 1 Da overlap and a scan range from 400-1200 m/z. The maximum injection time for a BoxCar scan was set to 250 ms, with a resolution of 140,000 FWHM, a target value of 5×105 ions. The 5 most abundant ions from each BoxCar scan were selected for HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 28 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 50. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 5 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.  Data analysis Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann 2008) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Tyanova et al. 2016). Library samples and BoxCar samples were grouped into separate parameter groups. In the group specific parameters, library samples were set to “Standard” type and BoxCar samples to “BoxCar” type, in the Misc. setting the Match type for library samples was set to “match from” and for BoxCar to “match from and to”.  MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from Solanum lycopersicum (ITAG3.2_proteins.fasta;  ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG3.2_release/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The match between runs option was enabled. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1% in both cases.  Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “only identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had three valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5%. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Cadmium (Cd) is a highly toxic and carcinogenic pollutant that poses a threat to human and animal health by affecting several major organ systems. Urbanization and human activities have led to significant increases in Cd concentration in the environment, including in agroecosystems. To protect against the harmful effects of Cd, efforts are being made to promote safe crop production and to clean up Cd-contaminated agricultural lands and water, reducing Cd exposure through the consumption of contaminated agricultural products. There is a need for management strategies that can improve plant Cd tolerance and reduce Cd accumulation in crop plant tissues, all of which involve understanding the impacts of Cd on plant physiology and metabolism. Grafting, a longstanding plant propagation technique, has been shown to be a useful approach for studying the effects of Cd on plants, including insights into the signaling between organs and organ-specific modulation of plant performance under this form of environmental stress. Grafting can be applied to the large majority of abiotic and biotic stressors. In this review, we aim to highlight the current state of knowledge on the use of grafting to gain insights into Cd-induced effects as well as its potential applicability in safe crop production and phytoremediation. In particular, we emphasize the utility of heterograft systems for assessment of Cd accumulation, biochemical and molecular responses, and tolerance in crop and other plant species under Cd exposure, as well as potential intergenerational effects. We outline our perspectives and future directions for research in this area and the potential practical applicability of plant grafting, with attention to the most obvious gaps in knowledge. We aim at inspiring researchers to explore the potential of grafting for modulating Cd tolerance and accumulation and for understanding the mechanisms of Cd-induced responses in plants for both agricultural safety and phytoremediation purposes.

### Keywords
Abiotic stress; cadmium mitigation; environmental research; heavy metals; plant grafting; stress tolerance

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


