### Accession
PXD005304

### Title
In-depth proteomics analysis of nicotinamide responses in triple negative breast cancer cells

### Description
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by an aggressive biologic behavior without specific targeted agent. Nicotinamide has recently been proven as a novel therapeutic agent for skin tumors in ONTRAC trial. Here we performed in-depth proteomes to characterize network of molecular interactions in TNBC cells treated by nicotinamide. Proteome profiles identified nicotinamide drives significant functional alterations related to major cellular pathways, including cell cycle, DNA replication, apoptosis and DNA damage repair. We further elaborated global signaling networks of molecular events with nicotinamide inducible expression changes in protein levels. This approach reveals that nicotinamide treatment rewires signaling networks towards dysfunction of DNA damage repair and away form a pro-growth state in TNBC. To our knowledge, our results of high resolution signaling network interactions provides the first evidence to comprehensively support the hypothesis of nicotinamide as a novel therapeutic agent in TNBC.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 cells were lysed in SDS-lysis buffer by 5 min sonication. After measurement of protein concentration using BCA reducing agent-compatible kit, 100ug of proteins were precipitated overnight at -20℃ using acetone. Proteins were digested by FASP procedure as described with some modifications. Protein pellets were resolved in SDT buffer (4% SDS and 0.1M DTT in 0.1M TEAB pH 8.0) and loaded onto a 30K amicon filter (Millipore). Buffer was exchanged with UA solution (8M Urea in 0.1M TEAB pH8.5) by centrifugation at 14,000g. Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 50mM IAA solution for 30 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. After exchanging buffer with 50mM TEAB, protein digestion was performed at 37℃ overnight with trypsin/LysC mixture at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling was performed according to manufacturer’s instruction with some modification. The TMT-labeled peptide pooled mixtures were fractionated using a Agilent 1260 bioinert  HPLC (Agilent, Santa Clara, Ca) equipped with an analytical column (4.6 X 250mm, 5 um). High-pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography was performed at a flow rate of 0.8 ml/min during 60min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software interfaced SEQUEST-HT search engine, based on Human Uniprot database (December 2014, 88,657 entries),  including forward and reverse proteins sequences and common contaminants. Searches were performed using a 10 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamido methylation  of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues (+0.98 Da) were set as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by an aggressive biological behavior in the absence of a specific target agent. Nicotinamide has recently been proven to be a novel therapeutic agent for skin tumors in an ONTRAC trial. We performed combinatory transcriptomic and in-depth proteomic analyses to characterize the network of molecular interactions in TNBC cells treated with nicotinamide. The multi-omic profiles revealed that nicotinamide drives significant functional alterations related to major cellular pathways, including the cell cycle, DNA replication, apoptosis and DNA damage repair. We further elaborated the global interaction networks of molecular events via nicotinamide-inducible expression changes at the mRNA and functional protein levels. This approach indicated that nicotinamide treatment rewires interaction networks toward dysfunction in DNA damage repair and away from a pro-growth state in TNBC. To our knowledge, the high-resolution network interactions identified in the present study provide the first evidence to comprehensively support the hypothesis of nicotinamide as a novel therapeutic agent in TNBC.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Tmt, Nicotinamide, Tnbc, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
Proteomics core facility, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Seoul National University Hospital


