### Accession
PXD004800

### Title
Analysis of the yeast peptidome and comparison with the human peptidome

### Description
Peptides function as signaling molecules in species as diverse as humans and yeast. Mass spectrometry-based peptidomics techniques provide a relatively unbiased method to assess the peptidome of biological samples. In the present study, we used a quantitative peptidomic technique to characterize the peptidome of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and compare it to the peptidomes of mammalian cell lines and tissues. Altogether, 297 yeast peptides derived from 75 proteins were identified. The yeast peptides are similar to those of the human peptidome in average size and amino acid composition. Inhibition of proteasome activity with either bortezomib or epoxomicin led to decreased levels of some yeast peptides, suggesting that these peptides are generated by the proteasome. Approximately 30% of the yeast peptides correspond to the N- or C-terminus of the protein; the human peptidome is also highly represented in N- or C-terminal protein fragments. Most yeast and humans peptides are derived from a subset of abundant proteins, many with functions involving cellular metabolism or protein synthesis and folding. Of the 75 yeast proteins that give rise to peptides, 24 have orthologs that give rise to human and/or mouse peptides and for some, the same region of the proteins are found in the human, mouse, and yeast peptidomes. Taken together, these results support the hypothesis that intracellular peptides may have specific and conserved biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Isotopic labeling Quantitative peptidomics was performed using isotopic forms of trimethylammonium butyrate (TMAB) activated with N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS), synthesized and used as described previously. Each group within an experiment (control/treated) was labeled with a different isotopic tag. The TMAB-NHS labels were dissolved in DMSO to a concentration of 400 µg/µL and 7.5 mg of label was used per sample. The pH of the peptide extract was adjusted to 9.5 with 1 M NaOH at the start of the experiment. Labeling was performed over 8 rounds; 2.3 µL of the label was added to the extract every 20 min. The pH was measured between each round and if necessary, brought back to 9.5 for the first five rounds. For rounds 6-8, the pH was not adjusted after the addition of the TMAB-NHS reagent. After the final round of labeling, the pH was adjusted to 9.5 again, extracts were incubated at room temperature for 90 min, following which 30 µL of 2.5 M glycine was added to quench unreacted label. After 40 min of incubation at room temperature, the labeled extracts for a single experiment were pooled and filtered through Amicon Ultracel-10 K units. 30 µL of a 2 M solution of hydroxylamine hydrochloride was added over three rounds to the pooled and filtered sample to hydrolyze any labeled tyrosines. The pH was measured after the addition of hydroxylamine and adjusted to 9.0 with 1 M NaOH. Samples were desalted through C-18 spin columns and peptides were eluted using 160 μL of 0.5% TFA and 70% acetonitrile. Samples were freeze-dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at −80ºC until analysis by mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry   The LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity capillary liquid chromatography (LC) system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptide mixture was desalted online for 3 min at a flow rate of 5 µL/min of phase A (0.1% formic acid) using a Symmetry C18 trapping column (5-µm particles, 180-µm inner diameters, 20-mm length; Waters). The mixture of trapped peptides was subsequently separated by elution with a gradient of 7-65% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through a BEH 130 C18 column (1.7-µm particles, 75-µm inner diameters, 100-mm length; Waters) in 42 min. The data were acquired in the data-dependent mode and the MS spectra of multiple-charged protonated peptides generated by electrospray ionization were acquired for 0.2 s from m/z 300-1600. The three most intense ions exceeding base peak intensity threshold of 2500 counts were automatically mass selected and dissociated in MS/MS by 15- to 60-eV collisions with argon for 0.2 s. The typical LC and electrospray ionization conditions consisted of a flow rate of 250 nL/min, a capillary voltage of 3.0 kV, a block temperature of 70°C, and a cone voltage of 50 V. The dynamic peak exclusion window was set to 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of relative peptide levels The MS spectra were manually evaluated. The intensity of the monoisotopic peaks of peptide containing each of the isotopic labels was logged into a spreadsheet. If a peptide was found with multiple charge states, the peak intensity of each state was averaged to arrive at a single number for the relative level of each isotopically-tagged form. Every experiment included two biological replicates of each treated and control group.  MS/MS identification of peptides Peptides were identified by MS/MS sequencing using the Mascot program (Matrix Science) followed by manual verification of the spectra using MassLynx, version 4.0 (Waters). The database searched was SwissProt_AC_20150324, limited to yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (7,904 sequences). No cleavage site was specified, and variable post-translational modifications selected for the searches included the TMAB labels (termed ‘GIST’ in Mascot), N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation, and cyanylation of Cys. The Mascot results were manually evaluated to exclude false positives, based on previously established criteria. These criteria are listed in Appendix 1 along with representative data showing the evaluation process for a peptide with a low Mascot score. Appendix 2 shows the evaluation of another peptide which failed to meet the criteria. The human peptidome was compiled from previous studies on human cell lines HEK293T, SH-SY5Y, and MCF-7 cell lines. In addition, recent peptidomic data using the RPMI-8226 cell line were included; these analyses were performed using identical procedures as those used for the other cell lines. Peptides detected in untreated cells were included in the compiled human peptidome database; those peptides only detected in cells treated with proteasome inhibitors or other reagents were excluded from the database. Supplemental files show the sequences (including cleavage sites) for the human peptides and their precursor proteins/genes. The mouse peptidome was previously reported.

### Publication Abstract
Peptides function as signaling molecules in species as diverse as humans and yeast. Mass spectrometry-based peptidomics techniques provide a relatively unbiased method to assess the peptidome of biological samples. In the present study, we used a quantitative peptidomic technique to characterize the peptidome of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and compare it to the peptidomes of mammalian cell lines and tissues. Altogether, 297 yeast peptides derived from 75 proteins were identified. The yeast peptides are similar to those of the human peptidome in average size and amino acid composition. Inhibition of proteasome activity with either bortezomib or epoxomicin led to decreased levels of some yeast peptides, suggesting that these peptides are generated by the proteasome. Approximately 30% of the yeast peptides correspond to the N- or C-terminus of the protein; the human peptidome is also highly represented in N- or C-terminal protein fragments. Most yeast and humans peptides are derived from a subset of abundant proteins, many with functions involving cellular metabolism or protein synthesis and folding. Of the 75 yeast proteins that give rise to peptides, 24 have orthologs that give rise to human and/or mouse peptides and for some, the same region of the proteins are found in the human, mouse, and yeast peptidomes. Taken together, these results support the hypothesis that intracellular peptides may have specific and conserved biological functions.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Proteasome, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Lloyd D. Fricker
Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA


