### Accession
PXD022002

### Title
Structure of the human signal peptidase complex

### Description
The ER-resident signal peptidase complex (SPC) is an essential membrane protein complex involved in the maturation of soluble and type-I transmembrane proteins destined to the secretory pathway. As a part of the ER translocon machinery, the SPC removes signal peptides (SPs) from the N-termini of many proteins such as hormones, antibodies, or secretory enzymes1,2. To accomplish this task, the SPC must process a large variety of SPs with an exquisite specificity. Although the determinants of SP recognition have been established empirically3, the molecular details of SP recognition and removal remain elusive. Here, we show that the human SPC exists in two functional paralogs with distinct proteolytic subunits. We determined the structures and posttranslational modifications of both paralogs using electron cryo-microscopy and structural proteomics. The respective proteolytic subunits SEC11A and SEC11C adopt a conserved signal peptidase (SPase) fold with their active sites facing a prominent transmembrane window, which is collectively formed by the transmembrane domains of all SPC subunits. Characteristic, charged regions on both sides of this window locally thin the membrane by approximately 40% compared to the exterior. The data suggest a mechanistic model for SPC specificity and the transfer of SPs from the Sec61 translocation channel to the SPC.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun MS Sample Preparation – Prior to lysis, cells were stored at -80˚C. Following mild centrifugation, the cell pellets were resuspended at a concentration of 1e6 cells per 100 µL of ice-cold lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris (pH 8), and EDTA-free mini protease inhibitor cocktail cOmplete (Sigma-Aldrich). The resuspended cell mixture was vortexed gently for 10 min and sonicated for five cycles of 30 s with a Bioraptor Plus (Diagenode SA) at 4˚C. The final protein concentration was measured using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An aliquot of ~50 µg cell lysate was reduced with freshly dissolved 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37˚C and alkylated with freshly dissolved iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37˚C in the dark. LysC (Wako Chemicals) was added at a 1:50 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio and the mixture was incubated for 3 h at 37˚C. Next, the mixture was diluted to 2 M final urea concentration with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added in 1:20 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio. Digestion was performed overnight at 37˚C, followed by quenching with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The digest was desalted using a Sep-Pac C18 1cc vacuum cartridge (Waters). The cartridge was washed twice with 100 % acetonitrile (ACN) and twice with 0.1 M acetic acid prior to sample loading. Elution was done with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1 M acetic acid in Milli-Q water. The desalted peptides were lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation to near-complete dryness. The final peptide mixture was resuspended in 2% (v/v) formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Intact mass and Top-down MS Sample Preparation – Samples stored in digitonin or amphipol-containing buffer were diluted to a final concentration of 0.2 µg/µL. Approximately 1 µg of sample was injected for a single top-down LC-MS(/MS) experiment. Cross-linking mass spectrometry Sample Preparation – Proteins were incubated with the cross-linking reagent PhoX10 for 45 min at room temperature (buffer conditions specified below). The cross-linking reaction was quenched by addition of Tris·HCl (100 mM, pH 7.5) to a final concentration of 10 mM. Cross-linked proteins were further purified from aggregation products by size exclusion chromatography on a Superose 6 increase column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with size exclusion buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.8, 85 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.09% (w/v) digitonin). The concentration of peak fractions ranged between 0.2 mg/mL (SPC-A) to 0.4 mg/mL (SPC-C). Crosslinked proteins were denatured by addition of urea (8 M in 100 mM Tris) and reduced by addition of DTT (final concentration of 2 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C, followed by alkylation with IAA (final concentration of 4 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C. Afterwards the sample was digested by incubation with a combination of LysC (1:75 enzyme to protein) and Trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein) for 10 h at 37 °C, after which formic acid (final concentration 1%) was added to stop the digestion. Finally, peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak C18 1cc vacuum cartridges (Waters) as described above. Cross-linked peptides were enriched with Fe(III)-NTA cartridges (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) in an automated fashion. Cartridges were primed at a flow rate of 100 μL/min with 250 μL of priming buffer (0.1% TFA, 99.9% ACN) and equilibrated at a flow-rate of 50 μL/min with 250 μL of loading buffer (0.1% TFA, 80% ACN). The flow-through was collected into a separate plate. Dried samples were dissolved in 200 μL of loading buffer and loaded at a flow-rate of 5 μL/min onto the cartridge. Cartridges were washed with 250 μL of loading buffer at a flow-rate of 20 μL/min and cross-linked peptides were eluted with 35 μL of 10% ammonia directly into 35 μL of 10% formic acid. Samples were dried down and stored at -20 °C prior to further use. Before to LC–MS/MS analysis, the samples were resuspended in 10% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Shotgun MS Data Analysis – Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform4 with standard settings applied. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the reviewed Human Uniprot database (date 15-07-2020; 20353 entries), with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant by default enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The iBAQ algorithm was used for calculation of approximate abundances for the identified proteins5, which normalizes the summed peptide intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides of the protein. In addition, we estimated the copy-numbers with the proteomics ruler approach6 implemented in the Perseus data analysis environment7 with standard settings applied. Intact mass and Top-down MS Data Analysis – Full MS spectra were deconvoluted with either Xtract or ReSpect (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for isotopically-resolved or unresolved data, respectively. Automated proteoform searches against a custom sequence database were performed in Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.0.305) extended with the ProSightPD 3.0 nodes. Parameters were set as follows. ReSpect: precursor m/z tolerance – 0.2 Th; relative abundance threshold – 0%; precursor mass range – 3-100 kDa; precursor mass tolerance – 30 ppm; charge range – 3-100. Xtract: signal/noise threshold – 3; m/z range – 500-3,000 Th. Initially, a large precursor tolerance window of 5 kDa was used to allow for detection of unknown PTMs and sequence processing followed by cycles of database filtering and sequence adjustment to determine a final set of isoforms/proteoforms. For the final database search, ProSightPD parameters were: precursor mass tolerance – 500 Da; fragment mass tolerance – 20 ppm. To verify unreported isoforms/proteoforms, in-house R and C# scripts were used to group replicate fragmentation scans for a precursor of interest followed by automated fragment annotation and manual spectrum inspection. A similar approach was used to characterize unidentified abundant precursors. Representation of proteoforms per protein was achieved by summing full MS scans per protein elution peak and converting spectra to zero-charged mass profiles in UniDec9. Cross-linking mass spectrometry Data Analysis – The acquired raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.0.388) with the XlinkX/PD nodes integrated10 The linear peptides search was performed using the standard Mascot node as the search engine with the full Human database  (20,230 entries, downloaded from UniProt downloaded at 2018_01entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation was set as dynamic modification. For the search of mono-links, water-quenched (C8H5O6P) and Tris-quenched (C12H14O8PN) were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme with a minimal peptide length of six and up to two miss cleavages were allowed. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level was applied through the Percolator node. For crosslinked peptides, a database search was performed against a FASTA containing the sequences of the proteins under investigation supplemented with a common contaminants list of 200 proteins using XlinkX/PD nodes for cross-link analysis. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Furthermore, identifications were only accepted with a minimal score of 40 and a minimal delta score of 4. Otherwise, standard settings were applied. Filtering at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide level was applied through the XlinkX Validator node with setting simple.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crosslinking ms, Signal peptidase complex, Cryoem

### Affiliations
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Richard A. Scheltema
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


