### Accession
PXD029353

### Title
Discovery of the Xenon-Protein Interactome using Large-Scale Measurements of Protein Folding and Stability

### Description
The intermolecular interactions of noble gases in biological systems are associated with numerous biochemical responses, including apoptosis, inflammation, anesthesia, analgesia, and neuroprotection. The molecular modes of action underlying these responses are largely unknown. This is in large part due to the limited experimental techniques to study protein-gas interactions.  The few techniques that are amenable to such studies are relatively low throughput and require large amounts of purified proteins.  Thus, they do not enable the large-scale analyses that are useful for protein-target discovery.  Here we report the application of Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) and limited proteolysis (LiP) methodologies to detect protein-xenon interactions on the proteomic scale using protein folding stability measurements. Over 5,000 methionine-containing peptides and semi-tryptic peptides, mapping to ~1,500 and ~950 proteins in a yeast cell lysate, respectively, were assayed for Xe-interacting activity using the SPROX and LiP techniques. The SPROX and LiP analyses identified 31 and 60 Xe-interacting proteins, respectively, none of which were previously known to bind Xe. A bioinformatics analysis of the proteomic results revealed that these Xe-interacting proteins were enriched in those involved in ATP-driven processes. A fraction of the protein targets that were identified is tied to previously established modes of action related to xenon’s anesthetic and organoprotective properties. These results enrich our knowledge and understanding of biologically relevant xenon interactions, and the sample preparation protocols and analytical methodologies developed here for xenon should be applicable to the discovery of a wide range of protein-gas interactions in complex biological mixtures, including cell lysates.

### Sample Protocol
Protein stability samples were generated using a previously established one-pot SPROX methodology. To remove small molecules from the yeast lysates, they were denatured in ~8 M urea (PBS 1x, pH 7.4) at 37oC for 30 minutes and then buffer-exchanged and renatured in 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters with PBS (1x, pH 7.4). Aliquots of each filtered yeast lysate (normalized to 2 mg/mL) were distributed into a series of 12 GdmCl-containing buffers (PBS 1x, pH 7.4) where the final concentrations of GdmCl were equally spaced at 0.15 M intervals between 0.5 and 2.15 M. GdmCl-containing buffers and yeast lysates were incubated with air or with xenon, using the developed freeze-pump-thaw protocol. Protein was then distributed into each GdmCl-containing buffer, where the total amount of protein in each sample was 20 µg. The samples in the GdmCl-containing buffers were incubated for 1 h at 4oC before hydrogen peroxide was added to each of the (+) and (-) xenon samples in the denaturant-containing buffers. The oxidation reactions proceeded for 3 min before they were quenched upon addition of 500 µL of a 1 M TCEP solution. Equal aliquots of the (+) xenon sample solutions were combined, as were equal aliquots of the (-) xenon samples. The above procedure was performed on 5 separate yeast lysates. This ultimately generated 5 (+) and (-) ligand sample pairs for a total of 10 samples. Samples were transferred to 10K centrifugal filter units, where a filter-aided bottom-up proteomic sample preparation with trypsin digestion and isobaric mass tag labeling was employed. The samples were then combined into one final sample that was desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Limited proteolysis samples were generated using a previously established STEPP-LiP methodology. Cell lysates were prepared similarly to those for the SPROX experiments. Samples containing 100 µg of protein were reacted with 1 µg of proteinase K for 5 minutes at RT. Proteinase K digestion was quenched upon the addition of 5 mM PMSF. Samples were subsequently reacted with TCEP/MMTS and labeled with isobaric mass tags. The samples were then combined into one final sample that was digested with trypsin and subjected to a chemo-selection procedure for semi-tryptic peptides. The final combined sample was desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
One-Pot SPROX Proteomic Data Analysis.  Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo) was used to search the raw LC-MS/MS files against the yeast proteins in the 2017-10-25 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase. The raw LC-MS/MS data generated in the protein expression experiments was searched using fixed MMTS modification on cysteine; TMT10-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini; variable oxidation of methionine; variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and variable acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin (full) was set as the enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. For peptide and protein quantification, reporter abundance was set as intensity, normalization mode and scaling mode were each set as none. All other settings were left as the default values. Only methionine-containing peptides with protein/peptide FDR confidence labelled as "high" or “medium” (i.e., FDR <0.01% or <0.05%) were used for subsequent analyses. Peptides with any of the ten TMT-tag signal intensities equaling zero were removed. For each condition (TMT-tag), a normalization factor was calculated from the average of all the intensities for that tag. The signal intensities used in experiment were the reporter ion intensities from the wild-type (nonoxidized) methionine-containing peptides generated in Proteome Discoverer. For each identified wild-type methionine-containing peptide in the SPROX experiment a ratio of the observed reporter ion intensities in the (+) ligand sample to the (-) ligand sample was generated for each biological replicate. The resulting ratio was divided by the normalization factor for each of the 5 biological replicates. These final normalized protein stability ratios (fold changes) were then log-2-base transformed, averaged, and subjected to a Student’s two-tailed t-test comparing to a mean of zero. Hit peptides were identified based on three criteria: (i) the peptide must have a significantly altered log2(fold change) value (≥2σ deviation from mean log2(fold change) of all replicates), (ii) the log2(fold change) value must be significantly different from zero, as determined by the Student’s two-tailed t-test (p-value ≤ 0.05), and (iii) the observation of similar hit behaviors between wild-type and modified versions of the same peptide. STEPP-LiP Proteomic Data Analysis.  Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo) was used to search the raw LC-MS/MS files against the yeast proteins in the 2017-10-25 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase. The raw LC-MS/MS data generated in the protein expression experiments was searched using fixed MMTS modification on cysteine; TMT10-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini; variable oxidation of methionine; variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and variable acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin (semi) was set as the enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. For peptide and protein quantification, reporter abundance was set as intensity, normalization mode and scaling mode were each set as none. All other settings were left as the default values. Only semi-tryptic peptides with protein/peptide FDR confidence labelled as "high" or “medium” (i.e., FDR <0.01% or <0.05%) were used for subsequent analyses. Peptides with any of the ten TMT-tag signal intensities equaling zero were removed.  For each condition (TMT-tag), a normalization factor was calculated from the average of all the intensities for that tag. The signal intensities used in experiment were the reporter ion intensities from the semi-tryptic peptides generated in Proteome Discoverer. For each identified semi-tryptic peptide in the LiP experiment a ratio of the observed reporter ion intensities in the (+) ligand sample to the (-) ligand sample was generated for each biological replicate. The resulting ratio was divided by the normalization factor for each of the 5 biological replicates. These final normalized protein stability ratios (fold changes) were then log-2-base transformed, averaged, and subjected to a Student’s two-tailed t-test comparing to a mean of zero. Hit peptides were identified based on three criteria: (i) the peptide must have a significantly altered log2(fold change) value (≥2σ deviation from mean log2(fold change) of all replicates), (ii) the log2(fold change) value must be significantly different from zero, as determined by the Student’s two-tailed t-test (p-value ≤ 0.05), and (iii) the observation of similar hit behaviors between wild-type and modified versions of the same peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The intermolecular interactions of noble gases in biological systems are associated with numerous biochemical responses, including apoptosis, inflammation, anesthesia, analgesia, and neuroprotection. The molecular modes of action underlying these responses are largely unknown. This is in large part due to the limited experimental techniques to study protein-gas interactions. The few techniques that are amenable to such studies are relatively low-throughput and require large amounts of purified proteins. Thus, they do not enable the large-scale analyses that are useful for protein target discovery. Here, we report the application of stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX) and limited proteolysis (LiP) methodologies to detect protein-xenon interactions on the proteomic scale using protein folding stability measurements. Over 5000 methionine-containing peptides and over 5000 semi-tryptic peptides, mapping to &#x223c;1500 and &#x223c;950 proteins, respectively, in the yeast proteome, were assayed for Xe-interacting activity using the SPROX and LiP techniques. The SPROX and LiP analyses identified 31 and 60 Xe-interacting proteins, respectively, none of which were previously known to bind Xe. A bioinformatics analysis of the proteomic results revealed that these Xe-interacting proteins were enriched in those involved in ATP-driven processes. A fraction of the protein targets that were identified are tied to previously established modes of action related to xenon's anesthetic and organoprotective properties. These results enrich our knowledge and understanding of biologically relevant xenon interactions. The sample preparation protocols and analytical methodologies developed here for xenon are also generally applicable to the discovery of a wide range of other protein-gas interactions in complex biological mixtures, such as cell lysates.

### Keywords
Noble gases, Sprox, Protein stability, Limited proteolysis

### Affiliations
Duke University
Professor, Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Lab Head: Fitzgerald Lab

### Submitter
Nancy Corsi

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Professor, Department of Chemistry, Duke University, Lab Head: Fitzgerald Lab


