### Accession
PXD039321

### Title
Fe-S clusters-binding proteins in mitoribosome

### Description
The human mitochondrial ribosome contains three [2Fe-2S] clusters whose assembly pathway, role, and implications for mitochondrial and metabolic diseases are unknown. Here, structure-function correlation studies show that the clusters play structural roles during mitoribosome assembly. To uncover the assembly pathway, we have examined the effect of silencing the expression of Fe-S cluster biosynthetic and delivery factors on mitoribosome stability. We have found that the mitoribosome receives its [2Fe-2S] clusters from the GLRX5-BOLA3. Additionally, the assembly of the small subunit depends on METTL17, recently reported to contain a [4Fe-4S] cluster, which we found to be inserted via ISCA1-NFU1. Consistently, fibroblasts from patients suffering from “multiple mitochondrial dysfunction” syndrome due to mutations in BOLA3 or NFU1 display previously unrecognized attenuation of mitochondrial protein synthesis that contributes to their cellular and pathophysiological phenotypes. Finally, we report that, in addition to their structural role, the mitoribosomal [2Fe-2S] clusters sense changes in the redox environment. In this way, the mitoribosome checks the availability and stability of mitochondrial Fe-S clusters to regulate organellar protein synthesis accordingly.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative analysis of the TMT-MS experiments was performed simultaneously to protein identification using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The whole cell lysates were collected after 9-day silencing of specific genes in HEK293T WT cells. Pelleted cells were solubilized in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 2 mM EDTA, and 0.1% SDS) with 1 X EDTA-free mammalian protease inhibitor cocktail. The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm, 0.6 Da, respectively, enzyme was Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and Uniprot UniprotKB Mouse Proteome UP000000589 Strain C57BL_6J FASTA file and common contaminant FASTA file used in SEQUEST searches. The impurity correction factors obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific for each kit was included in the search and quantification.

### Data Protocol
The following settings were used to search the data: dynamic modifications; Oxidation / +15.995Da (M), Deamidated / +0.984 Da (N, Q), and static modifications of TMTpro / +304.207 Da (K) (N-Terminus, K), MMTS / +45.988 Da (C). Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_5.0.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to TMTpro peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications with 82.0% < probability were accepted, to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation (Käll et al., 2008). Proteins with 5.0%< probability were accepted to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003) and default Scaffold settings were used except for Blocking level was Unique Samples, means were used for averaging and normalization was applied per Oberg et al. (Oberg et al., 2008). Of 40824 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds, 33826 (83%) were included in quantitation. Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying ANOVA with unadjusted significance level p < 0.05 corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
The human mitochondrial ribosome contains three [2Fe-2S] clusters whose assembly pathway, role, and implications for mitochondrial and metabolic diseases are unknown. Here, structure-function correlation studies show that the clusters play a structural role during mitoribosome assembly. To uncover the assembly pathway, we have examined the effect of silencing the expression of Fe-S cluster biosynthetic and delivery factors on mitoribosome stability. We find that the mitoribosome receives its [2Fe-2S] clusters from the GLRX5-BOLA3 node. Additionally, the assembly of the small subunit depends on the mitoribosome biogenesis factor METTL17, recently reported containing a [4Fe-4S] cluster, which we propose is inserted via the ISCA1-NFU1 node. Consistently, fibroblasts from subjects suffering from 'multiple mitochondrial dysfunction' syndrome due to mutations in BOLA3 or NFU1 display previously unrecognized attenuation of mitochondrial protein synthesis that contributes to their cellular and pathophysiological phenotypes. Finally, we report that, in addition to their structural role, one of the mitoribosomal [2Fe-2S] clusters and the [4Fe-4S] cluster in mitoribosome assembly factor METTL17 sense changes in the redox environment, thus providing a way to regulate organellar protein synthesis accordingly.

### Keywords
Fe-s cluster, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
University of Miami

### Submitter
Hui Zhong

### Lab Head
Dr Antoni Barrientos
Department of Neurology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA


