### Accession
PXD013189

### Title
SILAC analysis of proteins enriched from LNCaP cells by ABE

### Description
The study was to identify candidate S-acylated proteins from LNCaP cells by coupling SILAC quantification with ABE enrichment of S-acylated proteins and GeLC-MS/MS analysis. Another goal is to determine the ratio of candidate S-acylated proteins versus of co-isolated non-S-acylated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from cell pellets by adding about three volumes of lysis buffer (80 mM Tris-HCl, 4% SDS, pH7.4). Cell lysates were sonicated in a water-bath sonicator (Elma S180H) to reduce the viscosity, and centrifuged at 16,000×g for 5 min at RT, followed by transferring supernatant to clean Eppendorf tubes. Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The ABE enrichment was performed as we previously described in our PalmPISC paper3 with some modifications, which slightly decreased the background problem after many trials and errors. For each replicate of cell lysate samples, 200 μL 5 mg/mL protein solution was precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation to remove DNAs, RNAs, lipids, and small molecule metabolites. After completely discarding the upper and lower layers, protein pellets were solubilized by adding 2SB buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 2% SDS, 5 mM EDTA, pH7.4) followed by incubation in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) at 1,200 rpm at 37°C. After complete pellet solubilization, 0.5 M Bond-Breaker TCEP was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, vortexed, and incubated at RT for 30 min with rotation on a 3D rotator. After removing excess TCEP by methanol/chloroform precipitation, 2SB buffer was added and protein pellets were solubilized by incubation in a ThermoMixer as described above. Afterwards, 97% (v/v) of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4 and 3% (v/v) 3.33 M NEM in ethanol were sequentially added and vortexed, and then incubated at RT for 60 min with rotation as described above. Excess NEM was removed by three sequential methanol/chloroform precipitations. Protein pellets were resolubilized by 2SB buffer and incubation in a ThermoMixer as mentioned above, and the protein solution was equally divided into two portions. To one portion, one volume of 2 M neutralized (pH 7.4) hydroxylamine, 1 mM biotin-HPDP, 50% DMF was added. To the other portion, one volume of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 1 mM biotin-HPDP, 50% DMF was added. After incubation at RT for 60 min with rotation on a 3D rotator, excess biotin-HPDP was removed by two sequential methanol/chloroform precipitations. Protein pellets were resolubilized by 2SB buffer and incubation in a ThermoMixer. After complete solubilization, 19 volume of Dilution Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, pH7.4) was added to decrease the concentration of SDS to 0.1%. After being vortexed, samples were centrifuged at 16,000×g for 5 min at RT. Supernatant was transferred to clean EP tubes containing pre-equilibrated high-capacity streptavidin agarose beads, and incubated at RT for 60 min with rotation on a 3D rotator. The bead pre-equilibration and washing were performed by incubating beads with 1 mL/tube Equilibration Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS pH7.4) per time for three times. Beads were precipitated by centrifugation at 400×g for 1 min at RT, and supernatant was discarded. After six sequential washes with Equilibration Buffer, 200 μL 50 mM TCEP in Equilibrium Buffer was added to each tube. After 30 min incubation with rotation on a 3D rotator, tubes were centrifuged at 400×g for 1 min and the supernatant was completely moved to clean EP tubes. After samples were centrifuged at 400×g for 2 min, supernatant was carefully transferred to clean EP tubes without disturbing the residual beads at the bottom of tubes. Eluted proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform precipitation.Proteins enriched from SILAC-labeled samples by ABE were digested with trypsin in gel as we previously described4. Briefly, ABE-enriched proteins were resolved by 12% SD-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue solution (Bio-Rad). The protein-containing gel lane was cut into 10 gel slices of similar sizes, and then each slice was further cut into small gel particles. After dehydration, in-gel proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 56°C, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at RT in the dark, and in-gel digested with MS-grade trypsin (1:50, w/w) for 16 h at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were successively extracted with 100 μL of 5% acetic acid, 100 μL of 2.5% acetic acid and 50% acetonitrile, and 100 μL of 100% acetonitrile. Peptide solution was dried down in a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system connected to an LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Twenty microliters of peptide solution were separated on a 15-cm analytical column using a 140-min LC gradient at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent tree-decision manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. The full scan was performed in 60,000 resolution at m/z 400 Th. Up to 20 most intense peptide ions with charge state of ≥2 were automatically selected for MS/MS fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) or electron transfer dissociation (ETD). Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, an exclusion duration of 30 s, and a repeat duration of 30 s. Database searching was performed as described.2 The acquired MS data (10 RAW files) were searched against the Uniprot_Human database (released on 09/11/2012, containing 84,680 sequences) using the MaxQuant5 (v1.3.0.5). The searching parameters were set as follows: Multiplicity of 2 with Arg10 and Lys8 being ticked for heavy labels; trypsin/P as the protease; oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), NEM(C), and carbamidomethyl(C) as variable modifications, up to two missed cleavages; minimal peptide length as 7; identification of second peptides enabled; the mass tolerance for MS1 was 20 ppm and for MS2 was 0.7 Da. A stringent 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used to filter peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide, and protein identifications. The heavy/light SILAC ratios were automatically computed by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Protein <i>S</i>-acylation (also called palmitoylation) is a common post-translational modification whose deregulation plays a key role in the pathogenesis of many diseases. Acyl-biotinyl exchange (ABE), a widely used method for the enrichment of <i>S</i>-acylated proteins, has the potential of capturing the entire <i>S</i>-acylproteome in any type of biological sample. Here, we showed that current ABE methods suffer from a high background arising from the coisolation of non-<i>S</i>-acylated proteins. The background can be substantially reduced by an additional blockage of residual free cysteine residues with 2,2'-dithiodipyridine prior to the biotin-HPDP reaction. Coupling the low-background ABE (LB-ABE) method with label-free proteomics, 2&#x202f;895 high-confidence candidate <i>S</i>-acylated proteins (including 1&#x202f;591 known <i>S</i>-acylated proteins) were identified from human prostate cancer LNCaP cells, representing so-far the largest <i>S</i>-acylproteome data set identified in a single study. Immunoblotting analysis confirmed the <i>S</i>-acylation of five known and five novel prostate cancer-related <i>S</i>-acylated proteins in LNCaP cells and suggested that their <i>S</i>-acylation levels were about 0.6-1.8%. In summary, the LB-ABE method largely eliminates the coisolation of non-<i>S</i>-acylated proteins and enables deep <i>S</i>-acylproteomic analysis. It is expected to facilitate a much more comprehensive and accurate quantification of <i>S</i>-acylproteomes than previous ABE methods.

### Keywords
Silac; prostate cancer; lncap; abe; palmitoylation; s-acylation; palmitoyl-proteomics

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


