### Accession
PXD033643

### Title
Sample multiplexing-based targeted pathway proteomics with real-time analytics reveals the impact of genetic variation on protein expression

### Description
Targeted proteomics plays a specialized role in hypothesis-driven research where the expression of cohorts of dozens of proteins related by function, disease, co-expression, localization, or class are measured after perturbing a pathway. Moreover, a major advance in proteomics is the ability to combine many samples (up to 16) for simultaneous quantification using tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents. Here we present a pathway-centric approach for targeting protein lists selected from up to 10,000 expressed proteins to directly measure their abundances, exploiting sample multiplexing to increase throughput.  The strategy, termed GoDig, requires only a single-shot LC-MS analysis, ~1 µg combined peptide material, and real-time analytics to trigger simultaneous quantification of up to 16 samples for hundreds of analytes. We applied GoDig to investigate the impact of genetic variation on protein expression in mice fed a Western-style diet high in fat and sucrose.  For selected sets of proteins of interest (e.g., kinases, lipid metabolism- and lipid droplet-associated proteins), protein abundances from mouse livers from 480 fully genotyped Diversity Outbred mice were profiled. The results revealed previously unknown protein quantitative trait loci (QTL) and established potential linkages between specific proteins and lipid homeostasis. In all, GoDig provides an integrated solution for next-generation targeted pathway proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
10 μL of the homogenized tissue was mixed with 140 μL lysis buffer (8M Urea, 100 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 with protease inhibitor) and lysed by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle.  Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Lysates were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (15 min, r.t.) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, r.t. in the dark).  Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (15 min, r.t. in the dark). Proteins were precipitated using methanol-chloroform precipitation. For protein digestion, we added 100 µL of 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and Lys-C overnight at room temperature, followed by trypsin for 6 hr at 37°C on an orbital shaker (Jitterbug Heated Microplate Shaker). Both enzymes were added a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio in the presence of beads.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using the open-source Comet search engine33 with the mouse ENSEMBLE proteome database (ver. 39 release 103). Precursor error tolerance was 50 p.p.m. and fragment error tolerance was 0.9 Da. Static modifications include carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0215) and TMTpro16 (+304.2071). Maximum 3 methionine oxidation (+15.9949) was allowed as variable modification. Search results were first filtered to a 1% peptide FDR using linear discriminant analysis employing a target-decoy strategy and further filtered to obtain a protein level FDR 1%. TMT reporter ion signal was extracted by allowing a 0.003 Da mass tolerance and signal-to-noise (SN) ratios were calculated for each channel.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted proteomics enables hypothesis-driven research by measuring the cellular expression of protein cohorts related by function, disease, or class after perturbation. Here, we present a pathway-centric approach and an assay builder resource for targeting entire pathways of up to 200 proteins selected from &gt;10,000 expressed proteins to directly measure their abundances, exploiting sample multiplexing to increase throughput by 16-fold. The strategy, termed GoDig, requires only a single-shot LC-MS analysis, ~1&#x2009;&#xb5;g combined peptide material, a list of up to 200 proteins, and real-time analytics to trigger simultaneous quantification of up to 16 samples for hundreds of analytes. We apply GoDig to quantify the impact of genetic variation on protein expression in mice fed a high-fat diet. We create several GoDig assays to quantify the expression of multiple protein families (kinases, lipid metabolism- and lipid droplet-associated proteins) across 480 fully-genotyped Diversity Outbred mice, revealing protein quantitative trait loci and establishing potential linkages between specific proteins and lipid homeostasis.

### Keywords
Mouse proteome, Targeted proteomics, Sample multiplexing, Tmt

### Affiliations
Harvard medical school
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Qing Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard medical school


